                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




OPTIMAL EMISSION PRICING IN THE PRESENCE OF INTERNATIONAL SPILLOVERS:
         DECOMPOSING LEAKAGE AND TERMS-OF-TRADE MOTIVES

                                       Christoph Böhringer
                                         Andreas Lange
                                      Thomas F. Rutherford

                                       Working Paper 15899
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15899


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Christoph Böhringer, Andreas Lange, and Thomas F. Rutherford. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Emission Pricing in the Presence of International Spillovers: Decomposing Leakage
and Terms-of-Trade Motives
Christoph Böhringer, Andreas Lange, and Thomas F. Rutherford
NBER Working Paper No. 15899
April 2010
JEL No. D58,H21,Q43,R13

                                              ABSTRACT

Carbon control policies in OECD countries commonly differentiate emission prices in favor of energy-intensive
industries. While leakage provides a efficiency argument for differential emission pricing, the latter
may be a disguised beggar-thy-neighbor policy to exploit terms of trade. Using an optimal tax framework,
we propose a method to decompose the leakage motive and the terms-of-trade motive for emission
price differentiation. We illustrate our method with a quantitative impact assessment of unilateral climate
policies for the U.S. and EU economies. We conclude in these instances that complex optimal emission
price differentiation does not substantially reduce the overall economic costs of carbon abatement
compared with a simple rule of uniform emission pricing.


Christoph Böhringer                                   Thomas F. Rutherford
University of Oldenburg                               ETH Zurich
Department of Economics                               Zurichbergstrasse 18
D-26111 Oldenburg                                     8032 Zurich
Germany                                               Switzerland
christoph.boehringer@uni-oldenburg.de                 trutherford@ethz.ch

Andreas Lange
University of Maryland
2200 Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
alange@arec.umd.edu
1 Introduction

Non-differential pricing of uniformly dispersed pollutants across all sources constitutes a first-best strategy
to meet some emission reduction target implemented via harmonized emission taxes or likewise a system of
tradable emission quotas: The marginal cost (price) to each use of a given pollutant should be the same so
that the economy as a whole will employ the cheapest abatement options.

Incomplete regulatory coverage of emission sources provides an efficiency rationale for emission price
differentiation. When domestic emission regulation aims at combating international externalities such as
global warming, lower emission prices on energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries may reduce
counterproductive emission leakage to unregulated trading partners. There are two basic channels through
which emission leakage can occur. First, leakage can arise when in countries with emission limitations
energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries lose competitiveness, thereby increasing emission-intensive
production in unconstrained regions (the trade channel). Second, emission constraints in larger open
economies may depress the demand for fossil fuels and thus induce a significant drop in world energy prices,
which in turn could lead to an increase in the level of energy demand in other regions (the energy channel).

While border measures may be justified as a second-best strategy for a subglobal abatement coalition, these
interventions can influence terms of trade and thereby shift abatement cost to trading partners.

Both leakage and terms of trade motives for emission price differentiation figure prominently in the debate
on unilateral climate policy design. 1 The problem for an informed policy decision on optimal emission price
differentiation is that both motives are inherently intertwined: It is not obvious to what extent emission price
differentiation within unilateral climate policies can be justified on global efficiency grounds (to combat
leakage) or should be disguised as undue strategic exploitation of international market power (to manipulate
terms of trade). In the same vein, a domestic regulator may want to sort out the pure leakage motive for
differential emission pricing in negotiations with representatives of influential energy-intensive industries
that lobby for preferential treatment. Decision makers thus may search for sound support to address central
questions of unilateral climate policy design including:
•   What is the relative importance of the leakage and the terms-of-trade motive for the direction and
    magnitude of emission price differentiation across sectors?
•   What are the implications of emission price differentiation for the economy-wide cost of emission
    abatement?
•   How large are the differences in economic cost between differentiated second-best emission pricing
    strategies as compared to a simple uniform pricing policy neglecting international spillover effects?

In order to provide insights into these fundamental challenges of subglobal climate policies we develop and
apply a conceptual optimal tax framework that decomposes the leakage and terms-of-trade motives for
differential emission pricing. Our proposed decomposition method is based on a thought experiment which

1
 As efforts for an effective global emission reduction agreement continue to fail unilateral emission abatement policies
become increasingly important for industrialized countries to lead the way in the battle against climate change.


                                                           1
requires the unilateral abating country to compensate other countries for induced welfare changes. The
requirement of compensating transfers allows us to switch off the terms-of-trade motive and thereby to gain
insights into the relative importance of the terms-of-trade motive vis-à-vis the leakage motive for differential
emission pricing. We illustrate our method along an impact analysis of unilateral climate policies for the U.S.
and the EU.

Drawing on our quantitative assessment we find that both motives are likely to be overstated in the ongoing
policy debate on preferential treatment of energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries. While leakage
concerns may in rare circumstances justify second-best emission price reductions for energy-intensive
industries, the implications for leakage and overall economic cost are of secondary importance. Likewise, the
scope for exploiting terms of trade through differential pricing of energy-intensive goods and the rest of the
economy is limited. 2 We conclude that large open economies such as the EU or the U.S. cannot substantially
reduce costs by using sophisticated tax differentiation. A simple first-best rule of uniform emission pricing
performs only slightly worse in terms of economic efficiency even in a second-best world with international
spillovers.

Our policy conclusion hinges on the relative importance of fundamental economic adjustment mechanisms.
Emission leakage and terms-of-trade effects are to a large extent driven by the energy channel, i.e. the
decrease of international fuel prices due to global reductions in energy demand. The energy demand
reductions in turn are directly linked to the targeted reduction in global emissions. As we keep the
contribution of a unilaterally abating region to the global public good of climate protection constant, the
international energy market responses are robust to alternative unilateral emission pricing strategies and
dominate both the leakage and the terms-of-trade implications: Fuel importing regions receive terms-of-trade
gains from the decrease in international fuel prices, fuel exporting regions face terms-of-trade losses. The
trade channel through non-energy goods which can be influenced through strategic emission pricing plays
only an inferior role for leakage and additional terms-of-trade changes. Trade in energy-intensive (non-
energy) goods accounts for a small share of overall emissions: In order to mitigate leakage through trade,
price discrimination in favor of energy-intensive goods is warranted but the increase in the direct cost of
abatement due to non-uniform emission pricing works in the opposite direction. In addition, leakage
adjustment and terms-of-trade motives are limited through the restricted scope of differential emission
pricing between two segments of the economy: In theory, price differentiation should be applied to many
good categories. In policy practice, however, the rough categorization across two segments underlying our
simulations seems to be a conditio-sine-qua-non for pragmatic reasons. The dominant role of international
energy market adjustments for terms-of-trade changes and leakage explains why non-strategic uniform
emission pricing as a competitive market outcome comes very close to a second-best policy design under
explicit leakage concerns. This conclusions turns out to be sufficiently robust with respect to changes in key

2
 The implications of the terms-of-trade motive for price differentiation is ambiguous depending on the trade pattern.
A net exporter (importer) of energy-intensive goods adopts higher (lower) emission prices on its energy-intensive
production as a substitute for export tariffs (import duties).



                                                         2
parameters that affect the relative importance for emission price differentiation under the leakage or terms-
of-trade motive such as fossil fuel supply elasticities, trade elasticities or the magnitude of the emission
reduction requirement.

The analysis of environmental regulation in an optimal tax framework has been a growing research field
during the last two decades. An earlier strand of the literature (see Goulder 2002 for an overview) addresses
the implications of initial tax and labor market distortions for the level of environmental taxes and their
overall economic cost (e.g. Bovenberg and de Moji 1994; Bovenberg and Goulder 1996; Fullerton 1997;
Goulder, Parry and Burtraw 1997). No rigorous assessment, however, is in general provided on how these
initial distortions may affect the magnitude and direction of emission price discrimination across different
sectors of the economy. A recent contribution by Fischer and Fox investigates the implications of initial tax
distortions for unilateral climate policy design showing that with Pigouvian taxation of an emission
externality an optimal rebate to production not only reflects the marginal benefit of avoided leakage, but also
a component to adjust for labor tax interactions.

Distributional concerns constitute another important criterion in optimal taxation (see e.g. Alm 1996) and can
motivate a deviation from uniform emission pricing if complementary policy instruments for compensation
are unavailable. Yet, the common approach in the literature is to assess the impacts of exogenous
environmental tax schemes on different income groups or industries rather than deriving endogenously
optimal tax structures. Böhringer and Rutherford (1997) discuss the use of tax exemptions to reduce worker
layoffs in emission-intensive industries and find large excess costs vis-à-vis a mix of policy instruments, i.e.
uniform carbon taxes together with sector-specific wage subsidies. Metcalf (1998), as another example,
studies the income distribution impacts of a environmental tax reforms in the U.S., investigating ways to
make the tax reform distributionally neutral by means of targeted revenue recycling schemes. In an
international context, the phenomenon of emission leakage (Hoel 1991; Felder and Rutherford 1993) where
domestic policies meant to reduce emissions in one country may cause emissions to increase in other
countries provides a global efficiency rationale for differential emission pricing in favor of energy-intensive
and trade-exposed industries (Hoel 1996). At the same time, international spillovers may be exploited by
larger economies through differential emission pricing in order to improve their terms of trade. Stylized
theoretical analysis suggests that a country which is a net exporter of “dirty” goods will levy higher
environmental taxes on these commodities (as a proxy for an optimal export tax) – the opposite applies for
the case of net imports of “dirty” goods (Krutilla 1991; Anderson, 1992; Rauscher 1994). Our analysis
contributes to the literature by sorting out the relative importance of the leakage motive and the terms-of-
trade motive for optimal emission pricing and the overall economic cost implications for emission abatement
as a global public good.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the basic theoretical framework underlying our
decomposition of the leakage and the terms-of-trade motive for emission price differentiation. Section 3
entails a brief non-technical summary of the computable general equilibrium (CGE) model in use to quantify
the policy relevance of international spillover effects for differential emission pricing. Section 4 discusses


                                                       3
our numerical findings. Section 5 concludes.

2. Theoretical Background

Leakage and terms-of-trade effects provide theoretical arguments for emission price differentiation across
domestic sectors. Both effects are, however, intertwined: Emission abatement in an open economy not only
causes adjustment of domestic production and consumption patterns but also influence international prices,
i.e. the terms of trade, via changes in exports and imports; simultaneously leakage occurs as emission
reductions in the abating economy are partially offset by increased emissions in non-abating countries due to
the relocation of emission-intensive production or international energy market effects. A rigorous assessment
of the relative importance of the leakage and the terms-of-trade motive requires a decomposition of these
international spillover effects. In this section we present an analytical framework to illustrate our
decomposition technique which will be used later in the large-scale CGE application based on empirical data.
We start with a stylized two-region, multi-commodity economy where we first derive a Pareto optimal
allocation to satisfy a transboundary emission constraint. In this context, we show that any unilateral
emission tax (price) by one country cannot achieve efficiency as long as transboundary pollution is taken into
account. Next, we derive the first-order conditions for optimal unilateral emission policies from the
perspective of a large open economy where the domestic regulator might want to deviate from uniform
emission pricing for two reasons, i.e. the terms-of-trade motive or the leakage motive. We then show that we
can suppress the terms-of-trade motive by demanding that the unilaterally taxing region must keep the other
region at the initial welfare level through compensating transfers.

2.1 The Basic Model

We consider a simple two countries model (regions r = 1, 2) in which consumption goods i = 1,..., n are

produced with capital k ir and energy (emissions) e ir . Energy is produced in the countries with capital k er .
Production in sector i = 1,..., n and the energy sector are characterized by production functions

                                     y ir = f ir (k ir , eir )           y er = f   er
                                                                                         ( k er ) .

We assume that capital is immobile across regions such that ∑i =1 k ir = k r .
                                                                              n




Energy as well as the produced consumption goods can be traded internationally. The total energy use in the
respective countries is denoted by

                                                            n

                                                           ∑e
                                                           i =1
                                                                  ir
                                                                       = er


such that market clearance requires

                                                     e1 + e2 = y e1 + y e 2 .

We assume a representative consumer in country r who derives utility



                                                                  4
                                                                               u r = U r (c r )

from consuming goods, c j (i = 1,..., n) . The representative consumer holds all the capital and income share in

the domestic firms. Energy and consumption goods are traded at world market prices pe and pi . We use

energy as a numeraire on the world market, i.e. pe = 1 .

Finally, market clearance for consumption goods requires

                                                                ci1 + ci 2 = y i1 + y i 2

and the balance of payments (current accounts) is given if

                                             0 = p y ( y r − c r ) + pe ( y er − e r ) − Tr r
                                                                                   =1


where Tr r are potential transfers paid to the other country (Tr1 +Tr 2 = 0) .

We assume that the home country, r = 1, wants to reduce some environmental damages from energy use. We
hereby allow for transboundary pollution. In this setting country 1 aims at restricting energy use such that
e1 + αe 2 ≤ E , where α ≥ 0 .

2.2 The Pareto Optimum

A Pareto optimal allocation guarantees e1 + αe 2 ≤ E . The allocation maximizes the Lagrangean

                                U 1 (c1 ) + λU 2 (c 2 ) + μ ( E − ∑ e i1 − α ∑ e i 2 )
                                                                                             i                 i
                                              i
                                                  [
                                + ∑η f ( k , e ) + f ( k , e ) − c − c i 2 ]
                                                      i1       i1        i1        i2    i2      i2           i1

                                    i

                                + η e [ f e1 (k e1 ) + f e 2 (k e 2 ) − ∑ e i1 −∑ e i 2 ]
                                                                                             i            i

                                + η [k − ∑ k − k ] + η [k − ∑ k i 2 − k e 2 ]
                                        k1        1                 i1        e1        k2       2

                                                           i                                          i


which leads to the following first-order conditions:

                                                                     U i1 = λU i2 = η i                            (1)

                                              η i f ei1 = η e + μ ηi f ei2 = ηe + αμ                               (2)

                                                               η i f kir = η e f ker = η kr                        (3)

The interpretation is straightforward: the marginal rates of substitution have to be identical across countries
η i / η j and also be equal to the marginal rate of transformation from reallocating capital and energy across
the respective sectors.

2.3 The Decentralized Equilibrium


                                                                                   5
Producers in the respective countries can sell their products on the domestic or international market such that

output prices in both markets are assumed to be given by p yj (j = 1, . . . , n) and p e , respectively. Capital

prices are denoted by p kjr ( j = 1, … , n, e) and energy prices in sector j = 1, … , n by p ej . Production

decisions are therefore characterized by the first-order conditions

                                    p iy f kir = pker       p iy f eir = peir        pe f ker = pker                      (4)

                                          r
The consumers, facing consumption prices pc and income I r , maximize utility by choosing consumption

according to
                                             U ir / U rj = pcir / pcjr          pcr c r = I r                             (5)

while the countries must satisfy their balance of payments:
                                              p y c r = p y y r + p e ( y er − e r ) − Tr r                               (6)
                                                                   =1

A simple comparison of these equilibrium conditions with those for Pareto optimality shows that any Pareto
optimum (with the normalization ηe = 1) can be decentralized by choosing:
                   pe = ηe = 1      pkir = pker = η kr     p iy = pcir = η i      pei1 = η e + μ       pei 2 = η e + αμ   (7)

combined with appropriate transfers Tr r to satisfy the budget constraint, i.e. the balance of payments (see
equation (6)).

Note that in any Pareto optimum, the prices for energy inputs are not differentiated across sectors within each
country, while they might differ across countries if α ≠ 1 . Energy prices thereby reflect the production costs
p e as well as the external effects of emissions on country 1. In particular, this implies that any unilateral
emissions tax by country 1 cannot achieve efficiency if α > 0.

2.4 Unilateral Tax Policy of a Large Open Economy

For the case of unilateral action, we study how country 1 should set emissions taxes to unilaterally maximize

its welfare. We denote the tax rates in the respective sectors by τ e (i = 1, … , n) . We thereby assume that
                                                                                        i1



country 2 has no emissions policy and no distorting taxes, i.e. pk = pk , p iy = pcir and pe = pe .
                                                                 i2   e2                   i2



Furthermore, since we want to focus on reasons for differentiating energy/emissions taxes, we assume that
country 1 does not consider any taxation of or subsidies on consumption or capital use. That is,

pki1 = pke1 = p1k , p iy = pci1 .

It is clear that when the choice of           τ ei1 influences    world market prices for consumption goods p y , also

production decisions and therefore emission levels abroad change. The change in the terms of trade is
therefore linked with a potential leakage effect. For any given set of tax rates for the respective sectors,

(τ ei1 )i , the conditions (4)-(6) together with pei1 = pe + τ ei1 , define the equilibrium consumption and
production levels as well as prices. We suppress this dependence of these equilibrium values on the tax rates
                                                                   6
in our notation.

Country 1 maximizes U 1 (c1 ) with respect to         τ ei1 (i = 1, … , n) such that e1 + αe2 ≤ E . Differentiating with
respect to τ e , yields
              i1



                                                  dc          de1        de 2
                                          U c1          − μ (        + α        )=0
                                                 dτ ei1       dτ ei1     dτ ei1

As (5) implies that U c = λp c for an appropriately chosen
                          1
                                                                            λ>     0, we obtain the equivalent condition

(with μ = λμ ):

                                                  dc1          de1        de2
                                            py           − μ (        + α        )=0                                 (8)
                                                  dτ ei1       dτ ei1     dτ ei1

To analyze the optimal unilateral choice of emission taxes by country, we must totally differentiate
the equilibrium conditions. Differentiating (6) and using (4), we obtain (see Appendix A):

                                        dc          dp yj j1                 j1 de
                                                                                   j1
                                   pc
                                        dτ ei1
                                               = ∑j dτ i1 ( y − c j1
                                                                     ) + ∑j e dτ i1
                                                                           τ                                         (9)
                                                       e                           e


such that the first order condition (8) is given by

                                              de j1     dpyj j1 j1           de2
                              ∑[τ ej1 − μ ]
                               j
                                                    + ∑
                                              dτ ei1 j dτ ei1
                                                              ( y − c ) − μα
                                                                             dτ ei1
                                                                                    =0                             (10)


for all i .

It becomes obvious that energy tax differentiation may be optimal for country 1 for two reasons: (i) the

terms-of-trade effect (dp yj / dτ ei1 ) and (ii) the potential leakage effect (de / dτ e ) . If both effects were
                                                                                 2     i1



absent, τ e = μ for all j would solve (10). In general, however, country 1 should differentiate taxes across
           j1


sectors.

First, consider the terms-of-trade effect. It can be positive or negative: if country 1were an exporter of good

 j ( y j1 > c j1 ) , it would like to increase those tax rates which lead to an increase in p yj and decrease the
other tax rates. The opposite holds true if country imports good j .

Second, consider the carbon leakage effect. It is driven by the change in the domestic demand for energy.
This causes energy-prices to decrease, and prices for energy-intensive goods increase. Consequently, energy
demand abroad will increase. The marginal effects of sectoral tax rates on leakage may differ such that the
accounting for leakage in the policy choice also generally leads to differentiated taxes.

2.5 Decomposition

In order to measure the magnitude of the two effects, we “switch” off the terms-of-trade effect using a simple

                                                                7
procedure: country 1 optimizes its taxation policy τ e1 = (τ ei1 )i combined with appropriate transfers Tr1 (τ e1 )

that hold the welfare in the other country fixed, i.e. generate μ 2 = μ 2 . Here, μ 2 could be given by the

welfare level of country 2 in before emissions taxes are implemented in country 1. The tax system τ e thereby
                                                                                                    1


again fully characterizes the resulting equilibrium. With this compensation requirement, any marginal change
of the taxation system is accompanied by a change in transfers such that the resulting marginal consumption

change in country 2 satisfies U c dc / dτ e = 0 , or equivalently p y dc 2 / dτ ei1 = 0 . For country 1, the market
                                2   2     i1



clearance condition therefore implies

                                        p y (dy1 / dτ ei1 + dy 2 / dτ ei1 − dc1 / dτ ei1 ) = 0                         (11)

Country 1’s first-order conditions for welfare maximization with respect to the emission tax system therefore
again satisfy p y dc1 / dτ ei1 − μ[de1 / dτ ei1 + αde 2 / dτ ei1 ] = 0 for all i. Using (11), this is equivalent to:

                                                                   de j1       de2
                                              0 = ∑ (τ ej1 − μ )          − μα                                         (12)
                                                     j             dτ ei1      dτ ei1

which we show in Appendix A.

It is thus obvious that in case without leakage (α = 0), taxes will not be differentiated and we obtain the
standard results for a small open economy (which can not affect the terms of trade nor cares for leakage).
That is, the only remaining reason for differentiating taxes in the case of compensating transfers is leakage. 3
In presence of the requirement for compensating country 2, we can therefore assign the extent of tax
differentiation to the leakage motive. That is, the terms-of-trade motive is “switched off”.

In turn, we can consider the extent how terms-of-trade may lead to differentiated taxes by “switching off” the
leakage motive. For this, we solve the first-order conditions (10) when setting α = 0. That is, we consider the
case where country 1 does not consider the marginal effects of its policy choice on foreign emissions. It is
then obvious that terms-of-trade remains the only reason for tax differentiation. We will use the described
decomposition technique in the numerical analysis to quantify how much the terms-of-trade motive and the
leakage motive contribute to the optimal differentiation of emission pricing. It should be noted that our
reasoning is identical when we switch from emission taxes as policy instrument to partitioning some targeted
emission budget across sectors without the possibility of cross-sector emission. 4

3. Numerical Analysis

Our theoretical analysis has decomposed two reasons for differential emission pricing across sectors of an

3
                                                                  α = 0 , country 1 could achieve any Pareto optimum
    As another way to see this, we can reconsider condition (7). If
by unilaterally setting an emission tax, i.e. a tax on energy use, at τ e = μ and choosing appropriate transfers. It is
                                                                        1


therefore obvious that the program max u such that u ≥ u must lead to a Pareto-efficient solution. For that,
                                                 1                2      2

however, we know that emission prices, i.e. emission taxes, must coincide for all sectors in country 1.




                                                                 8
open economy when international spillover effects are explicitly taken into account: concerns on global
environmental effectiveness and exploitation of international market power. However, the analytical
derivation of optimal emission pricing becomes intractable for equilibrium conditions that exceed the
complexity of simple textbook models. Furthermore, marginal calculus does not allow for a generalization of
results to structural changes in policy variables. We therefore provide a numerical analysis based on
empirical data to substantiate our theoretical considerations with quantitative evidence on the magnitude and
direction of emission price differentiation motivated by international spillovers as well as the associated
economy-wide efficiency implications. In this section, we first provide a non-technical summary of our
numerical model. 5 We then describe alternative unilateral climate policy scenarios to curb global carbon
emissions and interpret the simulation results. Finally, we provide sensitivity analysis on the robustness of
our findings.

3.1 Computable General Equilibrium Model (CGE) of Global Trade and Energy Use

For our numerical analysis we adopt an established multi-region, multi-sector CGE model of global trade
and energy use (see e.g. Böhringer and Rutherford 2009). A multi-region, multi-sector setting with global
coverage is essential for capturing terms-of-trade and leakage spillovers induced by unilateral emission
regulation of open economies. In addition to the consistent representation of trade links, a detailed tracking
of energy flows is a pre-requisite for the assessment of climate policies. Combustion of fossil fuels is a
driving force of global warming through the release of the main greenhouse gas CO2.

Figure 1 provides a diagrammatic model structure. A representative agent RAr in each region r is endowed
with three primary factors: labor Lr , capital K r , and fossil-fuel resources Q ff ,r (used for fossil fuel

production). Labor and capital are intersectorally mobile within regions but immobile between regions.
Fossil-fuel resources are specific to fossil fuel production sectors in each region. Production Ygr of
commodity g, other than primary fossil fuels and electricity production, is captured by nested constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) cost functions that describe the price-dependent use of capital, labour, energy,
and material in production. At the top level, a CES material composite trades off with an aggregate of energy,
capital, and labour subject to a constant elasticity of substitution. At the second level, a CES function
describes the substitution possibilities between the energy aggregate and a value-added composite. At the
third level, capital and labour substitution possibilities within the value-added composite are captured by a
CES function. The aggregate energy input is further split down into a fossil fuel composite and electricity
subject to constant elasticity of substitution. The fossil fuel composite in turn is composed of a CES
aggregate of liquid fuels and solid fuels. In the production of fossil fuels, all inputs, except for the sector-
specific fossil fuel resource, are aggregated in fixed proportions at the lower nest. At the top level, this
aggregate trades off with the sector-specific fossil fuel resource at a constant elasticity of substitution. The

4
  As a prime example EU climate policy regulation stands out for the partitioning of an overall emission budget between
energy-intensive industries and the rest of the economy without direct trade links between these segments causing
substantial excess cost if international spillover effects are not taken into account (Böhringer et. al. 2009).
5
  Appendix B includes a detailed algebraic model description with a graphical exposition of the nesting structure of
flexible functional forms that capture production possibilities and consumption preferences.

                                                          9
latter is calibrated in consistency with empirical estimates for the price elasticity of fossil fuel supply.

Final consumption demand Cr in each region is determined by the representative agent who maximizes
utility subject to a budget constraint with fixed investment (i.e. given demand for the savings good) and
exogenous government provision. Total income of the representative household consists of factor income
and taxes. Consumption demand of the representative agent is given as a CES composite that combines
consumption of an energy and a non-energy goods aggregate.

Figure 1: Diagrammatic overview of the model structure




Substitution patterns within the non-energy consumption bundle are reflected via a CES function; the energy
aggregate in final demand consists of the various energy goods trading off at a constant elasticity of
substitution. Bilateral trade is specified following the Armington approach of product heterogeneity, i.e.,
domestic and foreign goods are distinguished by origin All goods used on the domestic market in
intermediate and final demand correspond to a CES Armington aggregate Air that combines the domestically
produced good Yir and the imported good composite Mir from other regions. The standard Armington
assumption of product heterogeneity implicitly provides each country with a certain degree of market power
in international trade: Depending on initial trade shares and the ease of substitution between imports and
domestically produced goods (captured by the Armington trade elasticities) domestic policies affect
international prices, i.e. the terms of trade. The latter can significantly alter the impacts of the primary
domestic policy (Böhringer and Rutherford 2002). Domestic production Yir either enters the formation of the
Armington good Air or is exported to satisfy the import demand of other regions. The balance of payment
constraint, which is warranted through flexible exchange rates, incorporates the benchmark trade deficit or
surplus for each region.

CO2 emissions are linked in fixed proportions to the use of fossil fuels with CO2 coefficients differentiated
by the specific carbon content of fuels. CO2 emission abatement can take place by fuel switching (inter-fuel
substitution) or energy savings (either by fuel-non-fuel substitution or a scale reduction of production and

                                                        10
final demand activities). Revenues from CO2 pricing are recycled lump-sum to the representative agent in the
abating region.

The model builds on the most recent GTAP7 dataset with detailed accounts of regional production, regional
consumption, bilateral trade flows as well as energy flows and CO2 emissions for the year 2004 (Badri and
Walmsley 2008). As is customary in applied general equilibrium analysis, base year data together with
exogenous elasticities determine the free parameters of the functional forms. Elasticity values in international
trade (Armington elasticities) and domestic production are based on empirical estimates reported in the
GTAP database.

As to sectoral and regional model resolution, the GTAP database is aggregated towards a composite dataset
that accounts for the specific requirements of climate policy analysis. At the sectoral level the model captures
details on sector-specific differences in factor intensities, degrees of factor substitutability and price
elasticities of output demand in order to trace back the structural change in production induced by policy
interference. The energy goods identified in the model are coal, crude oil, natural gas, refined oil products,
and electricity. This disaggregation is essential in order to distinguish energy goods by CO2 intensity and the
degree of substitutability. The model then features an aggregate of energy-intensive and trade-exposed non-
energy goods which are referred to as “sectors at risk of carbon leakage” in the policy debate and are
considered for preferential emission regulation (EU 2009). This energy-intensive composite includes iron
and steel industry, chemical industry, non-ferrous metals, non-metallic minerals, paper-pulp-print, and
transport. All other services and industries are summarized through a composite macro good With respect to
the regional disaggregation, the model covers all major industrialized and developing regions that are central
to the climate policy debate: the U.S., the EU, Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand, Russia, China,
India, Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa. In addition, the organization of oil exporting countries (OPEC) is
incorporated along with a composite region for the rest of the world.

General equilibrium conditions constitute the side-constraints of our optimal taxation problem where a
unilaterally abating region maximizes consumption welfare using endogenous carbon taxes on sectors as the
policy instrument to meet some domestic emission reduction target. The leakage motive for differential
emission pricing can be readily incorporated by replacing the domestic emission constraint with a global
emission constraint. In this case, emission increases in non-abating regions are endogenously balanced
through more stringent emission reductions of the unilaterally abating region. The global emission constraint
requires that total word-wide emissions do not exceed the base-year emissions of non-abating regions plus
the emission target of the unilaterally abating region. In order to suppress the terms-of-trade motive we
impose an additional constraint that requires the abating region to compensate all other regions with lump-
sum transfers at their benchmark welfare level. Following our theoretical exposition, the abating country
then has no incentive for strategic terms-of-trade manipulations and will go for uniform emission pricing as
long as it does not care for leakage spillovers.




                                                      11
3.2 Policy Scenarios

Our central simulations are based on five unilateral climate policy scenarios that allow us to explore the
leakage and the terms-of-trade motive for emission price differentiation between energy-intensive industries
(thereafter referred to as EIS) and the rest of the economy (thereafter referred to as nonEIS). 6 Whenever the
unilaterally abating country does not explicitly account for emission leakage, it simply pursues a domestic
emission constraint. If we want to switch off the terms-of-trade motive for differential emission pricing, we
require the unilaterally abating region to compensate other non-abating regions at their base-year welfare
level.

•      Scenario Ref serves as our reference scenario for unilateral climate policy where the abating region is
       restricted to uniform emission pricing across all sectors. This scenario has no strategic dimension as the
       leakage motive is absent and terms of trade cannot be exploited due to the lacking possibility of emission
       price differentiation.

•      Scenario None assumes that unilateral climate policy design fully ignores international spillovers, i.e.
       neither leakage effects nor terms-of-trade changes are strategically taken into account. We implement
       this scenario by switching off the terms-of-trade motive using our compensation method. In the absence
       of both the leakage and the terms-of-trade motive economic theory yields an unambiguous qualitative
       result for optimal emission pricing as we start from a market equilibrium without previous distortions:
       Emissions should be uniformly priced across all domestic sources to minimize economy-wide
       adjustment costs. Note that scenario None imposes terms-of-trade compensation whereas scenario Ref
       maintains terms-of-trade gains and losses for individual countries as the response of competitive market
       adjustments.

•      Scenario Leakage postulates that the unilaterally abating region only takes into account
       counterproductive leakage effects while the terms-of-trade motive is switched off, i.e. we require the
       abating region to compensate non-abating regions at the (pre-policy) base-year welfare levels. This
       scenario focuses on the leakage motive for second- best emission price differentiation.

•      Scenario ToT considers the case that the unilaterally abating region explicitly exploits its international
       market power associated with the assumption of product heterogeneity of traded goods while not taking
       leakage into account. As such, this scenario focuses on the pure terms-of-trade motive for emission price
       differentiation.

•      Scenario Leakage_ToT assumes that unilateral climate policy accounts for terms-of-trade changes as well
       as leakage effects in the optimal pricing of emissions between energy-intensive sectors and the rest of the
       economy. This scenario reflects a standard unilateral policy for a large open economy that pursues a
       global reduction target.


6
    We impose a non-negativity constraint on emission prices to exclude the possibility of emission subsidies.




                                                             12
Across all five scenarios we keep the global environmental outcome constant to provide a meaningful metric
of comparison for our cost-effectiveness analysis. As noted before, the global environmental emission target
is determined as the targeted domestic emission level of the unilaterally abating region and the business-as-
usual emission level of all other non-abating regions. For the scenarios Leakage and Leakage_ToT which
explicitly include the leakage motive the global emission constraint is added to the system of general
equilibrium conditions. 7 For the scenarios None and ToT where the explicit leakage adjustment motive needs
to be suppressed we can not directly include the global emission constraint as a simultaneous equilibrium
condition but need to reach the global environmental target through iterative adjustments of the domestic
emission abatement target (until the exogenous global environmental outcome is met). As to scenario Ref
where the abating region has no option to differentiate prices we can again simply add the global emission
constraint to the simultaneous system of equilibrium conditions.

Table 1 provides a brief summary of the different motives for emission price differentiation prevailing in the
five scenarios.

Table 1: Characterization of alternative unilateral climate policy scenarios

                                             Leakage Motive                     Terms-of-Trade Motive
Scenario
None                                                No                                     No
Leakage                                             Yes                                    No
ToT                                                 No                                    Yes
Leakage_ToT                                         Yes                                   Yes
Ref                                          Imposed uniform emission pricing across all sectors


In our core simulations we consider unilateral abatement of either the U.S. or the EU where policy concerns
on leakage are very outspoken and have motivated policy proposals for preferential treatment of energy-
intensive industries. We impose a domestic carbon emission reduction of 20% vis-à-vis the 2004 base-year
emission level which roughly reflects pledges of the respective governments for the Post-Kyoto area. Note
that the 2004 base year captures a clear-cut benchmark situation where the EU emission trading system has
not been implemented, and the Kyoto Protocol has not entered into force. Thus, climate policies are almost
absent internationally in our benchmark situation, and, importantly, there is no cap on emissions in Annex B
countries.

3.3 Simulation Results

We start interpretation of our simulation results with the implications of alternative policy motives for
differential emission pricing between energy-intensive industries (EIS) and the rest of the economy (nonEIS)
Figure 2 provides insights into the relative importance of the leakage and terms-of-trade motive for the
magnitude and direction of emission price differentiation in the U.S. and EU economies.


7
  The dual variable associated with the global emission constraint endogenously scales the domestic emission target of
the unilaterally abating region to compensate for leakage.

                                                          13
Figure 2a: Sector-specific emission prices (USD per ton of carbon) for unilateral action of the U.S. of the EU

                                                                           400


                                                                           350


                                                                           300
        U$D per ton of C




                                                                           250


                                                                           200                                                                                    EIS
                                                                                                                                                                  NonEIS

                                                                           150


                                                                           100


                                                                           50


                                                                            0
                                                                                  EU      USA   EU    USA   EU     USA   EU         USA    EU    USA
                                                                                       Ref        None       Leakage          ToT         ToT_Leakage


Figure 2b: Emission price ratio between energy-intensive sectors and the rest of the economy


                                                                            2,0


                                                                            1,8
                  Ratio of EIS emission price over nonEIS emission price




                                                                            1,6


                                                                            1,4
                                                                                                                                                        ref

                                                                            1,2                                                                         None

                                                                                                                                                        Leakage
                                                                            1,0
                                                                                                                                                        ToT
                                                                            0,8                                                                         ToT_Leakage

                                                                            0,6


                                                                            0,4


                                                                            0,2


                                                                            0,0
                                                                                                EU                                  USA




It is obvious that the absolute emission price level for the non-EIS segments of the economy remains
relatively robust across the different emission pricing scenario. The reasoning behind is twofold: Firstly, the
nonEIS segments which includes electricity and oil refineries account for most of the benchmark carbon
emissions in the U.S. and the EU. 8 Secondly, the implicit marginal abatement cost curve for the nonEIS
segment is much flatter than that for the EIS industries indicating cheaper emission mitigation possibilities



                                                                                                                14
outside the EIS industries (to a large extent because of low-cost fuel switching options in the electricity
sector). These two factors explain why strategically motivated shifts of the relative abatement burden
between EIS and nonEIS sectors (compared to uniform pricing) have a rather moderate impact on the
marginal abatement cost in nonEIS sectors and a much more pronounced impact on marginal abatement cost
in the EIS sector.

While uniform pricing in scenario Ref is externally imposed, it is the optimal choice of the abating region in
scenario None as predicted in our theoretical analysis: Without terms-of-trade and leakage motives the
optimal strategy of the unilaterally abating region (in the absence of other initial distortions) is to charge a
uniform price for each use of the carbon pollutant. The uniform emission price to meet the exogenous
contribution to global emission reduction thereby is higher for the EU than the U.S. The reason is that the
U.S. has cheaper abatement options than the EU, both with respect to energy efficiency improvements as
well as with respect to fuel switching (in the particular within electricity generation that accounts for a large
share of carbon emissions in both regions). There is a slight deviation between equalized marginal abatement
cost in scenario Ref compared to scenario None which stems from different income effects. Differences in
income effects arise because the terms-of-trade motive for price differentiation in scenario None is switched
off using the compensating transfers, whereas no transfers are made in scenario Ref to keep non-abating
regions at their initial consumption welfare level.

Not surprisingly, the pure leakage motive captured by scenario Leakage provides an unambiguous argument
for emission price differentiation in favour of energy-intensive industries. Lower emission prices to energy-
intensive good production ameliorate the cost disadvantage of unilateral action for these industries relative to
competitors abroad. Under optimal price differentiation the increase in direct abatement cost (due to
diverging marginal abatement cost across segments of the domestic economy) are offset at the margin by the
indirect (global efficiency) gains of reduced emission leakage. Our quantitative results based on empirical
data indicate that emission-intensive industries in the U.S. or the EU pay substantially lower emission prices
under the pure leakage motive than the rest of the economy.

As compared to the pure leakage motive the directional implications of the pure terms-of-trade motive
represented by scenario ToT are ambiguous depending on the trade characteristics of the unilaterally abating
region. The principle logic behind differential emission pricing is to make the country act as monopolists on
export markets (i.e. increasing the prices of export goods) and as a monopsonist on import markets (i.e.
favoring domestic production for goods that compete on import markets): Ceteris paribus, emission inputs to
sectors (commodities) which command large shares in the trading partners’ imports are priced at a higher
level to “export” the economic burden of domestic emission reduction; the inverse reasoning applies to
imports from abroad when unilateral emission levies are (mis-)used as a substitute for undue import duties.
Apart from trade intensities of commodities, the pricing differentials depend on additional country-specific
characteristics, such as the important demand and export supply elasticities of trading partners. Drawing on
the benchmark data, the EU is a net exporter of energy-intensive goods and a net importer of the composite

8
    EIS emissions amount to 18% of total domestic benchmark emissions in the U.S. and 23% in the EU.

                                                          15
macro good – therefore the terms-of-trade motive suggests higher rather than lower emission prices for
domestic energy-intensive production. In turn, the U.S. which is a net importer of the energy-intensive
composite goes for lower emission prices in the energy-intensive sector in order to discriminate against
competing imports, thereby reducing import demand and import prices. A potentially important policy
conclusion in the debate on undue beggar-thy-neighbor policies is that unilaterally abating countries with a
strong export position for energy-intensive products can hardly be accused of a selfish terms-of-trade
exploitation should they impose lower emission prices on energy-intensive industries than on the rest of their
economy.

If both motives for price discrimination overlap, the direction of price discrimination is a priori not clear for
the case of net exporters of energy-intensive goods since the terms-of-trade motive and the leakage motive
work in opposite direction. The combined effect for net importers of energy-intensive goods, however, is
unambiguous since both leakage adjustment and strategic terms-of-trade exploitation imply lower emission
pricing in favor of energy-intensive industries.

Figure 3 reports the welfare effects of alternative emission pricing strategies for the EU and the U.S. acting
                                                                           9
unilaterally in order to achieve a fixed global emission reduction. Unilateral abatement policies in large
open economies affect both the allocation of domestic resources and international markets. Policy-induced
changes in international prices then imply an indirect burden or benefit for all trading countries. For carbon
abatement policies associated with significant reductions in fossil fuel demand the terms-of-trade effects
work largely through energy markets (Böhringer and Rutherford 2002). Large oil importers such as the EU
or the U.S. benefit from the decline in international oil prices which may offset a larger part of the direct
emission abatement cost for their domestic economies. 10

Figure 3 highlights the crucial importance of international spillovers from energy markets for the cost
incidence of unilateral climate policies undertaken. For the unilaterally abating region the cost differences
between scenarios Ref, ToT_Leakage and ToT are rather negligible. That is neither strategic exploitation of
market power on non-energy markets (scenario ToT) nor additional leakage concerns (scenario
ToT_Leakage) provide notable welfare gains as compared to a non-strategic uniform emission pricing in the
Ref scenario. To put it differently: When we do not impose compensating transfers, the additional welfare
gains to be achieved from strategic emission pricing between energy-intensive goods and the rest of the
economy are relatively small as compared to blunt uniform emission pricing. Likewise, the additional
welfare implications of the pure leakage motive are of second order. As explained above, (i) leakage and
terms-of-trade effects are largely determined by robust energy market adjustments, (ii) emission price
differentiation comes at an increase of the direct cost of abatement, and (iii) the scope for strategic responses

9
   Recall that the effective global emission reduction equals the targeted domestic emission cutback of the unilaterally
abating region. Welfare impacts are measured as Hicksian equivalent variation in income, i.e. the amount of money
which is necessary to add to (or deduct from) the benchmark income of the consumer so that she enjoys a utility level
equal to the one in the counterfactual policy scenario on the basis of ex ante relative prices.
10
   In fact, for the more moderate emission reduction target of 15% the energy market terms-of-trade gains more than
offset the direct emission abatement costs for unilaterally abating regions U.S. or the EU making them better off as
compared to the benchmark situation without climate policy.

                                                          16
is limited to price differentiation between energy-intensive industries and the rest of the economy. The
scenarios None and Leakage where non-abating trading partners must be kept at their initial welfare level
through compensating transfers are much more costly for the U.S. and the EU as both regions can no longer
benefit from terms-of-trade gains. By comparing None and Leakage we see that leakage mitigation through
preferential pricing of energy-intensive trade goods has only very minor welfare implications. 11

Figure 3: Change in real consumption due to unilateral abatement (% change from doing-nothing case)
                                                                            EU                              USA
                                                                     0,0
         Welfare impacts for unilaterally abating region (in %HEV)




                                                                     -0,1



                                                                     -0,2
                                                                                                                                    Ref
                                                                                                                                     None
                                                                     -0,3                                                           Leakage
                                                                                                                                    ToT
                                                                                                                                    ToT_Leakage
                                                                     -0,4



                                                                     -0,5



                                                                     -0,6



                                                                     -0,7



Although we have introduced compensating transfers in our analysis mainly as a means to decompose the
terms-of-trade and leakage motives, the issue of compensation has some serious dimension in the
                                                                             12
international climate policy debate.                                              If we consider compensating transfers as a viable policy option, the
ranking of alternative unilateral policies are obviously quite different from the perspective of fuel-importing
or fuel-exporting regions. Larger importers of fossil fuels such as the EU and the USA can minimize their
cost of unilateral abatement action if the region is allowed to simultaneously take into account the leakage
motive as well as the terms-of-trade motive (scenario Leakage_ToT) while omission of the leakage motive
(scenario Leakage_ToT) is only slightly less attractive. As indicated before, the cost of unilateral action for
fuel importing regions become drastically higher when they are required to compensate other regions under
scenarios Leakage and None – with scenario None being most costly as the leakage motive is not accounted
for. The basic reasoning on the attractiveness of alternative policy strategies applies with opposite
implications for fuel importing regions. The latter would obviously prefer to ameliorate their terms-of-trade

11
   As we suppress terms-of-trade changes through compensating transfers, the differences in the ease of decarbonising
the domestic economy that have been apparent in marginal abatement cost are mirrored in the differences of
inframarginal economic adjustment cost.
12
   Under Articles 4.8 and 4.9 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1997) at
least developing countries may claim compensation for induced economic costs of climate policies in industrialized
countries. The Kyoto Protocol explicitly reflects concerns on adverse terms-of-trade-effects by postulating that
developed countries ‘. . . shall strive to implement policies and measures . . . in such a way as to minimize adverse . . .
economic impacts on other Parties, especially developing countries Parties . . . ’ (UNFCCC, 1997, Article 2, paragraph
3) – see Böhringer and Rutherford (2004) for a provoking analysis of this provision

                                                                                               17
losses that occur on the energy markets due to targeted (global) carbon emission reductions. As we suppress
the terms-of-trade motive, unilaterally abating fuel exporters receive transfers from non-abating regions that
would benefit otherwise from terms-of-trade spillovers. Thus, energy exporters are best off under scenario
Leakage where they avoid additional income transfers to the rest of the world through terms-of-trade
spillovers and simply can focus on the optimal price differentiation to mitigate leakage. Most expensive for
them – among the four strategic pricing variants – is scenario ToT where they can try to exploit terms-of-
trade gains on non-energy goods markets but are left with the dominant terms-of-trade losses on the
international fuel markets (in addition, efficient leakage adjustment is not strategically taken into account in
this scenario). The non-strategic Ref scenario imposes the highest cost to fuel exporting unilaterally abating
regions: Here the region faces larger terms-of-trade losses on energy markets due to its unilateral emission
reduction and does not employ differential emission pricing to save at least some cost through strategic
exploitation of terms-of-trade changes on non-energy markets a efficient leakage adjustment.

While terms-of-trade compensation is crucial from an individual countries’ perspective, the global efficiency
changes across our key scenarios are negligible. As leakage and terms of trade effects for some given global
emission reduction are robustly driven through the energy market channel, the efficiency implications of
differential emission pricing to reduce emission leakage through the trade channel (as a second-best strategy)
or selfishly exploit terms-of-trade on non-energy markets are minor.

Figure 4 summarizes the impacts of alternative emission pricing strategies on global emission leakage for
unilateral action on behalf of the U.S. or the EU.

Figure 4: Leakage rates (in %)

                        45


                        40


                        35


                        30
 Leakage rates (in %)




                                                                                                ref
                        25                                                                      N one
                                                                                                Leakag e
                        20                                                                      To T
                                                                                                To T_Leak age
                        15


                        10


                         5


                         0
                             EU                                        U SA

                                                     t ot al




Leakage rates are in general much higher for the EU than for the U.S. One reason for this difference is that
the EU is a more open economy than the U.S., meaning that imports and exports constitute a larger
share of the economy in the EU. This is true both for energy-intensive goods and for fossil fuels, where
                                                               18
the EU is a much bigger importer (relative to own consumption) than the U.S. Another reason for higher
leakage with unilateral EU policies is that energy-intensive industries in the EU are less carbon-
intensive than the same industries in the U.S. Thus, relocation of industrial activities away from the
abating region has more adverse effects on global emissions when the EU imposes unilateral climate
policies.

Alternative emission pricing strategies have very small impacts on global leakage rates. Leakage is mainly
caused through the reduction requirements of fossil fuels associated with the respective global emission
constraint and only to a minor extent through changes in the pattern of trade for energy-intensive goods.
Leakage rates are minimized if the unilaterally abating region only adopts the leakage motive for emission
price differentiation but the differences as compared to the other policy variants are negligible.

Figure 5 sketches the impacts on energy-intensive production and the effects for production of all other
goods and services of the unilaterally abating region.

Figure 5: Impacts on industrial production in unilaterally abating regions (% change from benchmark)


                                                          EU                                 USA
                                      1       Macro good production                     Macro good production
                                      0
                                           Energy-intensive production (EIS)        Energy-intensive
                                                                                      Energy-intensive
                                                                                                     production
                                                                                                       production
                                                                                                                (EIS)
   Production (in % from benchmark)




                                      -1
                                                                                                                        Ref
                                      -2                                                                                None
                                                                                                                        Leakage
                                      -3
                                                                                                                        ToT
                                      -4
                                                                                                                        ToT Leakage
                                      -5

                                      -6

                                      -7

                                      -8


The differences across policy variants are in first order correlated with the cost increase from emission
pricing (see Figure 2). Differential emission pricing thereby not only affects comparative advantage of
domestic energy-intensive production vis-à-vis production of the same goods abroad but also the competitive
situation with respect to non-energy-intensive production. The lower the ratio between emission prices paid
by energy-intensive industries and emission prices paid by the rest of the economy, the better ceteris paribus
becomes the competitive situation for the energy-intensive industries.

As to the EU, the pure leakage motive leads to the lowest emission prices for energy-intensive industries
whereas the pure terms-of-trade motive implies the highest emission prices – recall that the EU as a net
exporter of energy-intensive products uses differential emission pricing at the expense of energy-intensive
traded goods to substitute for strategic export taxes. The decline in energy-intensive production is thus lowest
for scenario Leakage and highest for scenario ToT. As to the U.S. which is a net importer of energy-intensive

                                                                               19
goods the terms-of-trade motive works in the same direction as the leakage motive (i.e. towards a
preferential treatment of emission-intensive industries) such that the modest impacts on production occur
under scenarios Leakage and ToT.

3.4 Sensitivity Analysis

We have performed extensive sensitivity analysis to understand how changes in key assumptions affect our
conclusions. We have found that our qualitative insights regarding the implications of various motives for
differential emission pricing and the inframarginal welfare cost remain robust.

In our central case simulations, energy market adjustments account for a large share of terms-of-trade
changes and emission leakage. The responsiveness of international fuel markets to changes in energy
demand is determined by supply elasticities. Lower (higher) elasticities imply that fossil fuel prices drop
more (less) as a consequence of some energy demand reduction with opposite welfare implications for fuel
exporting and fuel importing regions. The lower (higher) the energy supply elasticity the stronger (weaker) is
the energy market channel for leakage and thus the stronger (weaker) is the case for price differentiation in
favor of energy-intensive industries. Yet, for a plausible range of supply elasticities as given by the empirical
literature the dominant role of energy market adjustment relative to the importance of alternative emission
pricing strategies prevails.

Armington trade elasticities capturing the ease of substitution between domestic goods and imported goods
constitute an important driver for the magnitude of leakage and terms-of-trade effects. In our central case
simulations we have adopted GTAP-based empirical estimates for these elasticities. Changes in these values
affect the relative importance of leakage motive versus the terms-of-trade motive for emission price
differentiation. Higher Armington elasticities ceteris paribus imply more leakage and less scope for tax
burden shifting so the leakage motive becomes more important compared to the terms-of-trade motive.

Within the core simulations, the abating region had a unilateral emission reduction pledge of 20 % with
respect to the base-year emission level. Changes in the stringency of the emission reduction level affect both
the magnitude of price differentiation associated with different motives as well as the level of economy-wide
adjustment cost. Not surprisingly, higher reduction targets lead to an upward-shift of average emission prices
and an over-proportional increase in total cost. For sufficiently low reduction targets, fuel importing regions
may be able to offset the cost of unilateral abatement through terms-of-trade gains on energy markets. The
leakage argument for lowering emission prices in favor of energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries
production becomes more important towards higher emission reduction requirements as the increase in
domestic emission prices enhances comparative cost advantage of foreign competitors.

4. Conclusions

As long as the world community fails to achieve a broad-based international agreement with binding
multilateral emission reduction targets, greenhouse gas emission reduction hinges on unilateral climate
policies by industrialized countries that assume leading role in the battle against climate change. Cost-
effectiveness of unilateral emission regulation with respect to the global greenhouse gas externality may

                                                       20
however be seriously hampered through counterproductive emission leakage to non-abating regions triggered
by shifts in comparative advantage and international energy market effects. Concerns on global
environmental integrity of unilateral emission control provide an important policy argument for preferential
treatment of energy-intensive and trade-exposed sectors. Yet, the basic leakage motive in favor of lower
emission pricing for energy-intensive industries cannot be easily distinguished from selfish interests of the
abating region to exploit international market power through the strategic terms-of-trade manipulation. In a
political economy perspective the leakage argument may also be (mis-)used by domestic lobby groups with
the objective to dilute inevitable structural change in favor of specific industries under the vague catchword
of competitiveness.

In this paper we have developed and implemented a conceptual framework of how to decompose the leakage
motive from the terms-of-trade motive for differential emission pricing in the presence of international
spillovers. Our decomposition method is based on the hypothetical requirement for the unilateral abating
region to compensate other countries for policy-induced welfare changes (doing so, allows us to switch off
the terms-of-trade effect).

Our main insight is that leakage and economic adjustment cost of unilateral action are predominantly driven
by international energy market effects. The latter are robust to alternative domestic emission pricing
strategies as the global emission target is not changed. If the cost incidence triggered by international energy
market adjustments is politically accepted as the “natural” outcome of emission reduction then unilateral
climate policy might stick to a simple first-best rule of uniform emission pricing even in a second-best world.
Second-best emission price discrimination in favor of energy-intensive sectors has only negligible global
efficiency effects as the trade channel for leakage is of secondary importance. Likewise, the potential for
strategic terms-of-trade manipulation under the smokescreen of climate policies seem to be quite limited. On
the other hand, the cost of preferential emission pricing to energy-intensive and trade-exposed industries may
turn out high if such a policy route causes detrimental conflicts with important trading partners or windfall
profits to sectors that are successfully lobbied for.


References
Alm, J (1996), “What is an Optimal Tax System?,” National Tax Journal, 49, 117–133
Anderson, K. (1992), “The Standard Welfare Economics of Policies Affecting Trade and the Environment,”
   in K. Anderson and R. Blackhurst, eds., The Greening of World Trade, University of Michigan Press,
   25–48.
Badri, N. G. and T. L. Walmsley (2008), “Global Trade, Assistance and Production: The GTAP 7 Data Base,
    Center for Global Trade Analysis”, Purdue University, West Lafayette.
Böhringer, C. and T. F. Rutherford (1997), “Carbon Taxes with Exemptions in an Open Economy – A
    General Equilibrium Analysis of the German Tax Initiative,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management, 32, 189–203.
Böhringer, C. and T.F. Rutherford, T.F. (2002), "Carbon Abatement and International Spillovers",
    Environmental and Resource Economics 22 (3), 391-417.




                                                        21
Böhringer, C. and T.F. Rutherford (2004): "Who should pay how much? Compensation for International
    Spillovers from Carbon Abatement Policies to Developing Countries - A Global CGE Assessment",
    Computational Economics 23 (1), 71-103.
Böhringer, C., Tol, R. S. J. and T.F. Rutherford (2009), "The EU 20/20/2020 Targets: an Overview of the
    EMF22 Assessment", Energy Economics, 31(2), 268-S273.
Böhringer, C. and T.F. Rutherford (2009), "Canada's Policy Options under the Kyoto Protocol", The World
    Economy, 33 (2), 177 – 211.
Bovenberg, A. L. and R.A. de Moji (1994), Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation”, The
    American Economic Review, 84 (4), 1085-1089.
Bovenberg, A. L and L. H. Goulder (1996), “Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence of Other
   Taxes: General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic Review, 86, 985–1000.
Felder, S. and T. F. Rutherford (1993), “Unilateral Reductions and Carbon Leakage: The Effect of
    International Trade in Oil and Basic Materials,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
    25, 162–176.
Fullerton, D. (1997), “Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation: Comment.”, The American
     Economic Review, 87 (1), 245-251.
Goulder, L., I. W. H. Parry, and D. Butraw (1997), “Revenue-Raising vs. Other Approaches to
    Environmental Protection: The Critical Significance of Preexisting Tax Distortions,” RAND Journal of
    Economics, 28, 708–731.
Goulder, L., ed. (2002), “Environmental Policy Making in Economies with Prior Tax Distortions”,
    Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
EU 2009, “Commission Decision of determining, pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European
   Parliament and of the Council, a list of sectors and subsectors which are deemed to be exposed to a
   significant risk of carbon leakage 2010”. Available at:
   http://ec.europa.eu/environment/climat/emission/pdf/draft_dec_carbon_leakage_list16sep.pdf
Fischer, C. and A. K. Fox (2009), “Combining Rebates with Carbon Taxes: Optimal Strategies for Coping
     with Emissions Leakage and Tax Interactions”, RFF Discussion Papers, DP 09-12, Resources for the
     Future, Washington.
Hoel, M. (1991(, “Global Environment Problems: The Effects of Unilateral Actions Taken by One Country,”
    Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 20, 55–70.
Hoel, M (1996), “Should a carbon tax be differentiated across sectors?,” Journal of Public Economics, 59,
    17–32.
Krutilla, K. (1991), “Environmental regulation in an open economy,” Journal of Environmental Economics
    and Management, 20, 127–142.
Metcalf, G. E. (1998), “A Distributional Analysis of an Environmental Tax Shift,” NBER Working paper
    6546. Available at: http://papers.nber.org.
Oates, W. E. (1995), “Green Taxes: Can We Protect the Environment and Improve the Tax System at the
    Same Time?,” Southern Economic Journal, 61, 915–922.
OECD (2007), “OECD/EEA database on instruments used for environmental policy and natural resources
   management,” Technical Report, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
   Available at: http://www2.oecd.org/ecoinst/queries/index.htm.
Rauscher, M. (1994), “On Ecological Dumping,” Oxford Economic Papers, 46, 822–840.




                                                   22
A    Mathematical Proofs
Proof of equation (9)

Differentiating the balance of payments in (6), we obtain

                                                   dc     dp y 1 1              dy 1       e dy
                                                                                                 e1
                                                                                                      de1
                                          py            =       ( y − c ) + p          + p  (       −       )
                                                  dτ ei1 dτ ei1                 dτ ei1        dτ ei1 dτ ei1
                                                                              y



We can now differentiate the respective production functions and obtain:

                                                        j ⎡ j1 dk        j1 de ⎤
                                                                  j1          j1                   e1
                          dc     dp y 1 1                                                    e1 dk      de1
                   py          =
                         dτ ei1 dτ ei1
                                       ( y − c ) + ∑j y ⎢ k dτ i1 e dτ i1 ⎥
                                                      p     f        + f          + p e
                                                                                        ( f k         −
                                                                                                dτ ei1 dτ ei1
                                                                                                              )
                                                          ⎣       e           e ⎦



Noting that p j1 f k j1 = p1k and p j1 f e j1 = pe + τ ej1 , this leads to


                                                              ⎡               ⎤
                                       dc dpy 1 1             ⎢   dk j1
                                                                         dke1 ⎥
                                                                                 j1 de
                                                                                        j1
                                    py i1 = i1 ( y − c ) + pk ⎢∑ i1 + i1 ⎥ + ∑τ e
                                                            1

                                      dτ e dτ e               ⎢ j dτ e dτ e ⎥ j     dτ ei1
                                                              ⎢⎣      =0      ⎥⎦

which immediately proves equation (9).

Proof of equation (12)

Plugging (11) into the first order condition p y dc1 / dτ ei1 − μ [ de1 / dτ ei1 + αde 2 / dτ ei1 ] = 0 , we immediately

obtain:

                                                       [
                    0 = pydc1 / dτ ei1 − μ de1 / dτ ei1 +αde2 / dτ ei1           ]
                                                                      [
                        = p(dy1 / dτ ei1 + dy2 / dτ ei1) − μ de1 / dτ ei1 +αde2 / dτ ei1                   ]
                                                dk j1        j1 de
                                                                    j1
                                                                                      j 2 dk
                                                                                             j2
                                                                                                    j 2 de
                                                                                                           j2
                                                                                                                     de1     de2
                        = ∑ pyj [ fkj1                 + f             ] + ∑j y k dτ i1 e dτ i1 dτ i1 dτ i1 ]
                                                                              p j
                                                                                  [ f           + f           ] − μ[     + α
                                                dτ ei1          dτ ei1
                                                           e
                           j                                                                 e             e           e       e

                                    dk j1                j1 de
                                                                 j1
                                                                           dk j 2                dej 2
                        = p1k ∑           + ∑ e
                                             ( p − μ +τ    )        + pk∑
                                                                       2
                                                                                  + ( p  − μα)∑j dτ i1
                                    dτ ei1 j                 dτ ei1      j dτ e
                                                        e                     i1       e
                                j                                                                  e

                               −dke1 / dτ ei1                                        −dke 2 / dτ ei1

                                         dke1                   j1 de
                                                                        j1
                                                                                e2 dk
                                                                                     e2
                                                                                                         dej 2
                        = − pe fke1
                                         dτ ei1
                                                + ∑j e
                                                    ( p − μ +τ e  )
                                                                    dτ ei1
                                                                           −p f
                                                                             e k
                                                                                   dτ ei1
                                                                                          + ( pe − μα)∑j dτ i1
                                                                                                           e
                                       dye1 / dτ ei1                                           dye 2 / dτ ei1

                                                 dej1        de2
                        = ∑(τ ej1 − μ)                  − μα
                           j                     dτ ei1      dτ ei1



where, in the last step, we used the market clearance condition for the energy market.




                                                                                23
B      Algebraic Model Summary
In formal terms, our model-based analysis is cast as a policy optimization problem subject to economic
equilibrium conditions:
                                          max H ( z ,τ ) s.t. F ( z ,τ ) = 0
                                            τ

where:
z ∈ℜ n                    is a vector of endogenous variables that are determined by the equilibrium problem,

                                   ⎛ p⎞
                          i.e. z = ⎜ ⎟ , where p are prices and y are activity levels,
                                   ⎝ y⎠
τ∈ℜm                      is a vector of tax policy variables which are the choice variables for the problem (in
                          our specific application τ comprises the set of two taxes that can be differentiated
                          across the energy-intensive sector (EIS) and the remaining sectors of the economy),
F : ℜn → ℜn               is a system of equations which represents general equilibrium conditions, and
H(z)                      is the policy objective function.


In our implementation, the objective function H(z) denotes the welfare maximization by a region r that has
to keep with some unilateral emission budget. If the region explicitly accounts for leakage concern the
domestic emission constraint is replaced with a global emission constraint given by the sum of the targeted
domestic emission level on behalf of the unilaterally abating region and the business-as-usual emission level
of all other non-abating regions. If the region does not pursue any terms-of-trade exploitation motive then
compensating transfer constraints are added to the system of equilibrium conditions that keep non-abating
regions at their initial welfare level.


Two classes of conditions characterize the competitive equilibrium for our model: zero profit conditions and
market clearance conditions. The former class determines activity levels and the latter determines price
levels. In our algebraic exposition, the notation Π uir is used to denote the profit function of sector j in region

r where u is the name assigned to the associated production activity. Differentiating the profit function with
respect to input and output prices provides compensated demand and supply coefficients (Shepard’s lemma),
which appear subsequently in the market clearance conditions. We use i (aliased with j) as an index for
commodities (sectors) and r (aliased with s) as an index for regions. The label EG represents the set of
energy goods and the label FF denotes the subset of fossil fuels. Tables B.1 – B.6 explain the notations for
variables and parameters employed within our algebraic exposition. Note that with respect to the general
notation of our policy optimization problem, Table B.2 summarizes the activity variables of vector y within
    ⎛ p⎞
z = ⎜ ⎟ whereas Table B.3 summarizes the price variables of vector p. Figures B.1 – B.4 provide a
    ⎝ y⎠
graphical exposition of the production and final consumption structure.



                                                             24
B.1 Zero Profit Conditions

1. Production of goods except fossil fuels (i∉ FF ) :
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                 ⎡
                                                                                                                                             (                                    )              ⎤
                                                                                                                                                                                      1-σ KLE        1-σ KLE
                                                        1

Π (θ                                               )
                                                                                                                                                           KL
                                                                                                                                                       1−σ ir                KL
                                                                                                                                                                         1−σ ir       1−σ irKL
                                                                       ∑θ jir p Ajr − θ irKLE ⎢ θ irE pirE
                                                                                                                  1 - σ KLE
                                                                                                                                                                 (     )
                           1−η               1−η
                                 +(1−θirX ) pir                                                                                                                                                                =0
    Y                                                  1−η
                                                                                                                              + (1- θ ir )       θ irwr
                                                              −
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ⎥
                X                                                                                                                      E           L
    ir
       =       ir   pirX                                                                                                                                        + 1−θ ir
                                                                                                                                                                      L v
                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                   j∉EG
                                                                                                 ⎣                                                                                               ⎦
2. Production of fossil fuels (i∈ FF ) :
                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                     ⎡                                                                                1−σ i                            ⎤1−σiQ
                                                                                                                                                                                  Q

                                                                                                 ⎛ FF                                                ⎞
                                                                                                                                                       (                   )
                                                              1

  Π = (θ                                                 )         - ⎢θir qir       + (1 − θir ) ⎜ θ Lir wr + θ Kir v r + ∑θ                                                           ⎥
                                 1−η               1−η                     1−σ Q ,i                                                      CO     CO
                         pirX +(1−θirX ) pir
         Y                                                   1−η
                     X                                                  Q                   Q                   FF           FF
                                                                                                                                 p jr + t jr 2 a j 2 ⎟
                                                                                                                                   A

                                                                     ⎢                                                                                                                 ⎥
         ir         ir
                                                                                                 ⎝                                                   ⎠
                                                                                                                             jir
                                                                     ⎣                                                                                                                 ⎦
                                                                                                                           j


          =0
3. Sector-specific energy aggregate (i∉ FF ) :

Π
    E
    ir
         = p irE -
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                             1−σ ELE
⎧                                                                                                                                                                                                         ⎫1−σ ELE
⎪                            ⎡                                                                                                                                   1−σ COA
                                                                                                                                                                         ⎤                   1−σ COA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ⎪
                                                                                                                            ⎛                                  ⎞
 ⎪ ELE A1−σ ELE          ELE ⎢ COA
                                                               (                                 )                                                                       ⎥                                ⎪
                                                                                                  1−σ COA
                                                                                                               + (1 − θir ) ⎜ ∑ θ jir ( p jr + tir a j )
                                                                                                                                                                  1−σ LQ
                                                                                                                                                        1−σ
⎨θir p{ELE ,r } + (1 − θir ) ⎢θir       , r + tir aCOA
                                    A          CO2 CO2                                                                  COA        LQ     A     CO2 CO2     LQ
                                   pCOA                                                                                                                        ⎟         ⎥                                ⎬
 ⎪                           ⎢⎣                                                                                             ⎝ j∈LQ                             ⎠         ⎥⎦                               ⎪
⎪⎩                                                                                                                                                                                                        ⎪⎭
    =0
4. Armington aggregate:

                                                                                     1
                                                                                   1−σ iA


         = p ir - ⎛⎜ θ irA p ir + (1 − θ irA) p ir
                                                M 1−σ i ⎞
                             1−σ i      A                                     A


Π
    A        A
                                                        ⎟                                   =0
    ir
                   ⎝                                    ⎠

5. Aggregate imports across import regions:
                                                                   1

             M ⎛                1−σ M ⎞ 1−σ i
                                             M


Π        = p ir - ⎜ ∑ θ isr
    M                   M
                            pisX i ⎟           =0
                  ⎝ s                 ⎠
    ir




6. Household consumption demand:
                                                                                                                1

             C ⎛ E                                                                                        ⎞
                                                                                                 1-σ EC       1-σ EC
                                           E ⎡
                                              ) ∏ ( pirA ) ⎤
                                                          γ ir
Π                         E 1-σ EC
                                                                                                                       =0
    C
         = p r - ⎜ θ Cr p Cr       + (1- θ Cr                                                             ⎟
    r                                          ⎢⎣i∉EG          ⎥⎦
                 ⎝                                                                                        ⎠

7. Household energy demand:
         = p Cr - ∏ ( pirA + tCr ai )
                                                                   α ir
Π                                                                         =0
    E           E             CO2 CO2
    Cr
                           i∈EG



B.2 Market Clearance Conditions

8. Labor:
                         ∂ ΠYir
Lr = ∑ Y ir
           i             ∂ wr

9. Capital:

                                                                                                      25
                  ∂ Π Yir
K r = ∑ Y ir
         i         ∂ vr
10. Natural resources:
              ∂ ΠYir
Qir = Y ir                    i ∈ FF
              ∂ qir

11. Output for domestic markets:
     ∂ ΠYir           ∂ Π Ajr
Y ir
     ∂ pir
            = ∑j A jr ∂ p
                          ir


12. Output for export markets:
       ∂ ΠYir                   ∂ ΠisM
Y ir
       ∂ pirX
              =   ∑ M is
                     s          ∂ pirX


13. Sector specific energy aggregate:
              ∂ ΠYir
E ir = Y ir
              ∂ pirE

14. Import aggregate:
               ∂ Π irA
M ir = Air
               ∂ pirM

15. Armington aggregate:
                  ∂ ΠYjr      ∂ ΠCr
Air = ∑ Y jr             + Cr
         j        ∂ pirA      ∂ pirA

16. Household consumption:
     C
C r pr = wr Lr + vr K r +             ∑q
                                      j∈FF
                                             jr   Q jr + pCGD,r Y CGD,r + B r

                                     ∂ ΠirE                                              ∂ ΠYir
             +∑      ∑ (                                            +∑    ∑ (
                                                      )   a CO
                                                                                                       )
                                                              2 CO2
                                                            j tir                                          aiCO2 t CO 2

                             ∂ p Ajr + tirCO2 a CO                               ∂ pirA + t CO   CO2               jr
                                                                                            jr ai
                                                  2                                            2
              i∉FF j∈FF                         j                    i∈FF j∉FF

                             ∂ ΠirE
             +∑
                         (                   )     aiCO2 tCr
                                                          CO2

              i∈FF   ∂ pirA + tCr
                               CO2 CO2
                                    ai

17. Aggregate household energy consumption:
              ∂ ΠCr
E Cr = C r
              ∂ pCr
                 E




18. Carbon emissions:
CO 2r = ∑ Air aiCO2
              i




                                                                          26
Table B.1: Sets
i                 Sectors and goods
j                 Aliased with i

r                 Regions
s                 Aliased with r
EG                All energy goods: Coal, crude oil, refined oil, gas and electricity
FF                Primary fossil fuels: Coal, crude oil and gas
LQ                Liquid fuels: Crude oil and gas




Table B.2: Activity variables

Yir               Production in sector i and region r

E ir              Aggregate energy input in sector i and region r

M ir              Aggregate imports of good i and region r

Air               Armington aggregate for good i in region r

Cr                Aggregate household consumption in region r
E Cr              Aggregate household energy consumption in region r




Table B.3: Price variables
                  Output price of good i produced in region r for domestic market
pir
pirX              Output price of good i produced in region r for export market
    E             Price of aggregate energy in sector i and region r
pir
    M             Import price aggregate for good i imported to region r
pir
p irA             Price of Armington good i in region r
    C             Price of aggregate household consumption in region r
pr
    E             Price of aggregate household energy consumption in region r
pCr
wr                Wage rate in region r
vr                Price of capital services in region r
qir               Rent to natural resources in region r (i ∈ FF)

tdrCO2            CO2 tax in region r differentiated across sources d (d={C, i})




                                                          27
Table B.4: Cost shares

θ irX            Share of exports in sector i and region r

θ jir            Share of intermediate good j in sector i and region r (i∉FF)

θ irKLE          Share of KLE aggregate in sector i and region r (i∉FF)

θ irE            Share of energy in the KLE aggregate of sector i and region r (i∉FF)

θ irL            Share of labor in value-added composite of sector i and region r (i∉FF)

θ irQ            Share of natural resources in sector i of region r (i∈FF)

θ Tir
    FF           Share of good i (T=i) or labor (T=L) or capital (T=K) in sector i and region r (i∈FF)

θ COA
  ir
                 Share of coal in fossil fuel demand by sector i in region r (i∉FF)

θ irELE          Share of electricity in overall energy demand by sector i in region r

θ jirLQ          Share of liquid fossil fuel j in liquid energy demand by sector i in region r (i∉FF, j∈LQ)

θ isr
  M              Share of imports of good i from region s to region r

θ irA            Share of domestic variety in Armington good i of region r

θ Cr
  E              Share of composite energy input in household consumption in region r

α ir             Share of energy good i in energy household consumption demand in region r

γ ir             Share of non-energy good i in non-energy household consumption demand in region r




Table B.5: Endowments and emissions coefficients

Lr               Aggregate labor endowment for region r

Kr               Aggregate capital endowment for region r

Q ir             Endowment of natural resource i for region r (i∈FF)

Br               Balance of payment deficit or surplus in region r (note:    ∑B
                                                                             r
                                                                                  r   = 0)

CO 2 r           Carbon emission constraint for region r

a iCO2           Carbon emissions coefficient for fossil fuel i (i∈FF)




                                                             28
Table B.6: Elasticities
η           Transformation between production for the domestic market and production 4
            for the export

σ iKL       Substitution between labor and capital in value-added composite of             [0.2 – 1.4]
            production in sector i

σ KLE       Substitution between energy and value-added in production                      0.5

σ iQ        Substitution between natural resources and other inputs in fossil fuel         μCOA=4.0
            production calibrated consistently to exogenous supply elasticities μ FF .     μCRU=1.0
                                                                                           μGAS =1.0

σ ELE       Substitution between electricity and the fossil fuel aggregate in production   0.3

σ COA       Substitution between coal and the liquid fossil fuel composite in production   0.5

σ LQ        Substitution between gas and oil in the liquid fossil fuel composite in        2
            production

σ iA        Substitution between the import aggregate and the domestic input               [2.1 – 5.2]

σ iM        Substitution between imports from different regions                            [4.2 – 10.4]

σ EC        Substitution between the fossil fuel composite and the non-fossil fuel         0.8
            consumption aggregate in household consumption

σ FF ,C     Substitution between fossil fuels in household fossil energy consumption       1




                                                         29
Figure B.1: Nesting in non-fossil fuel production

           Domestic market variety                                 Export market variety
                                                  CET




                                                                               CES

                                                Leontief
         Non-energy intermediates (M)                            Capital-Labor-Energy (KLE)

                                                                               CES
                                                      Capital-Labor (KL)                     Energy (E)
                                                CES                                                              CES
                                                Capital (K)        Labor (L)         Oil-Gas-Coal         Electricity
                                                                                                    CES
                                                                                Oil-Gas      Coal
                                                                                           CES
                                                                               Oil     Gas
Figure B.2: Nesting in fossil fuel production

           Domestic market variety                CET               Export market variety




                                                  CES
             Fuel specific resource                             Non-fuel specific resource inputs
                                                                                                               Leontief

                                                Intermediate inputs            Labor                      Capital


Figure B.3: Nesting in household consumption




Figure B.4: Nesting in Armington production
                                                Armington good
                                                                                     CES

                       Domestic market variety                  Exports from other regions
                                                                    (CES aggregate)




                                                           30
