NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSEHOLD LEVERAGE AND THE RECESSION OF 2007 TO 2009
Atif R. Mian
Amir Sufi
Working Paper 15896
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15896

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

We thank Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Ayhan Kose, Kevin Lansing, two anonymous referees, and seminar
participants at the University of Chicago (Booth), Duke University (Fuqua), Purdue University (Krannert),
Harvard Business School, Princeton University, Wharton, NYU (Stern), and the Annual Research
Conference at the IMF for comments. Timothy Dore provided superb research assistance. We are grateful
to the National Science Foundation, the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business, the Center for Research in Security Prices, and the FMC Corporation for
funding. The results or views expressed in this study are those of the authors and do not reflect those
of the providers of the data used in this analysis. Mian: (510) 643 1425, atif@haas.berkeley.edu; Sufi:
(773) 702 6148, amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to 2009
Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 15896
April 2010
JEL No. E2,E3,G01,R2
ABSTRACT
We show that household leverage as of 2006 is a powerful statistical predictor of the severity of the
2007 to 2009 recession across U.S. counties. Counties in the U.S. that experienced a large increase
in household leverage from 2002 to 2006 showed a sharp relative decline in durable consumption starting
in the third quarter of 2006 – a full year before the official beginning of the recession in the fourth
quarter of 2007. Similarly, counties with the highest reliance on credit card borrowing reduced durable
consumption by significantly more following the financial crisis of the fall of 2008. Overall, our statistical
model shows that household leverage growth and dependence on credit card borrowing as of 2006
explain a large fraction of the overall consumer default, house price, unemployment, residential investment,
and durable consumption patterns during the recession. Our findings suggest that a focus on household
finance may help elucidate the sources macroeconomic fluctuations.
Atif R. Mian
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
atif@haas.berkeley.edu
Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagogsb.edu

Understanding the sources of deep recessions is the holy grail of macroeconomics. The
most recent recession has produced a sharp increase in unemployment and a large decline in
GDP (Figure I, top two panels). What factors explain the current economic downturn? This paper
focuses on the role of household leverage. We show that household leverage measured as of
2006 is an early and powerful statistical predictor of cross-sectional county-level variation in
household default, house price, unemployment, residential investment, and durable consumption
from 2007 to 2009. Any realistic macroeconomic theory of the 2007 recession must be consistent
with the time-series and cross-sectional patterns documented in this paper.
The aggregate U.S. evidence highlights the potential importance of household leverage.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows the unprecedented increase in the U.S. household debt to
income ratio during the years prior to the recession. In 2007, the household debt to GDP ratio
reached its highest level since the onset of the Great Depression. The initial indicators of
economic difficulty, namely a rise in household defaults and a decline in house prices, were also
related to household leverage. These trends began as early as the second quarter of 2006, a full
five quarters before the initial increase in the unemployment rate. The components of GDP that
initially declined in 2007 and early 2008 were fixed residential investment and durable
consumption—two components that most heavily rely on the willingness of households to obtain
additional debt financing.
While aggregate patterns are suggestive, it is difficult to reach definitive conclusions on
the link between household leverage and the economy based on aggregate data alone. For
example, it is possible that the decline in house prices and the increase in defaults in 2006
reflected an anticipation of future unemployment. Or perhaps the household-leverage component
of the recession, while occurring early in the downturn, is far less important than the credit crisis

1

of September and October of 2008. More generally, the linkages across the economy make it
difficult to conclude based on aggregate evidence alone what factors contributed the most to the
severe recession of 2007 to 2009.
Our focus on cross-sectional variation across U.S. counties in the severity of the
recession helps to overcome some of the difficulties associated with aggregate data. There is a
large degree of such variation across counties. For example, Saint Lucie County in Florida
experienced an increase in the unemployment rate of 6.6% from 2006 to 2008. In contrast, Harris
County in Texas, where Houston is located, had a rise of only 1.2% in the unemployment rate.
Our empirical methodology examines patterns across U.S. counties to explore why some
counties have experienced a much more severe recession than others.
We sort counties according to the increase in the household debt to income ratio from
2002 to 2006, and we refer to counties with large (small) increases in leverage during this period
as high (low) leverage growth counties. We find that the recession both began earlier and became
more severe in high leverage growth counties relative to low leverage growth counties. The top
10% leverage growth counties experienced an increase in the household default rate of 12
percentage points and a decline in house prices of 40% from the second quarter of 2006 through
the second quarter of 2009. In contrast, the bottom 10% leverage growth counties experienced a
modest increase of 3 percentage points in the default rate and a 10% increase in house prices.
Auto sales and new housing building permits reveal a similar pattern. By the third quarter
of 2008, auto sales in the top 10% leverage growth counties declined by almost 40% relative to
2005. In contrast, auto sales in the bottom 10% leverage growth counties were actually up almost
20%. From 2005 to 2008, new housing building permits declined by almost 150% in high
leverage growth counties while declining only 50% in low leverage growth counties. To the best

2

of our knowledge, we are the first to examine durable consumption and residential investment
patterns across U.S. counties during a recession, and the first to show the link between household
leverage and the decline in these variables.
The final measure of economic activity we examine is the unemployment rate. Similar to
the pattern in auto sales, the unemployment rate increased in high leverage growth counties
much earlier than low leverage counties. From the fourth quarter of 2005 to the third quarter of
2008, the unemployment rate climbed 2.5 percentage points in the top 10% leverage growth
counties; in contrast, the bottom 10% leverage growth counties experienced no change in
unemployment.
The evidence suggests that both the timing and the severity of the recession were related
to the increase in household leverage from 2002 to 2006. Counties that experienced a large
increase in their debt to income ratio before the onset of the downturn were precisely the
counties that experienced the sharpest decline in durable consumption and the largest increase in
unemployment. We also show that the correlation between leverage growth and the severity of
the recession is robust to county-level control variables for demographics, cyclicality, and
industrial composition.
While counties with low leverage largely escaped the recession up to the third quarter of
2008, auto sales drop and unemployment skyrocket in both high and low leverage growth
counties from the fourth quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009. In other words, the
growth household leverage from 2002 to 2006 is not correlated with the severity of the downturn
across U.S. counties during the last three quarters of the recession.
In the last section of our analysis, we examine what factors other than household leverage
growth from 2002 to 2006 are correlated with acceleration of the recession from the fourth

3

quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2009. We find that the severity of the downturn in these
three quarters is correlated with an alternative measure of household leverage: household
exposure to short term credit, as measured by the credit card utilization rate as of 2006. High
credit card utilization rate counties experienced a sharper drop in auto sales from the fourth
quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009. This coincides with a sharp reduction in
credit card availability that occurs simultaneously with the financial crisis in September and
October of 2008.
Our findings suggest that households faced a one-two punch during the recession. From
the fourth quarter of 2006 to the third quarter of 2008, an over-levered household sector facing
mounting defaults and falling house prices pulled back on durable consumption and experienced
higher unemployment rates. From the fourth quarter of 2008 onwards, credit-card dependent
consumers reduced consumption as credit card availability was cut dramatically.
We assess the statistical magnitude of the household leverage effect by using our
estimated regression coefficients to predict the severity of the recession across the household
leverage distribution. Using this methodology, we find that the growth in household leverage
from 2002 to 2006 and household dependence on credit card borrowing as of 2006 are
quantitatively sufficient to statistically explain the entire rise in household defaults, the drop in
house prices, and the drop in auto sales. Our factors also explain about a fifth of the overall rise
in unemployment. The reduced explanatory power for unemployment is a natural outcome of the
fact that goods consumed in one location are often produced in different locations, therefore
naturally lowering the correlation between local consumption and production shocks.1

1

For example, reduced recreational vehicle (RV) sales in Los Angeles County due to household leverage may lead
to a sharp increase in unemployment in Elkhart County, Indiana, even though Elkhart County has low household
leverage.

4

Overall, our findings suggest that household balance sheets are a crucial component of
explaining macroeconomic fluctuations. The idea that household debt instigates and exacerbates
economic downturns goes back to Fisher (1933), and is reiterated in subsequent research by
Mishkin (1978), King (1994), Leamer (2007, 2009), and Glick and Lansing (2009, 2010)).
Leamer (2007, 2009) points out that eight of the past ten recessions were preceded by substantial
problems in housing and consumer durables. Our paper provides the first micro-level crosssectional evidence based on the 2007 to 2009 recession of the link between household balance
sheets and an economic downturn.2
Our empirical findings should also serve as a useful metric for guiding theoretical work
on understanding business cycle fluctuations. Standard DSGE models of business cycles often
ignore the role of financial markets (see Tovar 2008). While this has changed more recently (see
e.g. Christiano et al 2007), the emphasis has been on firm and bank level, not household level3.
Our work on the other hand points to the potential importance of household balance
sheets in explaining macroeconomic fluctuations. While more research is needed to determine
whether household leverage was a catalyst of the recession or an amplification of other variables,
such as technology or monetary shocks, any explanation of the recession of 2007 to 2009 must
be consistent with the strong correlation between household leverage and subsequent economic
outcomes in the cross-section of U.S. counties.
Our results are closely related to the persistent business cycle fact that residential
investment and durable consumption are strong leading indicators of business cycles. This
finding deserves closer scrutiny by theoretical work. While many macro models predict that
investment is a leading indicator of business cycles, most have difficulty in explaining why

2
3

In a concurrent analysis, Glick and Lansing (2010) find similar results in the cross-section of western countries.
Iacovello (2005) is an important exception.

5

household investment should leads business investment over the business cycle. This difficultly
is recognized by Jonas Fisher (2001) as a “potent challenge to real business cycle theory”.
The rest of the study proceeds as follows. In the next section, we provide aggregate
evidence on the importance of household leverage. In Section 2, we describe the county-level
data and provide summary statistics. In Section 3, we focus on the relation between leverage
growth from 2002 to 2006 and economic outcomes from 2006 to 2009. Section 4 explores
alternative hypotheses and shows how credit card-reliant borrowers responded to the financial
crisis of the fall of 2008. Section 5 presents our magnitude estimation, and Section 6 concludes.

Section 1. Household Leverage and the Real Economy
A. The Origins of Household Leverage
What factors led to the dramatic expansion in household leverage from 2001 to 2007?
This is the central question of two of our previous studies. In Mian and Sufi (2009a), we argue
that the advent of subprime mortgage securitization represented a credit supply shock that
provided new home purchase financing for a segment of the population that traditionally was
unable to obtain mortgages. We are agnostic on the source of the credit supply shock—it is likely
that government programs (Leonnig (2008)), moral hazard on behalf of originators and servicers
of securitization pools (Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010), and the enormous capital
inflows into the United States (Obstfeld and Rogoff (2009)) all played some role. We present
evidence that the credit supply shock led to an increase in house prices, which led to an
important collateral feedback effect: once collateral values increased, lenders were willing to
lend even more to households (Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)).

6

In Mian and Sufi (2009b), we focus on existing homeowners who owned their homes
before the credit supply shock. We find that existing homeowners responded to house price
growth by borrowing heavily against the increase in the value of their home equity. We find that
homeowners borrowed 25 to 30 cents on every dollar of home value appreciation, and that this
home equity-based borrowing channel accounts for a substantial fraction of the increase in
homeowner debt from 2002 to 2006.
To summarize, two related factors are responsible for the rise in household leverage
between 2001 and 2007. First, an expansion in the supply of credit (as opposed to a productivity
driven demand side shock) pulled new buyers into the housing market, pushing house prices up
in the process. Second, the increase in house prices and low interest rates enticed existing
homeowners to extract cash from their home equity.
B. Household Leverage and the Real Economy
Following the historic rise in household leverage, the top panel in Figure 2 shows that
beginning in the second quarter of 2006, default rates began to rise and house prices began to
fall. As early as the second quarter of 2007—two months before the beginning of the current
recession—default rates were already above the levels they had reached in the 2001 recession.
By the second quarter of 2009, the default rate neared 10%, which is twice as high as any point
since 1991. Total delinquent debt as of the second quarter of 2009 was $1.7 trillion.4
The process of household de-leveraging began in the second quarter of 2008 (lower
panel). Households cut back on consumption as the personal savings rate reached 5.2% in the
second quarter of 2009 - the highest it has been in over a decade. As early as the fourth quarter of
4

Throughout, the household default rate refers to the default rate on all household debt, including housing- and nonhousing-related debt. In our sample as of 2006, housing-related debt (mortgages and home equity lines) is on
average 80% of total debt across U.S. counties. Further, a regression of housing-related default rates on total default
rates yields and R2 of 0.98. In other words, most of the variation across counties in household default rates is driven
by variation in housing-related default rates.

7

2007, debt growth began to moderate. From the fourth quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of
2009, total household debt declined for three straight quarters—something that had not
previously occurred in the past 60 years for which quarterly data are available.
Why did mortgage defaults begin to rise and house prices begin to fall in the middle of
2006? This question is beyond the scope of our analysis, but we offer three potential reasons.
First, rising interest rates likely played a role in reducing house prices by lowering the relative
advantage of homeownership (Mayer and Hubbard (2008)). Second, lending standards on
mortgages deteriorated to such a degree that mortgages originated in 2006 experienced
shockingly high default rates almost immediately after origination (Demyanyk and Van Hemert
(2008)). Third, even small increases in default rates may have shut down securitization markets,
leading to an amplification effect on default rates as households were unable to refinance.
One thing is certain: the rise in mortgage defaults and collapse in house prices preceded
the aggregate rise in the unemployment rate. Figure 3 shows that the increase in default rates (top
panel) and decrease in house prices (bottom panel) started five quarters before any increase in
the aggregate unemployment rate.
Figure 4 shows the decline in real activity. Starting in the first quarter of 2006, residential
fixed investment growth began to plummet. By the fourth quarter of 2007, residential fixed
investment had declined almost 50% from its 2005 level. In contrast, non-residential fixed
investment showed robust growth until the third quarter of 2008. The middle panel of Figure 4
shows a similar pattern for durable consumption, which leveled off in 2007 before experiencing
sharp declines through 2008. Non-durable and service consumption remained strong until the
end of 2008.

8

The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows monthly retail sales; as it shows, the drop in durable
consumption (motor vehicles, and furniture and appliances) began very early in the recession.
The drop in auto sales was particularly large—from the fourth quarter of 2007 to the fourth
quarter of 2008, auto sales dropped by 30%. The drop in non-durable consumption both began
later and was far less severe.
Figure 4 shows that the initial part of the economic downturn was driven by declines in
durable consumption and residential investment. This is common in post World War II
recessions (Leamer (2007, 2009)). The early drops in these two GDP components during the
2007 to 2009 recession occurred simultaneously with an extremely large increase in household
defaults. Given the importance of credit in the purchase of durable goods and housing, there is a
suggestive link between deterioration of household balance sheets and the early decline in
durable and housing consumption.
While the aggregate patterns are suggestive of a link between household leverage and the
recession, we urge caution in the interpretation of the evidence. A main disadvantage of
aggregate data is the inability to distinguish between competing hypotheses that imply similar
time series patterns in aggregate activity. For example, residential investment and durable
consumption may have declined given expectations of future unemployment increases. In the
next section, we begin our analysis of the cross-section of U.S. counties to provide further
evidence on the link between household leverage and the 2007 to 2009 recession.

Section 2. County-Level Data and Summary Statistics
We build the county-level data set from a variety of sources. Information on household
debt, default rates, and credit scores comes from Equifax zip code level aggregates. Data on

9

house prices come from the FHFA MSA level house price indices, which are subsequently
matched to counties. Zip code level income information is available from the IRS, and zip code
level demographics are from the 2000 Decennial Census. More information on these data sets is
available in the appendix of Mian and Sufi (2009a). The zip code level data in Equifax are
aggregated to the county level by weighting each zip code by the fraction of all consumers with a
credit report in the county living in the zip code. The IRS and Census zip code level data are
aggregated to the county level using the number of households in the 2000 census as weights.
There are four new county-level data sets that we do not employ in our previous studies.
The first includes auto sales data from R.L. Polk. Polk is an automotive intelligence company
that provides detailed auto sales data to a variety of customers. The data are collected by
examining new vehicle registrations at the county level. The data are available from 2004 to
2009 at a quarterly frequency, and they cover every county in the United States.5 County-level
unemployment data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, who provide quarterly
unemployment rate data for all U.S. counties. We use county business patterns data from the
Census Bureau to construct industry composition of employment for each county. The business
patterns data records payroll and employment data by industry for each county and is available
with a three year lag. New housing permits also come from the Census Bureau.6
While there are 3,138 counties in the U.S., we restrict our attention to the top 450
counties in the U.S. by population. These are counties with at least 50,000 resident households,
which cover 70% of the U.S. population and 82% of the aggregate debt outstanding as of the end
of 2005. Since our focus is on county-level analysis in this paper, we drop the very small
counties that add significant measurement error. All of our results are unchanged if we include
5

These data are available for purchase from R.L. Polk. For pricing information and purchase, please contact Robert
Sacka at robert_sacka@polk.com, and mention the county-level quarterly auto sales data used in this study.
6
County-level census data are available at: http://www2.census.gov/prod2/statcomp/usac/excel/

10

small counties, but give them their appropriate statistical weight by weighing by county
population.7
Every state and the District of Columbia are represented by the counties in our sample,
with the exception of Wyoming. To get a sense of the counties included, we list in the Appendix
Table every fifth county in our final sample, where the counties are sorted inversely according to
the change in the debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006 (i.e., counties with the largest increase
in the debt to income ratio are listed first).
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the final sample of 450 counties. The key variable
of interest in our study is the increase in the debt to income ratio across counties from 2002 to
2006. The average debt to income increase across counties from 2002 to 2006 was 0.8. The
average debt to income ratio as of 2001 was 2.2 with a standard deviation of 0.5, which implies
that the increase from 2002 to 2006 was more than one full standard deviation of the 2001 level.
The average increase in the default rates of counties from the fourth quarter of 2006 to
the second quarter of 2009 was 0.043, which is almost three times as large as one standard
deviation of the 2006 level. House prices collapsed from 2006 to 2009, with the average decline
across counties in our sample of 14%. House price data are only available for 123 counties; this
reflects the limits of the coverage of MSAs by FHFA.
Table 1 also shows that auto sales plummeted by an average of 32% from the fourth
quarter of 2006 to the second quarter of 2009. Over the same time period, the unemployment rate
increased by an average of 5.4 percentage points, which is more than 4 times a standard

7

The results using the full sample and equally weighting counties are qualitatively similar but are smaller in
magnitude. This is consistent with higher measurement error in very small counties. Consistent with this
explanation, the R2 of equally weighted regressions using the full sample are only between 1/3 and 1/2 as large as
the R2 of population weighted regressions using the full sample.

11

deviation of the 2006 level. Table 1 also includes information on Census demographics and
county business patterns across the 450 counties in our sample.

Section 3. Household Leverage and the Real Economy: County-Level Analysis
In this section, we examine how household leverage growth in a given county from 2002
to 2006 is correlated with the timing and severity of the recession in the county from 2006 to
2009. As we show, counties with the largest increases in household leverage experienced the
earliest and most severe downturns in economic activity.
A. Methodology
There are five county-level economic outcomes we evaluate: mortgage default rates,
house price growth, auto sales, new housing building permits, and unemployment. The goal of
our methodology is to see how the increase in leverage from 2002 to 2006 in a given county is
correlated with these county-level outcomes during the recession. We first split the sample into
high and low leverage growth counties. High leverage growth counties are counties in the top
10% of the distribution of the increase in the debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006. For
example, Merced County in California experienced an increase in its aggregate debt to income of
2.3 from 2002 to 2006. Low leverage growth counties are counties in the bottom 10% of the
same distribution. For example, Tarrant County in Texas experienced almost no increase in its
debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006. Once we split the sample into high and low leverage
growth counties, we present figures that plot each economic outcome from the fourth quarter of
2004 to the end of the sample. This technique shows both the timing and severity of the
downturn in high versus low leverage growth counties.

12

Our second approach is to present figures that contain the county-level scatter plot of the
change in each economic outcome during the recession against the rise in leverage that preceded
the recession. For example, for each county, we plot the increase in the unemployment rate from
the fourth quarter of 2006 to second quarter of 2009 against the rise in household leverage from
the fourth quarter of 2002 to the fourth quarter of 2006.
Third, for each outcome, we present a series of first difference regressions with countylevel control variables. The following equation represents the general form of the first difference
specifications:
06 4_09 2

02 4_06 4

Γ

(1)

where EconomicOutcome06q4_09q2 represents the change in the outcome (house prices, default
rates, unemployment, and auto sales) for county i from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the second
quarter of 2009, LeverageGrowth02q4_06q4 represents the increase in the debt to income ratio
in county i from the fourth quarter of 2002 to the fourth quarter of 2006, and ControlVariables is
a set of cyclicality, demographic, and industrial composition measures for county i. In estimating
specification (1), we weight by the total number of households in the county as of 2000 to
account for the fact that variables measured over smaller populations have larger variance. We
also report unweighted regression results in all our tables. Standard errors in all specification are
clustered at the state level.
In the regression specifications, we choose to measure household leverage growth up to
2006 because it reflects when the household leverage cycle shifted from expansion to
contraction. As Figure 2 above shows, the decline in house prices and the increase in household
defaults began in 2006. Although the recession did not formally begin until the fourth quarter of
2007 according to the NBER, we choose to measure economic outcomes from the fourth quarter
of 2006 because default rates increased rapidly and house priced declined sharply in 2007. All
13

results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar if we measure outcomes from the fourth
quarter of 2007. Further, as mentioned above, we plot all outcomes for high and low leverage
growth counties from 2004 onwards in order to show the exact timing of economic outcomes.
In most of our empirical tests, we take the variation across counties in leverage growth
from 2002 to 2006 as given. In other words, we do not attempt to discern why some counties
experienced sharper increases in household leverage than others. This issue is addressed in our
previous studies. In both Mian and Sufi (2009a) and Mian and Sufi (2009b), we show that an
aggregate credit supply shock beginning in 2002 shifted the demand for housing across the
country. The degree to which house prices increased in respond to this housing demand shock
depended crucially on the slope of the housing supply curve. In counties with relatively elastic
housing supply, house prices were relatively steady as home-builders responded to the demand
shock by constructing more homes. In counties with relatively inelastic housing supply, house
prices increased given the difficulty in constructing more homes to meet new demand.
As a corollary, as counties with inelastic housing supply experienced sharper increases in
house prices, existing homeowners aggressively borrowed against the value of their homes
(Mian and Sufi (2009b)) and new homeowners were forced to take out larger mortgages to buy
more expensive homes (Mian and Sufi (2009a)). The primary measure of housing supply
elasticity we use in the previous studies comes from Saiz (2008), who constructs his measure
based on geographical and topographical constraints on house construction.
The impact of housing supply elasticity on leverage growth is quite strong: a county level
regression of the increase in the debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006 on the Saiz (2008)
measure of housing supply inelasticity shows a strongly positive correlation with an R2 of almost

14

0.2. This motivates our final test of the relation between leverage growth and economic
outcomes, which is the following instrumental variables specification:
06 4_09 2

02 4_06 4

02 4_06 4

Γ
Θ

(2)
(3)

Where equation (3) represents the first stage in which leverage growth is regressed on the Saiz
(2008) measure of housing supply inelasticity. The second stage is identified using the predicted
values of LeverageGrowth02q4_06q4 for each county. We examine the exclusion restriction in
great detail in our previous work, and we come to the conclusion that differential patterns in
economic outcomes in the IV specification above come through house price growth and its effect
on household leverage.
B. Default Rates and House Prices
Figure 5A shows differential patterns for default rates and house prices for high versus
low leverage growth counties. Counties that experienced the largest increase in their debt to
income ratio from 2002 to 2006 saw a tremendous rise in household default rates. Beginning in
the second quarter of 2006, the household default rate in high leverage growth counties began to
skyrocket. By the second quarter of 2009, the default rate increased by 12 percentage points for
these counties. In contrast, default rates in low leverage growth counties began to rise later and
experienced only a modest increase by 2009. By the end of the sample period, the default rate is
almost 10 percentage points higher in high leverage growth counties relative to low leverage
growth counties.
The patterns in house price growth are similar. Low leverage growth counties completely
avoided the housing downturn. High leverage growth counties were hammered. Starting in 2006,
house prices began to plummet in counties that had experienced the largest rise in the debt to

15

income ratio from 2002 to 2006. From 2005 to the second quarter of 2009, house prices dropped
a stunning 40% in high leverage growth counties.
Figure 5B shows the scatter plots for the change in these two outcome variables from
2006 to 2009 against the increase in household leverage from 2002 to 2006. As they show, the
increase in household leverage before the recession in a given county strongly predicts the
severity of the subsequent default and housing crisis within the same county. The magnitudes are
very large: the regression line implies that a one standard deviation increase in leverage growth
from 2002 to 2006 leads to a 2/3 standard deviation increase in subsequent default rates and a 2/3
standard deviation decline in subsequent house price growth.
Tables 2 and 3 present the first difference regression analogs to the scatter plots, and they
show that the correlations in Figure 5B are robust to the inclusion of control variables. In column
1 of Table 2, the change in the debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006 is strongly correlated with
the increase in default rates from 2006 to 2009. This single variable gives an R2 of 0.45, which is
extremely high for a first-difference cross-section regression. Column 2 presents the coefficient
estimate after weighting the observations by the number of households in the county as of 2000.
In columns 3 and 4, we include a variety of control variables that increase the adjusted R2
substantially. The inclusion of control variables actually increases the size of the coefficient on
leverage growth. Column 5 presents the IV estimate where the change in the debt to income ratio
is instrumented using the Saiz (2008) measure of housing supply inelasticity. The IV estimate is
considerably larger than the OLS estimate, which may be may be driven by two factors. First, the
IV could be correcting for some measurement error in leverage growth. Second, to the extent
some of the increase in leverage is driven by real permanent income shocks, it would tend to
reduce ex-post differences between high and low leverage growth counties. For example, if high

16

leverage growth were driven by an accurate expectation of higher income growth in future, then
leverage growth will not be correlated with high default rates. Since our housing supply elasticity
instrument is uncorrelated with such permanent income shock differences (see Mian and Sufi
2009b for evidence), the IV specification corrects for the endogeneity problem.
The coefficient in column 1 of Table 3 shows the strong negative correlation between
leverage growth from 2002 to 2006 and subsequent house price growth. The univariate
specification yields an R2 of 0.62. As before, the inclusion of control variables improves the fit
of the regression, but has almost no effect on the relation between leverage growth and house
price growth. As with default rates, the IV estimate is larger than the OLS estimate, although the
coefficient is not estimated precisely.
C. Auto Sales, New Housing Permits, and Unemployment Rates
In Figure 6A, we plot the differential patterns in auto sales, new housing building
permits, and unemployment rates for high versus low leverage growth counties. Counties that
experienced the largest increase in their debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006 saw a severe
contraction in auto sales very early in the downturn. By the first quarter of 2008, auto sales
dropped 20% relative to their 2005 level in high leverage growth counties. In contrast, auto sales
were actually up in low leverage growth counties in the first quarter of 2008. In the third quarter
of 2008, auto sales dropped in both high and low leverage growth counties, but the drop in high
leverage growth counties was much more severe. Interestingly, all counties saw auto sales
plummet in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. We return to this latter fact in
Section 4.
The middle panel of Figure 6A plots the differential patterns for new housing permits.
High leverage growth counties experienced a much earlier and more severe downturn in new

17

housing permit growth. At the end of 2007, new housing permits declined in counties
experiencing a large increase in leverage from 2002 to 2006 by 75%. The decline in counties
experiencing no increase in leverage from 2002 to 2006 was only 20%. The differential only
increased from 2007 to 2008.
Perhaps the most important measure of recession severity is the unemployment rate. The
right panel of Figure 6A shows that the rise in unemployment began much earlier in high versus
low leverage growth counties, and the subsequent increase in unemployment was much more
severe. As early as the middle of 2007, the unemployment rate had increased more sharply in
counties that had experienced the largest increase in their debt to income ratios from 2002 to
2006.
While the unemployment rate is relatively constant in low leverage growth counties
through the third quarter of 2008, it increases sharply from the third quarter of 2008 to the
second quarter of 2009. This is similar to the pattern in auto sales. In other words, while
household leverage is strongly correlated with auto sales and unemployment through the third
quarter of 2008, all counties experience dramatic declines in auto sales and dramatic increases in
unemployment during the last part of the recession.
Figure 6B presents the scatter plots of the relation between leverage growth from 2002 to
2006 and the change in auto sales, new housing permits, and unemployment from 2006 to 2009.
The plots show a negative correlation between leverage growth and subsequent auto sales growth
and leverage growth and subsequent new housing permit growth. The right panel shows a
positive correlation between leverage growth and subsequent increases in unemployment. The
scatter plots show a significant amount of unexplained variation, which we examine in the next
section.

18

Table 4 presents coefficients from the first difference specification of auto sales growth
from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the second quarter of 2009 regressed on leverage growth from
2002 to 2006. The coefficient estimate in column 2 implies that a one standard deviation increase
in leverage growth from 2002 to 2006 in a county was associated with a ½ standard deviation
decrease in auto sales from 2006 to 2009. The inclusion of control variables reduces the
magnitude slightly, but the effect is still large and statistically significant. The IV specification in
column 5 yields a coefficient estimate that is substantially larger, but less precise.
Table 5 replicates the specifications with the growth in new housing building permits
from 2006 to 2008 as the left hand side variable. The coefficient in column 2 implies that a one
standard deviation increase in leverage growth from 2002 to 2006 leads to a 1/3 standard
deviation decrease in new housing permit growth from 2006 to 2008. The inclusion of control
variables does not affect the estimate. The IV specification produces a larger coefficient, but it is
measured less precisely.
The results on new housing building permits raise a possible “real estate construction”
channel through which household leverage affects real economic activity: the housing boom in
high leverage growth counties led to higher employment in real estate construction from 2002 to
2006, and the resulting downturn is a natural response as this sector shrinks. The coefficient
estimate in column 6 disputes this hypothesis. The estimate implies that high leverage growth
counties experienced less residential housing construction during the housing boom than low
leverage growth counties.8 This is consistent with our previous research that shows that a creditinduced housing demand shock led to more building in elastic counties (Mian and Sufi (2009b)).
In addition, the employment share in construction and real estate as of the end of 2006 is

8

In an unreported specification, we include census, 2001 economic condition, and 2001 industry share control
variables in the column 6 specification and find similar results.

19

included as a control variable for all economic outcomes, and this control variable does not affect
the estimated coefficient on leverage growth in any specification.
Table 6 presents coefficients from the first difference specification of the unemployment
rate change from 2006 to 2009 regressed on leverage growth from 2002 to 2006. The coefficient
estimate in column 2 implies that a one standard deviation increase in leverage growth from
2002 to 2006 led to a 1/3 standard deviation increase in the unemployment rate during the
recession. The inclusion of control variables has almost no effect on the magnitude. The IV
estimate is even larger than the OLS estimate.
Taken together, these results show that a county’s expansion in household leverage from
2002 to 2006 is a powerful statistical predictor of the severity and timing of the economic
downturn across U.S. counties. Counties which had experienced the largest increase in their
household debt to income ratios were precisely the counties that saw auto sales plummet and
unemployment rates increase the most.

Section 4. The Credit Crisis and the Deepening of the Recession
Household leverage growth from 2002 to 2006 in a county is a strong predictor of the
decline in economic activity from the second quarter of 2006 to the third quarter of 2008.
Counties with modest increases in debt to income ratios from 2002 to 2006 experience almost no
decline in auto sales or increase in unemployment during the early part of the recession.
However, as Figure 6A above shows, both high and low leverage growth counties experience a
dramatic decline in auto sales and a dramatic increase in unemployment from the third quarter of
2008 to the second quarter of 2009. In this section, we explore the potential relation between
these patterns, the financial crisis, and consumer reliance on credit cards.

20

A. Credit card utilization rates
Figure 7 presents evidence on the evolution of credit card and home equity patterns from
2005 through 2009. Availability under credit lines is a useful measure of credit supply given
evidence that total available access on a credit line reflects a bank’s willingness to lend (see
Gross and Souleles (2002)). While the size of a credit line can also reflect consumer demand, the
utilization rate (total line less borrowed portion) can offer suggestive evidence of whether supply
or demand is driving variation in credit limits. If a decline in credit limits leads to a sharp rise in
utilization rates, then the decline in credit limits is more consistent with a shift in credit supply
than credit demand. As the top left panel shows, credit card availability increased dramatically
during the early part of the recession from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the third quarter of 2008.
In other words, while home equity and mortgage credit markets became significantly tighter in
the early part of the recession, credit card availability was expanding.
As the middle left panel shows, high leverage growth counties took advantage of these
increased limits by borrowing heavily on credit cards during the early part of the recession.
Recall that these same counties experienced a sharp increase in defaults and unemployment and a
sharp decrease in house price growth, residential investment, and auto sales during this same
time period. The sharp relative growth in credit card debt from the fourth quarter of 2007 to the
third quarter of 2008 for high leverage growth counties was either a last attempt to avoid
defaults, or a final draw down on credit cards before inevitable bankruptcy.
As the top left panel shows, the financial crisis in the fall of 2008 led to a sharp reversal
in credit card availability. All counties faced a dramatic reduction in credit card availability,
which is consistent with a large negative aggregate credit supply shock.

21

As shown in Figure 6A above, both high and low leverage growth counties experienced a
sharp decline in auto sales and a sharp increase in unemployment after the third quarter of 2008.
How is the large negative consumer credit supply shock shown in Figure 7 related to this
pattern? To answer this question, we sort counties based on credit card utilization rates as of the
fourth quarter of 2006. Counties with high credit card utilization rates are assumed to be more
reliant on short-term unsecured consumer credit.9
The top panel of Figure 8 presents the correlation between the credit card utilization rate
as of 2006 and the decline in auto sales from the third quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of
2009. There appears to be a negative correlation, although there is a substantial amount of noise.
The bottom panel examines the unemployment rate increase from the third quarter of 2008 to the
second quarter of 2009. There is a very weak positive correlation between credit card utilization
and the subsequent increase in unemployment.
Table 7 presents results relating the credit card utilization rate to changes in economic
outcomes during the recession. As column 1 of Table 7 shows, the credit card utilization rate is
not related to auto sales growth from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the third quarter of 2008. In
other words, our initial measure of household leverage appears to be the dominant force early in
the recession. In column 2, we examine auto sales growth for the entire recession; the credit card
utilization rate as of 2006 is strongly correlated with the decline in auto sales when we examine
the entire recession. The magnitude of the coefficient implies that a one standard deviation
increase in credit card utilization rates as of 2006 is associated with a 1/3 standard deviation
decrease in auto sales. Household leverage growth from 2002 to 2006 continues to be correlated
with the decline in auto sales during the recession. Column 3 includes control variables; the
9

The correlation across counties between the increase in the debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006 and the credit
card utilization rate as of the fourth quarter of 2006 is statistically significantly negatively correlated. As a result, we
are able to separately test the household leverage growth channel from the credit card reliant-consumer channel.

22

magnitude of the credit card utilization rate declines, but it remains negative and statistically
significant at the 10% level.
In columns 4 through 6, we examine whether credit card utilization rates as of 2006 os
related to the drop in housing permits or the increase in unemployment. Unlike the evidence on
auto sales, we find little evidence of a correlation between credit card utilization rates and
housing construction or unemployment. In other words, there is a large fraction of unexplained
variation in housing permit growth and unemployment growth, especially after the third quarter
of 2008.
B. Alternative channels
In this section, we consider other factors that may have been important in explaining the
cross-sectional severity of the recession across U.S. counties. It is important to emphasize that
alternative channels must be able to explain the cross-sectional patterns we observe.
Whenever a financial crisis occurs simultaneously with a severe recession, there is a
possibility that financial market difficulties have an accelerator effect through business credit
availability and investment (Bernanke and Gertler (1989)). Indeed, the results in the previous
subsection suggest a financial accelerator effect through consumer credit supply. However, one
potential argument against our household leverage channel is a local financial accelerator effect:
household defaults in a given county led to difficulties in the local banking sector which in turn
led to a contraction of business credit. The channel was not households cutting back in the face
of enormous debt burdens and reduced credit availability; instead, financial difficulties in the
local banking sector led to the economic downturn.

23

We examine the local financial accelerator hypothesis in Table 8.10 In columns 1 through
3, we isolate the sample to 52 counties that have banks in the county with less than 10% of their
total deposit base in the county. In other words, these counties have almost exclusively national
banks that are unlikely to have large exposure to the household defaults within the county.
Among these national bank counties, we see the exact same relation between the increase in
household leverage from 2002 to 2006 and economic outcomes from 2006 to 2009. It is difficult
to argue that local banking markets are driving the effect in these counties, given that the banks
are major national players.
In columns 4 through 6, we include explicit control variables for charge-offs and net
income for the banks that have branches in the county. The inclusion of such control variables
does not change the coefficient estimates on leverage growth from 2002 to 2006. These results
are inconsistent with the hypothesis that the effect of household leverage on county-level
outcomes is due to a local financial accelerator operating through the business sector.
More generally, a common argument for the severity of the recession of 2007 to 2009 is
an aggregate contraction of credit to businesses. We are skeptical of this view for a number of
reasons. First, non-residential business investment was the last main component of GDP to move
in the cycle. As Figure 4 above shows, investment in equipment in software did not register a
major decline until the fourth quarter of 2008, and the reduction in investment in structures did
not begin until the first quarter of 2009. While the drop in investment in the last part of the
recession may have been due to harsh credit conditions, it is just as likely that businesses cut
investment in response to the dramatic reduction in consumption.

10

Deposit data by county for each bank is constructed using the FDIC Summary of Deposit data. Data on chargeoffs and net income is from Call Report data.

24

Second, businesses were in a much healthier financial situation than consumers as of the
third quarter of 2008 when the credit crisis began. Indeed, the corporate debt to income ratio
increased only moderately leading up to the recession (Mian and Sufi (2009b)). A large body of
research documents how businesses used large revolving credit facilities extended during the
credit boom to mitigate the impact of the credit crunch (Ivashina and Scharfstein (2009), Gao
and Yun (2009), Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (2008)). Survey evidence also suggests that there
was absolutely no evidence of a credit crunch to small businesses through September 2008
(Dunkelburg (2008)).
Third, while consumer defaults have skyrocketed above any level in recent history, direct
measures of corporate distress were relatively low compared to the 2001 recession, even in the
heart of the credit crunch in the fall of 2008. Figure 9 shows the fraction of public firms that are
in violation of a financial covenant in any debt agreement (top panel) and the fraction of public
firms in payment default of debt agreements (bottom panel).11 For the 2008 fiscal year (which
covers firms filing their 10-K at any point from July 2008 to June 2009), the fraction of firms
that violated a financial covenant is much lower than during the recession of 2001. While
corporate defaults did eventually skyrocket in the second quarter of 2009, these defaults occurred
very late in the recession. As of the fourth quarter of 2008, corporate defaults were much lower
than during the years around the 2001 recession. Both covenant violation and default patterns
suggest that firms faced less distress than they did in the relatively mild recession of 2001.

Section 5. How Much of the Recession Does Our Model of Household Leverage Explain?

11

The covenant violation data are described in detail in Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2009). The corporate default data are
from Moody’s Default and Recovery Database.

25

The severity of the 2007 to 2009 recession is reflected in four aggregate facts: (i) there
was an extraordinary rise in household defaults from 4.1% to 9.7%, (ii) homeowners experienced
a 21% drop in house prices, (iii) consumers pulled back sharply on durable consumption, which
we proxy for with the 36% drop in auto sales, and (iv) the unemployment rate jumped from 4.2%
to 9.8%.12
How much of these four factors can the growth in household leverage from 2002 to 2006
and the level of consumer reliance on credit card borrowing as of 2006 explain? In other words,
can the cross-sectional variation in these two measures of household leverage explain most of the
aggregate fluctuations listed above?
A simple answer to this question is given by the predicted fluctuations for counties that
score very low on our two measures of household leverage.13 For example, if household leverage
growth from 2002 to 2006 were the only factor responsible for the dramatic increase in defaults,
then we would predict zero increase in defaults for counties with no growth in leverage from
2002 to 2006. Using this methodology, our first factor – the growth in household leverage from
2002 to 2006 – accounts for almost the entire increase in household defaults and the entire
decline in house prices. This can be seen in column 2 of Tables 2 and 3 where the constant in
univariate regressions is very close to zero and precisely estimated.14
The constant in column 2 of Table 4 suggests that the leverage growth from 2002 to 2006
alone is not sufficient to explain the entire drop in auto sales from the end of 2006 to 2009. The
regression predicts a 15% drop in auto sales even in counties for which there was no increase in
12

All of these numbers are calculated using our sample.
By using predicted values, this magnitude assessment ignores unexplained (residual) variation. In other words, we
compare magnitudes by using the economic outcomes that our model predicts for counties with varying degrees of
household leverage, and ignoring any “unexplained” variation not predicted by our model.
14
Counties in the lowest leverage growth decile have a change in the debt to income ratio from 2002 to 2006 just
above zero. The constant therefore represents an in sample prediction for these lowest decile leverage growth
counties.
13

26

household leverage. Given an average drop in auto sales of 36%, this estimate implies that our
first factor cannot explain 42% (= 15/36) of the overall drop in auto sales.
However, the specification reported in column 2 of Table 7 shows that adding our second
factor – the credit card utilization rate as of 2006 – significantly adds to our predictive power of
explaining the auto sales decline. How much of the overall decline in auto sales can our two
combined factors explain? This question can be answered by looking at the predicted auto sales
decline for counties that score low on both household leverage growth and the credit card
utilization rates. Counties in the bottom decile of household leverage growth from 2002 to 2006
and credit card utilization rate in 2006 have mean values for these two variables of 0.166 and
0.198, respectively. Using the coefficient estimates from column 2 of Table 7, the predicted auto
sales decline for a county in the lowest decile of both our factors is 3.5% (= -0.281*0.1663.051*0.198+0.616). In other words, our model predicts almost no change in auto sales in the
absence of the observed changes in leverage growth and the credit card utilization rate.15
Comparatively, our measures of household leverage within the model cannot explain as
much of the aggregate rise in unemployment. For example, the estimates in column 2 of Table 6
imply that even counties with no increase in household leverage from 2002 to 2006 would have
seen a rise in unemployment of 4.7%. Household leverage growth therefore explains only 1.1%
of the 5.6% increase in aggregate unemployment. The estimates in column 6 of Table 7 show
that the credit card utilization rate does not add much power in explaining the rise in
unemployment.

15

We focus on the lowest decile counties, because we prefer to avoid out of sample predictions. We should point out
however, that household leverage growth and credit card utilization rates are strongly negatively correlated with a
correlation coefficient of -0.31. Nonetheless there exist counties that lie in the intersection of bottom deciles for the
two factors.

27

However, the limitation of our cross-sectional measures of household leverage in
explaining the aggregate rise in unemployment should not be seen as a failure of household
leverage itself. Our earlier results – as well as aggregate patterns - show that a large part of the
decline in GDP is driven by a drop in consumption, and in particular durable consumption. The
drop is much more pronounced in areas that were more levered, either in terms of leverage
growth or dependence on credit card borrowing. However, production of consumer goods is
often not in the same county where consumers are located. As a result, we would naturally
expect unemployment to be more evenly distributed across the country, even if household
leverage is the underlying cause of the rise in unemployment. For example, a decline in auto
sales due to high leverage growth in Florida and California would naturally lead to higher
unemployment in other states such as Alabama and Michigan.
As a cautionary note, our exercise is not meant to argue that household leverage
“predicts” recessions. Instead, we examine only one recession. In this recession, our crosssectional statistical model predicts that the increase in mortgage defaults and the decline in house
prices and durable consumption would have been largely avoided had counties had low measures
of household leverage as of 2006.

Section 6. Conclusion
Understanding economic fluctuations is a central goal of macroeconomics. Our results
suggest that the sharp increase in household leverage from 2002 to 2006 is closely linked to the
2007 to 2009 economic recession. Other factors in the financial markets—such as banks’
liquidity, the Lehman bankruptcy, and policy uncertainty—may have contributed to the size of
the downturn. However, our evidence lends support to the hypothesis that the initial economic

28

slowdown was a result of a highly-leveraged household sector unable to keep pace with its debt
obligations.
Our results are consistent with the following interpretation: As homeowners realized that
house price appreciation was no longer sufficient to roll over existing debt, they borrowed
aggressively from their existing unsecured credit limits, started to default, and, most importantly,
cut back on durable consumption. These patterns began around the middle of 2006, well before
the financial market turmoil of August 2007 or the deeper meltdown of the fall of 2008.
Our interpretation of the evidence is consistent with two other studies that rely on crosssectional variation in household leverage. King (1994) examines GDP growth across western
countries in the 1990 to 1991 recession and finds evidence that countries with higher household
debt to GDP ratios before the recession had more severe declines in GDP. Glick and Lansing
(2010) conduct a similar exercise for the 2007 to 2009 recession and find similar results. The
similarity of the cross-sectional evidence in these three different settings is strongly indicative of
a close link between household leverage and economic downturns. The weight of the evidence
suggests the need for more theoretical and empirical research on this potential channel.

29

References
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review 79: 14-31.
Chari, V., Lawrence Christiano, and Patrick Kehoe, 2008, “Facts and Myths About the Financial
Crisis of 2008,” Working Paper.
Chrisitiano, L, R Motto and M Rostagno, 2007, “Financial factors in business cycles”, Mimeo,
European Central Bank.
Demyanyk, Y., and Van Hemert, O., “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis,” Review of
Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Dunkelberg, William, 2008, “Economic Responses to the Monetary Policy Signals of 2007: A
Small Business Perspective,” University of Michigan RSQE Conference Proceedings.
Fisher, Irving, 1933, The debt-deflation theory of great depressions, Econometrica 1: 337-357.
Fisher, J., 2001, “Heterogeneous Investment Dynamics,” mimeo, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago.
Gao, Pengjie and Hayong Yun, 2009, “Commercial Paper, Lines of Credit, and the Real Effects
of the Financial Crisis of 2008: Firm-Level Evidence from the Manufacturing Industry,”
Working Paper.
Glick, Reuvan and Kevin Lansing, 2009. “U.S. Household Deleveraging and Future
Consumption Growth”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, Number 200916, May 15, 2009.
Gross, David and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints And Interest Rates
Matter For Consumer Behavior? Evidence From Credit Card Data”, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117: 149-185.
Iacoviello, M., 2005. “House prices, borrowing constraints and monetary policy in the business
cycle”, American Economic Review, 95, 739–64.
Ivashina, Victoria and David Scharfstein, 2009, “Bank Lending during the Financial Crisis of
2008,” Working Paper.
Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, “Did Securitization
Lead to Lax Screening: Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125
King, Mervyn, 1994, “Debt deflation: Theory and evidence,” European Economic Review, 38:
419-455.

30

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997. “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy, 105,
211-248.
Leamer, Edward, 2009. “Macroeconomic Patterns and Stories: A Guide for MBAs”, Springer
Publications.
Leamer, Edward, 2007. “Housing is the business cycle”, NBER working paper # 13428.
Leonnig, Carol D., 2008, “How HUD Mortgage Policy Fed the Crisis,” Washington Post, June
10, available at:
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/06/09/AR2008060902626.html
Mayer, Christopher and R. Glenn Hubbard, 2008, House prices, Interest Rates, and the Mortgage
Market Meltdown, Working Paper, Columbia GSB.
Mian, Atif R. and Sufi, Amir, 2009a. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion:
Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124:
Mian, Atif R. and Sufi, Amir, 2009b. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
U.S. Household Leverage Crisis”, Working Paper, Chicago Booth.
Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi and Francesco Trebbi, forthcoming. “The Political Economy of the
U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, American Economic Review.
Mishkin, Frederic, 1978, “The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression,” Journal of
Economic History, 38: 918-937.
Nini, Greg, David Smith and Amir Sufi, 2009, “Creditor Control Rights, Corporate Governance,
and Firm Value,” Working Paper, June.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2009, “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:
Products of Common Causes,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Asia Economic Policy
Conference Paper.
Saiz, Albert, 2010. “On Local Housing Supply Elasticity”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
Sinai, T. and Souleles, N. S., 2005. “Owner-occupied housing as a hedge against rent risk”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 763–89.
Tovar, Camilo E., 2008, “DSGE models and central banks”, BIS Working Paper No 258.

31

Figure 1
Household Leverage and the U.S. Recession of 2007 to 2009
The top panel plots the unemployment rate according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the middle panel plots
GDP growth from NIPA. The bottom panel plots the aggregate household debt to income ratio for the U.S. from
1977 to 2008. Household debt data come from the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds, income represents wage and
salary payments from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA).

.04

Unemployment rate
.06
.08

.1

Unemployment Rate

2004q1

2005q1

2006q1

2007q1

2008q1

2009q1

2008q1

2009q1

-.05

Annualized growth rate
0
.05

.1

GDP Growth

2004q1

2005q1

2006q1

2007q1

.8

1

Debt to income ratio
1.2
1.4
1.6

1.8

Household debt to income ratio

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

2008

Figure 2
Weakness of Household Balance Sheets
The top panel presents default rate data from Equifax and house price data from the Case Shiller 20 MSA house
price index. The house price series represents the cumulative growth since the fourth quarter of 2005. The bottom
panel plots household debt growth from Equifax since 2005 and the personal savings rate from NIPA.

.02

70

.04

Default rate
.06

80
90
House prices (2005q4 == 100))

.08

100

.1

Default Rates and House Prices

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

Household default rate

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2

CS 20 MSA house price index

1

-.2

2

-.1

Savings rate
3

0
Debt growth since 2005q4

4

.1

5

.2

Household Savings and Debt Growth

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

Personal savings rate

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2
Household debt

Figure 3
Household Defaults and Unemployment
Household default rate data comes from Equifax and the unemployment data are from the BLS.

-.005

0

.005

.01

.015

Default Rate and Unemployment Rate

04q104q204q304q405q105q205q305q406q106q206q306q407q107q207q307q408q108q208q308q409q109q209q3

Change in household default rate
Change in unemployment rate

70

-.005

0

80
90
House prices (2005q4 == 100))

Unemployment rate change
.005
.01

100

.015

House Prices and Unemployment rate

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2

Quarterly change in unemployment rate
CS 20 MSA house price index

Figure 4
What Components of GDP Moved First?
The top two panels present investment and consumption data from NIPA. The bottom panel presents monthly retail
sales data from the Department of Commerce. Each series represents the cumulative growth rate since the fourth
quarter of 2005.

-1

Growth since 2005q4
-.5
0

.5

Fixed Investment Growth

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

Residential

2007q3

2008q3

2009q2

Equipment and software

Structures

-.2

Growth since 2005q4
-.1
0
.1

.2

Consumption Growth

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

Durables

2007q3

2008q3

2009q2

Non-durables

Services

Growth since December 2005
-.3
-.2
-.1
0
.1

Retail Sales Growth

08/2004

08/2005

Motor Vehicles
Other

08/2006

08/2007

08/2008

06/2009

Furniture and Appliances

Figure 5A
Default Rates and House Price Growth in High and Low Leverage Growth Counties
High leverage growth counties are defined to be the top 10% of counties by the increase in the debt to income ratio from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4. Low leverage
growth counties are in the bottom 10% based on the same measure. The left panel plots the change in the default rate for high and low leverage growth counties
since 2005, and the right panel plots the growth rate for high and low leverage growth counties since 2005.

House Price Growth

-.1
-.3

-.2

Change since 2005Q4

.1
.05

-.4

0

Change since 2005Q4

0

.1

.15

Change in Default Rate

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

High leverage growth counties

2007q3

2008q3

2009q2

Low leverage growth counties

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

High leverage growth counties

2007q3

2008q3

2009q2

Low leverage growth counties

Figure 5B
Correlation across Counties of Default Rates and House Prices during Recession with Leverage Growth from 2002 to 2006
The left panel presents the correlation across U.S. counties of the increase in the household debt to income ratio from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and the increase in the
default rate from 2006Q4 to 2009Q2. The right panel presents the correlation across U.S. counties of the increase in the household debt to income ratio from
2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and the decline in house prices from 2006Q2 to 2009Q2. The sample includes 450 counties with at least 50,000 households as of 2000.

Debt to Income Increase and House Price Growth

-.1
-.2
-.3
-.4
-.5
-.6

House price growth (2006Q4-2009Q2)

-.8

-.7

.2
.15
.1
.05

-.9

0

Change in default rate (2006Q4-2009Q2)

0

.1

.25

Debt to Income Increase and Default Rates

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Change in household debt to income ratio (2002Q4-2006Q4)

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Change in household debt to income ratio (2002Q4-2006Q4)

Figure 6A
Auto Sales, New Home Building, and Unemployment Rates in High and Low Leverage Growth Counties
High leverage growth counties are defined to be the top 10% of counties by the increase in the debt to income ratio from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4. Low leverage
growth counties are in the bottom 10% based on the same measure. The left panel plots the growth in auto sales since 2005, the middle panel plots the growth in
new housing permits since 2005, and the right panel plots the change in the unemployment rate since 2005.
New Housing Permits Growth

Change In Unemployment Rate

Change since 2005Q4

.02

Growth since 2005Q4
2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

High leverage growth counties

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2

Low leverage growth counties

-.02

-1.5

-.6

0

-.4

-1

-.2

Growth since 2005Q4

-.5

0

.04

.2

.06

0

Auto Sales Growth

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

High leverage growth counties

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2

Low leverage growth counties

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

High leverage growth counties

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2

Low leverage growth counties

Figure 6B
Correlation across Counties of Auto Sales, New Housing Permits, and Unemployment during Recession with Leverage Growth
from 2002 to 2006
The left panel presents the correlation across U.S. counties of the increase in the household debt to income ratio from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and the decline in auto
sales from 2006Q4 to 2009Q2. The middle panel presents the correlation of the increase in the household debt to income ratio from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and the
growth in housing permits from 2006 to 2008. The right panel presents the correlation across U.S. counties of the increase in the household debt to income ratio
from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and the increase in unemployment rates from 2006Q2 to 2009Q2. All y axis variables are winsorized at the 1% level. The sample
includes 450 counties with at least 50,000 households as of 2000.
Debt to Income Increase and Unemployment

-2

.09
.08
.07
.06
.05
.04
.01

.02

.03

Change in unemployment rate (2006Q2-2009Q2)

0
-.5
-1

Housing permit growth (2006Q4-2008Q4)

-1.5

0
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.8
-1
-1.2

Growth in auto sales (2006Q4-2009Q2)

.2

.1

.5

.11

Debt to Income Increase and New Housing Permits

.4

Debt to Income Increase and Auto Sales

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Change in household debt to income ratio (2002Q4-2006Q4)

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Change in household debt to income ratio (2002Q4-2006Q4)

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Change in household debt to income ratio (2002Q4-2006Q4)

Figure 7
Credit Lines during the Recession
High leverage growth counties are defined to be the top 10% of counties by the increase in the debt to income ratio
from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4. Low leverage growth counties are in the bottom 10% on the same measure. The panels of
this figure present evidence on home equity and credit card limits, draw-downs, and utilization rates from 2004Q4 to
2009Q2 for high and low leverage growth counties.
Home Equity Limit

-.2

-.6

-.1

-.4

0

-.2

0

.1

.2

.2

Credit Card Limit

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

2007q3

High Lev Gr

2008q3 2009q2

2004q3

Low Lev Gr

2005q3

2006q3

2007q3

High Lev Gr

Low Lev Gr

-.6

-.1

-.4

0

-.2

.1

0

.2

.2

.4

Home Equity Amount

.3

Credit Card Amount

2008q3 2009q2

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

2007q3

High Lev Gr

2008q3 2009q2

2004q3

Low Lev Gr

2005q3

2006q3

2007q3

High Lev Gr

Low Lev Gr

-.02

-.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

.08

Home Equity Utilization

.06

Credit Card Utilization

2008q3 2009q2

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

High Lev Gr

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2
Low Lev Gr

2004q3

2005q3

2006q3

High Lev Gr

2007q3

2008q3 2009q2
Low Lev Gr

Figure 8
Consumer Credit Constraints and the Severe Contraction from 2008Q3 to 2009Q2
The top panel presents the correlation across counties between auto sales growth from 2008Q3 to 2009Q2 and the
credit card utilization rate as of 2006Q4. The bottom panel presents the correlation across counties between the
change in the unemployment rate from 2008Q3 to 2009Q2 and the credit card utilization rate as of 2006Q4. All
variables are winsorized at the 1% level.

0
-.1
-.2
-.3
-.4
-.7

-.6

-.5

Auto sales growth (2008Q3-2009Q2)

.1

.2

.3

CC Utilization 06Q4 and Auto Sales

.18

.2

.22

.24

.26

.28

.3

.32

.3

.32

CC utilization (2006Q4)

.06
.05
.04
.03
.02
.01

Unemployment change (2008Q3-2009Q2)

.07

.08

CC Utilization 06Q4 and Unemployment

.18

.2

.22

.24

.26

CC utilization (2006Q4)

.28

Figure 9
Measures of Financial Distress for U.S. Corporations
Covenant violation data for U.S. publicly traded corporations are from Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2009). Corporate
default data are for U.S. publicly traded corporations and come from Moody’s Default and Recovery Database.

.06

.08

.1

.12

Fraction of firms violating financial covenant

1996q4

1998q4

2000q4

2002q4

2004q4

2006q4

2008q4

0

10

20

30

40

Number of corporate defaults

1996q4

1998q4

2000q4

2002q4

2004q4

2006q4

2008q4

Table 1
Summary Statistics for U.S. Counties
This table presents summary statistics for the 450 counties in our sample. We include only counties that have at least
50,000 households as of the 2000 Decennial Census.
N

Mean

Median

SD

10th

90th

Equifax credit bureau/IRS income
Debt to income increase, ‘02Q4 to ‘06Q4
Debt to income, ‘01Q4

450
450

0.775
2.211

0.668
2.084

0.530
0.533

0.256
1.615

1.460
2.995

Equifax credit bureau
Change in default rate, ’06q4 to ‘09q2
Default rate, ‘06Q4
Default rate, ‘01Q4
Fraction with credit score below 660, ‘01Q4
Credit card utilization rate, ‘06Q4

450
450
450
450
450

0.043
0.041
0.043
0.334
0.237

0.032
0.039
0.042
0.318
0.234

0.039
0.015
0.016
0.087
0.028

0.010
0.023
0.024
0.236
0.205

0.099
0.058
0.064
0.457
0.276

FHFA house price index
House price growth, ’06Q4 to ‘09Q2

123

-0.141

-0.072

0.204

-0.450

0.060

R.L. Polk auto sales
Auto sales growth, ’06Q4 to ‘09Q2

450

-0.323

-0.283

0.272

-0.679

-0.018

Census New Housing Permits
New house permit growth, ’06Q4 to ‘09Q2

449

-0.692

-0.694

0.461

-1.244

-0.139

Bureau of Labor Statistics
Change in unemployment rate, ’06Q4 to ‘09Q2
Unemployment rate, ‘06Q4
Unemployment rate, ‘01Q4

450
450
450

0.054
0.042
0.052

0.050
0.040
0.050

0.019
0.013
0.016

0.033
0.029
0.035

0.080
0.057
0.070

Decennial Census
Total households, ’00 (thousands)
Fraction black, ‘00
Fraction homeowner, ‘00
Fraction with high school education or less, ‘00
Ln (Median household income, ‘00)
Ln(Median home value, ’00)

450
450
450
450
450
450

182
0.093
0.708
0.301
10.720
11.690

104
0.050
0.729
0.295
10.714
11.628

246
0.115
0.103
0.072
0.238
0.430

55
0.004
0.589
0.213
10.416
11.194

355
0.250
0.808
0.391
11.042
12.278

Census County Business Patterns
Employment share in construction, ‘06Q4
Employment share in real estate, ‘06Q4
Employment share in finance, ‘06Q4
Employment share in retail, ‘06Q4
Employment share in exports, ‘06Q4

449
449
449
449
450

0.067
0.018
0.051
0.147
1.513

0.060
0.017
0.044
0.147
0.000

0.029
0.008
0.028
0.032
2.631

0.038
0.010
0.026
0.109
0.000

0.109
0.028
0.083
0.189
4.986

Table 2
Household Leverage Increase from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and
Default Rates from 2006Q4 to 2009Q2
The regression in columns 2 through 5 are weighted by the number of households in the county as of 2000. Column
5 reports coefficients from the second stage of an IV specification where the change in the debt to income ratio from
2002 to 2006 is instrumented with housing supply inelasticity of the county as constructed by Saiz (2008). Standard
errors are clustered by state.

Change in debt to income, ‘02 to ‘06

Debt to income, ‘01

Dependent variable: Change in default rates, ‘06Q4 to ‘09Q2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Unweighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
IV
0.049**
0.058**
0.056**
0.055**
0.093**
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.025)
0.020**
(0.006)
-0.782
(0.474)
0.850**
(0.313)
-0.171
(0.246)
1.280**
(0.342)
0.245**
(0.075)
-0.628**
(0.130)
-0.066**
(0.025)
-0.074*
(0.031)
0.116*
(0.053)
0.081**
(0.022)
-0.021+
(0.012)

0.015*
(0.006)
Unemployment rate, ‘06
-0.520
(0.429)
Unemployment rate, ‘01
0.767*
(0.301)
Default rate, ‘06
-0.228
(0.259)
Default rate, ‘01
1.232**
(0.360)
Fraction with credit score under 660, ‘01
0.239**
(0.082)
Credit card utilization rate, ‘06
-0.610**
(0.138)
Fraction black, ‘00
-0.063*
(0.025)
Fraction homeowner, ‘00
-0.049
(0.036)
Fraction with high school or less, ‘00
0.131*
(0.050)
Ln (Median household income, ‘00)
0.072**
(0.022)
Ln(Median home value, ’00)
-0.018
(0.012)
Employment share in construction, ‘06
0.101
(0.107)
Employment share in real estate, ‘06
0.770*
(0.382)
Employment share in finance, ‘06
0.066
(0.056)
Employment share in retail, ‘06
-0.048
(0.062)
Employment share in exports, ‘06
-0.001
(0.001)
Constant
0.005+
0.005
-0.630**
-0.595**
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.153)
(0.153)
Number of counties
450
450
450
449
R2
0.45
0.49
0.76
0.77
**,*,+ Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

0.010
(0.010)
-0.986*
(0.429)
1.134**
(0.349)
-0.486
(0.323)
1.642**
(0.388)
0.093
(0.131)
-0.232
(0.325)
-0.049+
(0.027)
-0.088
(0.054)
0.241**
(0.065)
0.104**
(0.033)
-0.052*
(0.021)
-0.059
(0.114)
0.960*
(0.425)
0.066
(0.096)
-0.062
(0.094)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.617*
(0.238)
218
0.77

Table 3
Household Leverage Increase from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and
House Price Growth from 2006Q4 to 2009Q2
The regression in columns 2 through 5 are weighted by the number of households in the county as of 2000. Column
5 reports coefficients from the second stage of an IV specification where the change in the debt to income ratio from
2002 to 2006 is instrumented with housing supply inelasticity of the county as constructed by Saiz (2008). Standard
errors are clustered by state.

Change in debt to income, ‘02 to ‘06

Debt to income, ‘01

Dependent variable: House price growth, ‘06Q4 to ‘09Q2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Unweighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
IV
-0.247**
-0.235**
-0.221**
-0.221**
-0.553
(0.024)
(0.032)
(0.036)
(0.035)
(0.574)
-0.117*
(0.050)
-0.985
(1.798)
-1.523
(1.365)
-2.661
(2.061)
-0.341
(1.891)
-1.523*
(0.597)
4.261**
(0.793)
0.262
(0.226)
0.466+
(0.230)
-0.417
(0.309)
-0.575**
(0.149)
0.251**
(0.062)

-0.079+
(0.044)
Unemployment rate, ‘06
-0.760
(2.106)
Unemployment rate, ‘01
-2.007
(1.359)
Default rate, ‘06
-2.877
(2.223)
Default rate, ‘01
-0.809
(2.080)
Fraction with credit score under 660, ‘01
-1.263*
(0.593)
Credit card utilization rate, ‘06
4.017**
(0.762)
Fraction black, ‘00
0.220
(0.220)
Fraction homeowner, ‘00
0.394
(0.249)
Fraction with high school or less, ‘00
-0.345
(0.291)
Ln (Median household income, ‘00)
-0.460**
(0.141)
Ln(Median home value, ’00)
0.199**
(0.072)
Employment share in construction, ‘06
-1.132*
(0.456)
Employment share in real estate, ‘06
-0.790
(1.449)
Employment share in finance, ‘06
-0.221
(0.279)
Employment share in retail, ‘06
0.797
(0.708)
Employment share in exports, ‘06
-0.004
(0.006)
Constant
0.097**
0.060
3.069*
2.395*
(0.023)
(0.039)
(1.206)
(0.988)
Number of counties
123
123
123
123
R2
0.62
0.57
0.79
0.80
**,*,+ Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

0.076
(0.385)
-0.144
(2.938)
-4.407
(3.122)
3.918
(14.229)
-3.204
(6.192)
-0.384
(1.675)
0.602
(7.349)
0.303
(0.490)
0.267
(0.816)
-0.939
(1.065)
-0.929*
(0.409)
0.615
(0.468)
0.546
(1.563)
-1.782
(4.917)
0.801
(1.758)
4.587
(5.352)
0.012
(0.028)
2.483
(3.873)
56
0.46

Table 4
Household Leverage Increase from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and
Auto Sales Growth from 2006Q4 to 2009Q2
The regression in columns 2 through 5 are weighted by the number of households in the county as of 2000. Column
5 reports coefficients from the second stage of an IV specification where the change in the debt to income ratio from
2002 to 2006 is instrumented with housing supply inelasticity of the county as constructed by Saiz (2008). Standard
errors are clustered by state.

Change in debt to income, ‘02 to ‘06

Debt to income, ‘01

Dependent variable: Auto sales growth, ‘06Q4 to ‘09Q2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Unweighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
IV
-0.222**
-0.236**
-0.116*
-0.122*
-0.528
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.048)
(0.051)
(0.326)
-0.250**
(0.049)
-0.406
(2.364)
-2.089
(1.389)
-0.672
(2.399)
0.430
(2.199)
-1.699**
(0.556)
1.960*
(0.809)
0.126
(0.259)
-0.211
(0.204)
0.419
(0.424)
-0.283+
(0.160)
0.178+
(0.091)

-0.238**
(0.053)
Unemployment rate, ‘06
-1.469
(2.292)
Unemployment rate, ‘01
-2.009
(1.373)
Default rate, ‘06
0.078
(2.336)
Default rate, ‘01
0.877
(2.194)
Fraction with credit score under 660, ‘01
-1.808**
(0.557)
Credit card utilization rate, ‘06
1.806*
(0.750)
Fraction black, ‘00
0.119
(0.259)
Fraction homeowner, ‘00
-0.422*
(0.207)
Fraction with high school or less, ‘00
0.230
(0.443)
Ln (Median household income, ‘00)
-0.217
(0.164)
Ln(Median home value, ’00)
0.165+
(0.093)
Employment share in construction, ‘06
-0.237
(0.665)
Employment share in real estate, ‘06
-2.716
(2.163)
Employment share in finance, ‘06
-0.584
(0.559)
Employment share in retail, ‘06
0.881
(0.551)
Employment share in exports, ‘06
0.003
(0.006)
Constant
-0.151**
-0.150**
1.498
1.161
(0.038)
(0.053)
(1.118)
(1.143)
Number of counties
450
450
450
449
R2
0.19
0.19
0.44
0.45
**,*,+ Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

-0.106
(0.120)
2.589
(3.029)
-3.748
(2.880)
0.869
(3.031)
-0.906
(5.112)
-0.303
(1.614)
-1.995
(3.906)
-0.174
(0.378)
-0.257
(0.468)
-0.170
(0.834)
-0.435
(0.319)
0.485+
(0.274)
0.427
(1.013)
-4.209
(3.497)
-0.738
(0.948)
1.465
(1.299)
0.004
(0.011)
0.081
(2.386)
218
0.25

Table 5
Household Leverage Increase from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and
New Housing Permit Growth
The regression in columns 2 through 5 are weighted by the number of households in the county as of 2000. Column
5 reports coefficients from the second stage of an IV specification where the change in the debt to income ratio from
2002 to 2006 is instrumented with housing supply inelasticity of the county as constructed by Saiz (2008). Standard
errors are clustered by state.
Dependent variable: New Housing Permit Growth
‘06 to ‘08
’02 to ‘06
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Unweighted Weighted Weighted Weighted Weighted
IV
Change in D2I, ‘02 to ‘06
-0.262**
-0.263**
-0.225*
-0.231**
-0.632
-0.094+
(0.074)
(0.078)
(0.099)
(0.085)
(0.386)
(0.048)
Debt to income, ‘01

-0.357**
(0.062)
-5.146
(6.351)
-1.343
(4.294)
-3.517
(3.994)
-5.039
(5.023)
0.233
(0.995)
0.597
(2.320)
0.436
(0.401)
0.123
(0.394)
-0.091
(0.484)
-1.055**
(0.217)
0.577**
(0.138)

-0.328**
-0.157
(0.062)
(0.185)
Unemployment rate, ‘06
-7.139
-5.906
(5.734)
(6.003)
Unemployment rate, ‘01
-0.771
-2.853
(4.065)
(5.055)
Default rate, ‘06
-2.675
-0.448
(4.124)
(6.066)
Default rate, ‘01
-4.818
-5.414
(5.054)
(6.584)
Fraction with CS under 660, ‘01
0.139
0.670
(1.076)
(1.961)
Credit card utilization rate, ‘06
0.541
-1.816
(2.445)
(5.762)
Fraction black, ‘00
0.467
0.291
(0.383)
(0.392)
Fraction homeowner, ‘00
-0.339
-0.273
(0.335)
(0.475)
Fraction with HS or less, ‘00
-0.335
-1.121
(0.544)
(0.948)
Ln (Median HH income, ‘00)
-0.945**
-1.265**
(0.235)
(0.419)
Ln(Median home value, ’00)
0.568**
0.834**
(0.135)
(0.238)
Employment share in const., ‘06
0.131
2.055
(0.607)
(1.334)
Employment share in RE, ‘06
-10.055*
-13.952*
(4.206)
(6.268)
Employment share in finance, ‘06
-0.476
-1.708
(0.957)
(1.418)
Employment share in retail, ‘06
1.517
1.510
(1.264)
(1.945)
Employment share in exports, ‘06
-0.002
-0.009
(0.008)
(0.016)
Constant
-0.489**
-0.461**
5.139*
4.445*
5.305+
(0.061)
(0.084)
(1.969)
(1.965)
(3.060)
Number of counties
449
449
449
449
218
R2
0.09
0.10
0.31
0.32
0.27
**,*,+ Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

0.041
(0.072)
449
0.01

Table 6
Household Leverage Increase from 2002Q4 to 2006Q4 and
Change in Unemployment Rate from 2006Q4 to 2009Q2
The regression in columns 2 through 5 are weighted by the number of households in the county as of 2000. Column
5 reports coefficients from the second stage of an IV specification where the change in the debt to income ratio from
2002 to 2006 is instrumented with housing supply inelasticity of the county as constructed by Saiz (2008). Standard
errors are clustered by state.

Change in debt to income, ‘02 to ‘06

Debt to income, ‘01

Dependent variable: Change in unemployment rate, ‘06Q4 to ‘09Q2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Unweighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
IV
0.007*
0.011**
0.008*
0.011**
0.018*
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.008)
0.012**
(0.003)
0.205
(0.386)
0.321
(0.220)
0.205
(0.206)
0.116
(0.179)
-0.000
(0.046)
-0.090
(0.106)
0.023
(0.018)
-0.005
(0.025)
0.064**
(0.021)
0.020
(0.014)
-0.003
(0.011)

0.013**
(0.003)
Unemployment rate, ‘06
0.157
(0.377)
Unemployment rate, ‘01
0.347+
(0.200)
Default rate, ‘06
0.178
(0.218)
Default rate, ‘01
0.124
(0.178)
Fraction with credit score under 660, ‘01
0.018
(0.042)
Credit card utilization rate, ‘06
-0.102
(0.110)
Fraction black, ‘00
0.017
(0.018)
Fraction homeowner, ‘00
0.021
(0.026)
Fraction with high school or less, ‘00
0.073**
(0.021)
Ln (Median household income, ‘00)
0.014
(0.013)
Ln(Median home value, ’00)
-0.003
(0.009)
Employment share in construction, ‘06
-0.065
(0.044)
Employment share in real estate, ‘06
0.219
(0.208)
Employment share in finance, ‘06
0.014
(0.046)
Employment share in retail, ‘06
-0.133*
(0.054)
Employment share in exports, ‘06
0.001**
(0.000)
Constant
0.048**
0.047**
-0.188+
-0.131
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.111)
(0.104)
Number of counties
450
450
450
449
R2
0.04
0.10
0.30
0.34
**,*,+ Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

0.005
(0.005)
-0.257
(0.164)
0.093
(0.090)
0.214
(0.185)
0.015
(0.194)
0.035
(0.050)
-0.112
(0.123)
0.000
(0.014)
-0.007
(0.018)
0.028
(0.020)
0.004
(0.011)
-0.007
(0.008)
-0.075
(0.046)
0.005
(0.155)
0.056+
(0.032)
-0.032
(0.037)
0.000
(0.000)
0.039
(0.091)
218
0.44

Table 7
Consumer Credit Constraints and the Deepening of the Recession from 2008Q3 to 2009Q2
This table presents coefficient estimates of the effect of credit card utilization rates on auto sales and unemployment. Column 3 (4) restricts the sample to firms in
the bottom (top) decile counties of the change in debt to income from 2002 to 2006 distribution. The specification reported in column 3 includes the following
control variables: the unemployment rate as of 2001Q4 and 2006Q4, the fraction of population that is black, the fraction of homeowners, the fraction with a high
school education or less, and the fraction of employment in construction, real estate, finance, retail and export industries. All regressions are weighted by the
number of households and standard errors are clustered by state.
Dependent variable
Auto sales
Auto sales growth,
Housing permit
Unemployment
Unemployment
growth,
‘06Q4 to ‘09Q2
growth,
rate change,
rate change,
‘06Q4 to ‘08Q3
’06 to ‘08
‘06Q4 to ‘08Q3
‘06Q4 to ‘09Q2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Change in debt to income, ‘02 to ‘06
CC utilization rate, ‘06Q4
Constant

Control variables?

-0.194**
(0.023)
-1.066
(0.712)
0.309+
(0.181)

-0.281**
(0.030)
-3.051**
(0.688)
0.616**
(0.180)

-0.264**
(0.056)
-1.664+
(0.866)
-2.282+
(1.280)

-0.287**
(0.080)
-1.580
(1.158)
-0.065
(0.313)

0.010**
(0.001)
0.034
(0.042)
0.002
(0.010)

0.012**
(0.002)
0.085
(0.083)
0.025
(0.018)

N

N

Y

N

N

N

449
0.11

450
0.20

450
0.11

Number of counties
450
450
449
R2
0.30
0.26
0.37
**,*,+ Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 8
Can the Effect of Household Leverage on Recession Severity be Due to Local Banking Effects?
The coefficient estimates reported in columns 1 through 3 are from specifications that isolate the sample to counties where the banks have less than 10% of their
deposits within the same county. Columns 4 through 6 report coefficient estimates from specifications that include measures of bank performance within the
county. All specifications are weighted by the number of households in the county as of 2000. Standard errors are clustered by state.
Only counties where banks have <10% local
deposits
(1)
(2)
(3)
Dependent variable:

Change in debt to income, ‘02 to ‘06

Auto sales
growth,
‘06q4 to ‘09q2

New Housing
Permit Growth,
‘06 to ‘08

Increase in
unemployment
rate,
‘06q4 to ‘09q2

Auto sales
growth,
‘06q4 to ‘09q2

New Housing
Permit Growth,
‘06 to ‘08

Increase in
unemployment
rate,
‘06q4 to ‘09q2

-0.219**
(0.035)

-0.170**
(0.039)

0.007*
(0.003)

-0.236**
(0.036)

-0.255**
(0.064)

0.010**
(0.002)

0.053**
(0.005)

-2.334
(2.464)
14.537*
(5.609)
-0.014
(0.062)

2.255
(3.998)
25.300**
(8.999)
-0.307**
(0.089)

-0.061
(0.132)
-1.133**
(0.343)
0.039**
(0.004)

450
0.25

449
0.16

450
0.18

Change in charge-offs for banks in county, ’05 to ‘08
Change in net income for banks in county, ’05 to ‘08
Constant

Include controls for performance of banks in
county
(4)
(5)
(6)

-0.172*
(0.066)

-0.558**
(0.073)

Number of counties
52
51
52
R2
0.30
0.08
0.10
**,*,+ Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Appendix Table
20% of Counties in Sample, Ordered by Change in Debt to Income from 2002 to 2006
(Largest Increase First)
This table lists every 5th county in our sample, ordered by the largest increase in the household debt to income ratio
from 2002 to 2006. There are a total of 450 counties in our sample, and 90 counties in this list.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45

CALIFORNIA,MONTEREY
CALIFORNIA,SANTABARBARA
CALIFORNIA,MERCED
HAWAII,HAWAII
VIRGINIA,LOUDOUN
FLORIDA,SARASOTA
OREGON,DESCHUTES
FLORIDA,MANATEE
FLORIDA,CHARLOTTE
MARYLAND,MONTGOMERY
FLORIDA,BROWARD
NEW JERSEY,OCEAN
COLORADO,BOULDER
MARYLAND,PRINCEGEORGES
FLORIDA,OKALOOSA
FLORIDA,CITRUS
NEW JERSEY,MONMOUTH
NEW YORK,ROCKLAND
MASSACHUSETTS,HAMPSHIRE
COLORADO,ARAPAHOE
NEW YORK,RICHMOND
COLORADO,JEFFERSON
ILLINOIS,LAKE
FLORIDA,BAY
NEW JERSEY,SUSSEX
MARYLAND,WASHINGTON
NEW JERSEY,UNION
ALASKA,ANCHORAGE
ILLINOIS,COOK
WASHINGTON,SNOHOMISH
MAINE,KENNEBEC
FLORIDA,MARION
NORTH CAROLINA,CABARRUS
INDIANA,MONROE
NEW YORK,QUEENS
COLORADO,WELD
GEORGIA,DEKALB
MICHIGAN,GENESEE
NEW JERSEY,MIDDLESEX
MISSOURI,CLAY
MICHIGAN,OTTAWA
ARKANSAS,BENTON
UTAH,DAVIS
MICHIGAN,MONROE
SOUTH CAROLINA,LEXINGTON

46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90

FLORIDA,PASCO
KENTUCKY,KENTON
CONNECTICUT,TOLLAND
NEW MEXICO,BERNALILLO
GEORGIA,MUSCOGEE
INDIANA,LAKE
WISCONSIN,MILWAUKEE
WASHINGTON,SPOKANE
NORTH CAROLINA,DURHAM
MISSOURI,JACKSON
MICHIGAN,KALAMAZOO
WISCONSIN,OUTAGAMIE
FLORIDA,ALACHUA
TEXAS,FORTBEND
OHIO,STARK
WISCONSIN,ROCK
TEXAS,SMITH
INDIANA,ELKHART
KANSAS,WYANDOTTE
SOUTH CAROLINA,YORK
SOUTH CAROLINA,RICHLAND
NEW YORK,ALBANY
PENNSYLVANIA,BERKS
ARKANSAS,PULASKI
INDIANA,PORTER
NORTH CAROLINA,MECKLENBURG
KANSAS,SHAWNEE
NEW YORK,RENSSELAER
NEW YORK,BRONX
ILLINOIS,WINNEBAGO
OREGON,MARION
TENNESSEE,RUTHERFORD
TENNESSEE,SULLIVAN
LOUISIANA,EASTBATONROUGE
PENNSYLVANIA,LEBANON
TEXAS,MCLENNAN
TEXAS,NUECES
TEXAS,BRAZORIA
TEXAS,TARRANT
PENNSYLVANIA,WESTMORELAND
ILLINOIS,MACON
ARIZONA,PINAL
LOUISIANA,RAPIDES
OHIO,RICHLAND
TEXAS,ECTOR

