NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SIMPLE AND ROBUST RULES FOR MONETARY POLICY
John B. Taylor
John C. Williams
Working Paper 15908
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15908

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

We thank Andy Levin, Mike Woodford, and other participants at the Handbook of Monetary Economics
Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Justin Weidner for excellent research
assistance. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the management of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by John B. Taylor and John C. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy
John B. Taylor and John C. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 15908
April 2010
JEL No. E5
ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on simple rules for monetary policy which central banks have used in various ways
to guide their interest rate decisions. Such rules, which can be evaluated using simulation and optimization
techniques, were first derived from research on empirical monetary models with rational expectations
and sticky prices built in the 1970s and 1980s. During the past two decades substantial progress has
been made in establishing that such rules are robust. They perform well with a variety of newer and
more rigorous models and policy evaluation methods. Simple rules are also frequently more robust
than fully optimal rules. Important progress has also been made in understanding how to adjust simple
rules to deal with measurement error and expectations. Moreover, historical experience has shown
that simple rules can work well in the real world in that macroeconomic performance has been better
when central bank decisions were described by such rules. The recent financial crisis has not changed
these conclusions, but it has stimulated important research on how policy rules should deal with asset
bubbles and the zero bound on interest rates. Going forward the crisis has drawn attention to the importance
of research on international monetary issues and on the implications of discretionary deviations from
policy rules.
John B. Taylor
Herbert Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
John.Taylor@stanford.edu
John C. Williams
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research Department, MS 1130
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.c.williams@sf.frb.org

Economists have been interested in monetary policy rules since the advent of economics.
In this review paper we concentrate on more recent developments, but we begin with a brief
historical summary to motivate the theme and purpose of our paper. We then describe the
development of the modern approach to policy rules and evaluate the approach using experiences
before, during, and after the Great Moderation. We then contrast in detail this policy rule
approach with optimal control methods and discretion. Finally we go on to consider several key
policy issues, including the zero bound on interest rates and issue of bursting bubbles, using the
lens of policy rules.

1. Historical Background
Adam Smith first delved into the subject monetary policy rules in the Wealth of Nations
arguing that “a well-regulated paper-money” could have significant advantages in improving
economic growth and stability compared to a pure commodity standard. By the start of the 19th
century Henry Thornton and then David Ricardo were stressing the importance of rule-guided
monetary policy after they saw the monetary-induced financial crises related to the Napoleonic
Wars. Early in the 20th century Irving Fisher and Knut Wicksell were again proposing monetary
policy rules to avoid monetary excesses of the kinds that led to hyperinflation following World
War I or seemed to be causing the Great Depression. And later, after studying the severe
monetary mistakes of the Great Depression, Milton Friedman proposed his constant growth rate
rule with the aim of avoiding a repeat of those mistakes. Finally, modern-day policy rules, such
as the Taylor (1993a) Rule, were aimed at ending the severe price and output instability during
the Great Inflation of the late 1960s and 1970s (see also Asso, Kahn, and Leeson, 2007, for a
detailed review).

2

As the history of economic thought makes clear, a common purpose of these reform
proposals was a simple, stable monetary policy that would both avoid creating monetary shocks
and cushion the economy from other disturbances, and thereby reduce the chances of recession,
depression, crisis, deflation, inflation, and hyperinflation. There was a presumption in this work
that some such simple rule could improve policy by avoiding monetary excesses, whether related
to money finance of deficits, commodity discoveries, gold outflows, or mistakes by central
bankers with too many objectives. In this context, the choice between a monetary standard
where the money supply jumped around randomly versus a simple policy rule with a smoothly
growing money and credit seemed obvious. The choice was both broader and simpler than
“rules versus discretion.” It was “rules versus chaotic monetary policy” whether the chaos was
caused by discretion or unpredictable exogenous events like gold discoveries or shortages.
A significant change in economists’ search for simple monetary policy rules occurred in
the 1970s, however, as a new type of macroeconomic model appeared on the scene. The new
models were dynamic, stochastic, and empirically estimated. But more important, these
empirical models incorporated both rational expectations and sticky prices, and they therefore
were sophisticated enough to serve as a laboratory to examine how monetary policy rules would
work in practice. These were the models that were used to find new policy rules, such as the
Taylor Rule, to compare the new rules with earlier constant growth rate rules or with actual
policy, and to check the rules for robustness. Examples of empirical modes with rational
expectations and sticky prices include the simple three equation econometric model of the United
States in Taylor (1979), the multi-equation international models in the comparative studies by
Bryant, Hooper, and Mann (1993), and the econometric models in robustness analyses of Levin,
Wieland, and Williams (1999). More or less simultaneously, practical experience was

3

confirming the model simulation results as the instability of the Great Inflation of the 1970s gave
way to the Great Moderation around the same time that actual monetary policy began to
resemble the simple policy rules that were proposed.
While the new rational expectations models with sticky prices further supported the use
of policy rules—in keeping with the Lucas (1976) critique and time inconsistency (Kydland and
Prescott, 1977)—there was no fundamental reason why the same models could not be used to
study more complex discretionary monetary policy actions which went well beyond simple rules
and used optimal control theory. Indeed, before long optimal control theory was being applied to
the new models, refined with specific micro-foundations as in Rotemberg and Woodford (1997),
Woodford (2003), and others. The result was complex paths for the instruments of policy which
had the appearances of “fine tuning” as distinct from simple policy rules.
The idea that optimal policy conducted in real time without the constraint of simple rules
could do better than simple rules thus emerged within the context of the modern modeling
approach. The papers by Mishkin (2007) and Walsh (2009) at recent Jackson Hole Conferences
are illustrative. Mishkin (2007) uses optimal control to compute paths for the federal funds rate
and contrasts the results with simple policy rules, stating that in the optimal discretionary policy
“the federal funds rate is lowered more aggressively and substantially faster than with the
Taylor-rule….This difference is exactly what we would expect because the monetary authority
would not wait to react until output had already fallen.” The implicit recommendation of this
statement is that simple policy rules are inadequate for real world policy situations and that
policymakers should therefore deviate from them as needed.
The differences in these approaches are profound and have important policy implications.
At the same Jackson Hole conference that Mishkin (2007) emphasized the advantages of

4

deviating from policy rules, Taylor (2007) showed that one such deviation added fuel to the
housing boom and thereby helped bring on the severe financial crisis, the deep recession, and
perhaps the end of the Great Moderation. For these reasons we focus on the differences between
these two approaches in this paper. Like all previous studies of monetary policy rules by
economists, our goal is to find ways to avoid such economic maladies.
We start in the next section with a review of the development of optimal simple monetary
policy rules using quantitative models. We then consider the robustness of policy rules using
comparative model simulations and show that simple rules are more robust than fully optimal
rules. The most recent paper in the Elsevier Handbook in Economics series on monetary policy
rules is the comprehensive and widely-cited survey published by Ben McCallum (1999) in the
Handbook of Macroeconomics (Taylor and Woodford, 1999). Our paper and McCallum’s are
similar in scope in that they focus on policy rules which have been designed for normative
purposes rather than on policy reaction functions which have been estimated for positive or
descriptive purposes. In other words, the rules we study have been derived from economic
theory or models and are designed to deliver good economic performance, rather than to fit
statistically the decisions of central banks. Of course, such normative policy rules can also be
descriptive if central bank decisions follow the recommendations of the rules which they have in
many cases. Research of an explicitly descriptive nature, which focuses more on estimating
reaction functions for central banks, goes back to Dewald and Johnson (1963), Fair (1978), and
McNees (1986), and includes, more recently, work by Meyer (2009) on estimating policy rules
for the Federal Reserve.
McCallum’s Handbook of Macroeconomics paper stressed the importance of robustness
of policy rules and explored the distinction between rules and discretion using the time

5

inconsistency principles. His survey also clarified important theoretical issues such as uniqueness
and determinacy and he reviewed research on alternative targets and instruments, including both
money supply and interest rate instruments. Like McCallum we focus on the robustness of
policy rules. We focus on policy rules where the interest rate rather than the money supply is the
policy instrument, and we place more emphasis on the historical performance of policy rules
reflecting the experience of the dozen years since McCallum wrote. We also examine issues that
have been major topics of research in academic and policy circles since then, including policy
inertia, learning, and measurement errors. We also delve into the issues that arose in the recent
financial crisis including the zero lower bound on interest rates and dealing with asset price
bubbles. In this sense, our paper is complementary to McCallum’s useful Handbook of
Macroeconomics paper on monetary policy rules.

2. Using Models to Evaluate Simple Policy Rules
The starting point for our review of monetary policy rules is the research that began in the
mid 1970s, took off in the 1980s and 1990s, and is still expanding. As mentioned above, this
research is conceptually different from previous work by economists in that it is based on
quantitative macroeconomic models with rational expectations and frictions/rigidities, usually in
wage and price setting.
We focus on the research based on such models because it seems to have led to an
explosion of practical as well as academic interest in policy rules. As evidence consider, Don
Patinkin’s (1956) Money, Interest, and Prices, which was the textbook in monetary theory in
many graduate school in the early 1970s. It has very few references to monetary policy rules. In
contrast, the modern day equivalent, Michael Woodford’s (2003) book, Interest and Prices, is

6

packed with discussions about monetary policy rules. In the meantime, thousands of papers have
been written on monetary policy rules since the mid 1970s. The staffs of central banks around
the world regularly use policy rules in their research and policy evaluation (see for example,
Orphanides, 2008) as do practitioners in the financial markets.
Such models were originally designed to answer questions about policy rules. The
rational expectations assumption brought attention to the importance of consistency over time
and to predictability, whether about inflation or policy rule responses, and to a host of policy
issues including how to affect long term interest rates and what to do about asset bubbles. The
price and wage rigidity assumption gave a role for monetary policy that was not evident in pure
rational expectations models without price or wage rigidities; the monetary policy rule mattered
in these models even if everyone knew what it was.
The list of such models is now way too long to even tabulate, let alone discuss, in this
review paper, but they include the rational expectations models in the Bryant, Hooper, Mann
(1993) volume, the Taylor (1999a) volume, the Woodford (2003) volume, and many more
models now in the growing database maintained by Volker Wieland (see Taylor and Wieland,
2009). Many of these models go under the name “new Keynesian” or “new neoclassical
synthesis” or sometimes “dynamic stochastic general equilibrium.” Some are estimated and
others are calibrated. Some are based on explicit utility maximization foundations, others more
ad hoc. Some are illustrative three-equation models, which consist of an IS or Euler equation, a
staggered price setting equation, and a monetary policy rule. Others consist of more than 100
equations and include term structure equations, exchange rates and other asset prices.

7

Dynamic Stochastic Simulations of Simple Policy Rules
The general way that policy rule research originally began in these models was to
experiment with different policy rules, trying them out in the model economies, and seeing how
economic performance was affected The criteria for performance was usually the size of the
deviations of inflation or real GDP or unemployment from some target or natural values. At a
basic level a monetary policy rule is a contingency plan that lays out how monetary policy
decisions should be made. For research with models, the rules have to be written down
mathematically. Policy researchers would try out policy rules with different functional forms,
different instruments, and different variables for the instrument to respond to. They would then
search for the ones that worked well when simulating the model stochastically with a series of
realistic shocks. To find better rules, researchers searched over a range of possible functional
forms or parameters looking for policy rules that improved economic performance. In simple
models, such as Taylor (1979), optimization methods could be used to assist in the search.
A concrete example of this approach to simulating alternative policy rules was the model
comparison project started in the 1980s at the Brookings Institution and organized by Ralph
Bryant and others. After the model comparison project had gone on for several years, several
participants decided it would be useful to try out monetary policy rules in these models. The
important book by Bryant, Hooper and Mann (1993) was one output of the resulting policy rules
part of the model comparison project. It brought together many rational expectations models,
including the multicountry model later published in Taylor (1993b).
No one clear “best” policy rule emerged from this work and, indeed, the contributions to
the Bryant, Hooper, and Mann (1993) volume did not recommend any single policy rule. See
Henderson and McKibbin (1993) for analysis of the types of rules in this volume. Indeed, as is so

8

often the case in economic research, critics complained about apparent disagreement about what
was the best monetary policy rule. Nevertheless, if one looked carefully through the simulation
results from the different models, one could see that the better policy rules had three general
characteristics: (1) an interest rate instrument performed better than a money supply instrument,
(2) interest rate rules that reacted to both inflation and real output worked better than rules which
focused on either one, and (3) interest rate rules which reacted to the exchange rate were inferior
to those that did not.
One specific rule that was derived from this type of simulation research with monetary
models is the Taylor Rule. . The Taylor Rule says that the short-term interest rate, it, should be
set according to the formula:
0.5

0.5

,

(1)

where r* denotes the equilibrium real interest rate, πt denotes the inflation rate in period t, π* is
the desired long-run, or “target,” inflation rate, and y denotes the output gap(the percent
deviation of real GDP from its potential level). Taylor (1993a) set the equilibrium interest rate
r* equal to 2 and the target inflation rate π* equal to 2. Thus, rearranging terms, the Taylor Rule
says that the short term interest rate should equal one-and-a-half times the inflation rate plus onehalf times the output gap plus one. Taylor focused on quarterly observations and suggested
measuring the inflation rate as a moving average of inflation over four quarters. Simulations
suggested that response coefficients on inflation and the output gap in the neighborhood of ½
would work well. Note that when the economy is in steady state with the inflation rate equaling
its target and the output gap equaling zero, the real interest rate (the nominal rate minus the
expected inflation rate) equals the equilibrium real interest rate.

9

This rule embodies two important characteristics of monetary policy rules that are
effective at stabilizing inflation and the output gap in model simulations. First, it dictates that the
nominal interest rate react by more than one-for-one to movements in the inflation rate. This
characteristic has been termed the Taylor principle (Woodford 2001). In most existing
macroeconomic models, this condition (or some close variant of it) must be met for a unique
stable rational expectations to exist (see Woodford, 2003, for a complete discussion). The basic
logic behind this principle is clear: when inflation rises, monetary policy needs to raise the real
interest rate in order to slow the economy and reduce inflationary pressures. The second
important characteristic is that monetary policy “leans against the wind,” that is, it reacts by
increasing the interest rate by a particular amount when real GDP rises above potential GDP and
by decreasing the interest rate by the same amount when real GDP falls below potential GDP. In
this way, monetary policy speeds the economy’s progress back to the target rate of inflation and
the potential level of output.

Optimal Simple Rules
Much of the more recent research on monetary policy rules has tended to follow a similar
approach except that the models have been formalized to include more explicit microfoundations and the quantitative evaluation methodology has focused on specific issues related to
the optimal specification and parameterization of simple policy rules like the Taylor Rule. To
review this research, it is useful to consider the following quadratic central bank loss function:
(2)
where E denotes the mathematical unconditional expectation and λ, υ ≥ 0 are parameters
describing the central bank’s preferences. The first two terms represent the welfare costs

10

associated from nominal and real fluctuations from desired levels. The third term stands in for
the welfare costs associated with large swings in interest rates (and presumably other asset
prices). The quadratic terms, especially those involving inflation and output, represent the
common sense view that business cycle fluctuations and high or variable inflation and interest
rates are undesirable, but these can also be derived as approximations of welfare functions of
representative agents. In some studies these costs are modeled explicitly.1
The central bank’s problem is to choose the parameters of a policy rule to minimize the
expected central bank loss subject to the constraints imposed by the model and where the
monetary policy instrument—generally assumed to be the short-term interest rate in recent
research—follows the stipulated policy rule. Williams (2003) describes numerical methods used
to compute the model-generated unconditional moments and optimized parameter values of the
policy rule in the context of a linear rational expectations model. Early research--see, for
example the contributions in Taylor (1999a) and Fuhrer (1997)--focused on rules of a form that
generalized the original Taylor Rule2:
1

.

(3)

This rule incorporates inertia in the behavior of the interest rate through a positive value of the
parameter ρ. It also allows for the possibility that policy responds to expected future (or lagged)
values of inflation and the output gap.
A useful way to portray macroeconomic performance under alternative specifications of
the policy rule is the policy frontier, which describes the best achievable combinations of
1

See Woodford (2003) for a discussion of the relationship between the central bank loss function and the the
welfare function of households. See Rudebusch (2006) for analyses of this topic of interest rate variability in the
central bank’s loss function. In the policy evaluation literature, the loss is frequently specified in terms of the
squared first-difference of the interest rate, rather than in terms of the squared difference between the interest rate
and the natural rate of interest.
2
An alternative approach is followed by Fair and Howrey (1996), who do not use unconditional moments to
evaluate policies, but instead compute the optimal policy setting of based on counterfactual simulations of the U.S.
economy during the postwar period. .

11

variability in the objective variables obtainable in a class of policy rule. In the case of two
objectives of inflation and the output gap that was originally studied by Taylor (1979), this can
be represented by a two-dimensional curve plotting the unconditional variances (or standard
deviations) of these variables. In the case of three objective variables, the frontier is a threedimensional surface, which can be difficult to see clearly on the printed page. The solid line in
Figure 1 plots a cross section of the policy frontier, corresponding to a fixed variance of the
interest rate, for a particular specification of the policy rule.3 The optimal parameters of the
policy rules that underlie these frontiers depend on the relative weights placed on the
stabilization of the variables in the central bank loss. These are constructed using the Federal
Reserve Board’s FRB/US large-scale rational expectations model (Williams, 2003).
One key issue for simple policy rules is the appropriate measure of inflation to include in
the rule. In many models (see, for example, Levin, Wieland, and Williams, 1999, 2003), simple
rules that respond to smoothed inflation rates such as the one-year rate typically perform better
than those that respond to the one-quarter inflation rate, even though the objective is to stabilize
the one-quarter rate. In the FRB/US model, the rule that responds to the three-year average
inflation rate performs the best and it is this specification that is used in the results reported for
FRB/US in this paper. Evidently, rules that respond to a smoothed measure of inflation avoid
sharp swings in interest rates in response to transitory swings in the inflation rate.
Indeed, the simple policy rules that respond to the percent difference between the price
level and a deterministic trend performs nearly as well as those that respond to the difference
between the inflation rate and its target rate (see Svensson 1999 or further discussion on this
topic). In the case of a price level target, the policy rule is specified as:
3

The variance of the short-term interest rate is set to 16 for the FRB/US results reported in this paper. Note that in
this model, the optimal simple rule absent any penalty on interest rate variability yields a variance of the interest rate
far in excess of 16.

12

1

.

(4)

where pt is the log of the price level and p* is the log of the target prices level, which is assumed
to increase at a deterministic rate. The policy frontier for this type of price-targeting policy rule
is shown in Figure 1. We will return to the topic of rules that respond to price-levels versus
inflation later.
A second key issue regarding the specification of simple rules is to what extent they
should respond to expectations of future inflation and output gaps. Batini and Haldane (1999)
argue that the presence of lags in the monetary transmission mechanism argues for policy to be
forward looking. However, Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), Levin, Wieland, and Williams
(2003), and Orphanides and Williams (2007a) investigate the optimal choice of lead structure in
the policy rule in various models and do not find a significant benefit from responding to
expectations out further than one year for inflation or beyond the current quarter for the output
gap. Indeed, Levin, Wieland, and Williams (2003) show that rules that respond to inflation
forecasts further into the future are prone to generating indeterminacy in rational expectations
models.
A third key issue is policy inertia or “interest rate smoothing.” A significant degree of
inertia can significantly help improve performance in forward-looking models like FRB/US.
Figure 2 compares the policy frontier for the optimized three-parameter rules to that for “level”
rules with no inertia (ρ = 0). As seen in the figure, except for the case where the loss puts all the
weight on inflation stabilization, the inertial rule performs better than the level rule. In fact, in
these types of models the optimal value of ρ tends to be close to unity and in some models can be
greatly in excess of one, as discussed later. As discussed in Levin, Wieland, and Williams
(1999) and Woodford (1999, 2003), inertial rules take advantage of the expectations of future

13

policy and economic developments in influencing outcomes. For example, in many forwardlooking models of inflation, a policy rule that generates a sustained small negative output gap has
as much effect on current inflation as a policy that generates a short-lived large negative gap.
But, the former policy accomplishes this with a small sum of squared output gaps. As discussed
later, in purely backward-looking models, however, this channel is entirely absent and highly
inertial policies perform poorly.
The analysis of optimal simple rules described up to this point has abstracted from
several important limitations of monetary policy in practice. One issue is the measurement of
variables in the policy rule, especially the output gap. The second, which has gained increased
attention because of the experiences of Japan since the 1990s and several other major economies
starting in 2008, is the presence of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. The third is
the potential role of other variables in the policy rule, including asset prices. We take up each of
these in turn.

Measurement issues and the output gap
One practical issue that affects the implementation of monetary policy is the
measurement of variables of interest such as the inflation rate and the output gap (Orphanides
2001). Many macroeconomic data series such as GDP and price deflators are subject to
measurement errors and revisions. In addition, both the equilibrium real interest rate and the
output gap are unobserved variables. Potential errors in measuring the equilibrium real interest
rate and the output gap result from estimating latent variables as well as uncertainty regarding
the processes determining them (Orphanides and van Norden, 2002, Laubach and Williams
2003, and Edge, Laubach, and Williams, 2010). Similar problems plague estimation of related

14

metrics such as the unemployment gap (defined to be the difference between the unemployment
rate and the natural rate of unemployment) and the capacity utilization gap. Arguably, the late
1960s and1970s were a period when errors in measuring the output and unemployment gap were
particularly severe, but difficulties in measuring gaps extend into the present day (Orphanides
2002, Orphanides and Williams, 2010).
A number of papers have examined the implications of errors in the measurement of the
output (or unemployment) gap for monetary policy rules, starting with Orphanides (1998), Smets
(1999), Orphanides et al (2000), McCallum (2001), and Rudebusch (2001). A general finding in
this literature is that the optimal coefficient on the output gap in the policy rule declines in the
presence of errors in measuring the output gap. The logic behind this result is straightforward.
The response to the mismeasured output gap adds unwanted noise to the setting of policy which
can be reduced by lowering the coefficient on the gap in the rule. The optimal response to
inflation may rise or fall depending on the model and the weights in the objective function.
In addition to the problem of measurement of the output gap, the equilibrium real interest
rate is not a known quantity and may vary over time (Laubach and Williams, 2003). Orphanides
and Williams (2002) examine the combined problem of unobservable unemployment gap and
equilibrium real interest rate. In their model, the unemployment gap is the measure of economic
activity in both the objective function and the policy rule. They consider a more generalized
policy rule of the form:
1

̂

.

(5)

where ̂ ( ) denotes the central bank’s real-time estimate of the equilibrium real interest rate
(unemployment gap) in period t, and Δut denotes the first-difference of the unemployment rate.

15

The presence of mismeasurement of the natural rate of interest and the natural rate of
unemployment tends to move the optimal policy toward greater inertia. Figure 3 shows the
optimal coefficients of this policy rule for a particular specification of the central bank loss as the
degree of variability in the equilibrium real interest rate and the natural rate of unemployment
rises. The case where these variables are constant and known by the central bank is indicated by
the value of zero on the horizontal axis. In that case, the optimal policy is characterized by a
moderate degree of policy inertia. The case of a moderate degree of variability of these latent
variables, consistent with the lower end of the range of estimates of variability, is indicated by
the value of 1 on the horizontal axis. Values of 2 and above correspond to cases where these
latent variables are subject to more sizable fluctuations, consistent with the upper end of
estimates of their variability. In these cases, the central bank’s estimates of the equilibrium real
interest rate and the natural rate of unemployment are imprecise, and the optimal value of ρ rises
to near unity. In such cases, the equilibrium real interest rate, which is multiplied by (1-ρ) in the
policy rule, plays virtually no role in the setting of policy.
The combination of these two types of mismeasurement also implies that the optimal
policy rule respond only modestly to the perceived unemployment gap, but relatively strongly to
the change in the unemployment rate. This is shown in the lower two panels of Figure 3. These
policy rules that respond more to the change in the unemployment rate use the fact that that the
direction of the change in the unemployment rate is generally less subject to mismeasurement
than the absolute level of the gap in the model simulations. If these measurement problems are
sufficiently severe, it may be optimal to replace entirely the response to the output gap with a
response to the change in the gap. In the case where the value of ρ is unity, such a rule is closely
related to a rule that targets the price level, as can be seen by integrating equation (5) in terms of

16

levels. See McCallum (2001), Rudebusch (2002), and Orphanides and Williams (2007b) for
analysis of the relative merits of gaps and first differences of gaps in policy rules.

The zero lower bound on interest rates
The discussion of monetary policy rules so far has abstracted from the zero lower bound
(ZLB) on nominal interest rates. Because an asset, cash, pays a zero interest rate, it is not
possible to for short-term nominal interest rates to fall significantly below zero percent.4 In
several instances—including the Great Depression in the United States, Japan during much of the
1990s and 2000-2006, and several countries during the recession that began in late 2007 —the
ZLB has constrained the ability of central banks to lower the interest rate in the face of a weak
economy and low inflation. A concern is that the inability to reduce interest rates below zero can
impair the effectiveness of monetary policy to stabilize output and inflation (see See Fuhrer and
Madigan, 1997, Reifschneider and Williams, 2000, Eggertsson and Woodford , 2003, Coenen ,
Orphanides, and Wieland, 2004, Williams, 2010, and references therein).

Research has identified four important implications for monetary policy rules owing to
the ZLB. First, the monetary policy rule in equation (3) must be modified to account for the zero
lower bound:
max 0,
where ̃

1

̃

(6)

denotes the preferred setting of the interest rate in the previous period that would

occur absent the ZLB. This distinction between the actual lagged interest rate and the
unconstrained rate is crucial for the performance of inertial rules with the ZLB. If the lagged

4

Because cash is not a perfect substitute for bank reserves, the overnight rate can in principle be somewhat below
zero, but there is a limit to how negative nominal interest rates can go as long as cash pays zero interest.

17

interest rate appears in the rule, deviations from the unconstrained policy are carried into the
future, exacerbating the effects of the ZLB (Reifschneider and Williams 2000, Williams 2006).
Second, the ZLB can imply the existence of multiple steady states (Reifschneider and
Williams 2000, Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe 2001). For a wide set of macroeconomic
models, one steady state is characterized by a rate of inflation equal to the negative of the
equilibrium real interest rate, a zero output gap zero, and a zero nominal interest rate. Assuming
the target inflation rate exceeds the negative of the equilibrium real interest rate, a second steady
state exists. It is characterized by a rate of inflation equal to the central bank’s target inflation
rate, a zero output gap, and a nominal interest rate equal to the equilibrium real interest rate plus
the target inflation rate. In standard models, the steady state associated with the target inflation
rate is locally stable in the sense that the economy returns to this steady state following a small
disturbance. But, due to the existence of the ZLB, if a large contractionary shock hits the
economy, monetary policy alone may not be sufficient to bring the inflation rate back to the
target rate. Instead, depending on the nature of the model economy’s dynamics, the inflation rate
will either converge to the deflationary steady state or will diverge to an infinitely negative
inflation rate. Fiscal policy can be used to eliminate the deflationary steady state and assure that
the economy returns to the desired steady state inflation rate (Evans, Guse, and Honkapohja,
2008).5
Third, the ZLB has implications for the specification and parameterization of the
monetary policy rule. For example, Reifschneider and Williams (2002) find that increasing the
response to the output gap helps reduce the effects of the ZLB. Such an aggressive response to
output gaps prescribes greater monetary stimulus before and after episodes when the ZLB
5

See also Eggertsson and Woodford (2006). In addition to fiscal policy, researchers have examined the use of
alternative monetary policy instruments, such as the quantity of reserves, the exchange rate, and longer-term interest
rates. See McCallum (2000), Svensson (2001), and Bernanke and Reinhart (2004) for discussions of these topics.

18

constrains policy, which helps lessen the effects when the ZLB constrains policy. However,
there are limits to this approach. First, it generally increases the variability of inflation and
interest rates, which may be undesirable. In addition, Williams (2010) shows that too large a
response to the output gap can be counterproductive. The ZLB creates an asymmetry between
the very strong responses to positive output gaps and truncated responses to negative output gaps
that increases output gap variability overall.
Given the limitations of the approach of simply responding more strongly to output gaps,
Reifschneider and Williams (2000, 2002) argue for modifications to the specification of the
policy rule. They consider two alternative specifications of simple policy rules. In one, the
policy rule is modified to lower the interest rate more aggressively than otherwise in the vicinity
of the ZLB. In particular, they consider a rule where the interest rate is cut to zero if the
unconstrained interest rate falls below 1 percent. This asymmetric rule encapsulates the principle
of adding as much monetary stimulus as possible near the ZLB in order to offset the effects of
constraint on monetary stimulus when the ZLB binds. In the second version of the modified
rule, the interest rate is kept below the “notional” interest rate following episodes when the ZLB
is a binding constraint on policy. Specifically, the interest rate is kept at zero until the absolute
value of the cumulative sum of negative deviations of the actual interest rate from the notional
values equals that that occurred during the period that ZLB constrained policy. This approach
implies that the rule “makes up” afterwards for lost monetary stimulus resulting from the ZLB.
Both of these approaches work well at mitigating the effects of the ZLB in model
simulations when the public is assumed to know the features of the modified policy rule.
However, these approaches rely on unusual behavior by the central bank in the vicinity of the
ZLB, which may confuse private agents and thereby entail unintended and potentially

19

undesirable consequences. An alternative approach advocated by Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003) is to adopt an explicit price-level target, rather than an inflation target. Reifschneider and
Williams (2000) and Williams (2006, 2010) find that such price-level targeting rules are
effective at reducing the costs of the ZLB as long as the public understands the policy rule. Such
an approach works well because, like the second modified policy rule discussed above, it
promises more monetary stimulus and higher inflation in the future than a standard inflationtargeting policy rule. This anticipation of future monetary stimulus boosts economic activity and
inflation when the economy is at the ZLB, thereby mitigating its effects. This channel is highly
effective in models where expectations of future policy have important effects on current output
and inflation. But, as pointed out by Walsh (2009), central bankers have so far been unwilling to
embrace this approach in practice.
Finally, the ZLB provides an argument for a higher target inflation rate than otherwise
would be the case. The quantitative importance of the ZLB depends on the frequency and degree
to which the ZLB constraint is expected to bind, a key determinant of which is the target
inflation rate. If the target inflation rate is sufficiently high, the ZLB will rarely impinge on
monetary policy and the macroeconomy. As discussed in Williams (2010), the consensus from
the literature on the ZLB is that a 2 percent inflation target is sufficient to avoid significant costs
in terms of macroeconomic stabilization, based on the historical pattern of disturbances hitting
the economy over the past several decades. This figure is close to the inflation targets followed,
either explicitly or implicitly, by many central banks today (Kuttner 2004).

20

Responding to other variables
A frequently-heard criticism of simple monetary policy rules is that they ignore valuable
information about the economy. In other words, they are simply too simple for the real-world
(Svensson 2003 and Mishkin 2007). However, as shown in Williams (2003), even in large-scale
macroeconometric models like FRB/US, adding additional lags or leads of inflation or the
output gap to the three-parameter rule of the type discussed above yields trivial gains in terms of
macroeconomic stabilization. The same is true for other empirical macro models (Rudebusch
and Svensson 1999, Levin and Williams 2003, Levin, Wieland, and Williams 1999). Similar
results are found using micro-founded DSGE models where the central bank aims to maximize
household welfare (Levin, Onatski, Williams, and Williams, 2005, Edge, Laubach, and
Williams, 2010).
One specific issue that has attracted a great deal of attention is adding various asset
prices, such as the exchange rate or equity prices, to the policy rule (see Clarida, Gali, and
Gertler, 2001, Bernanke and Gertler, 1999, and Woodford, 2003, for discussions and references).
Research has shown that he magnitude of the benefits from responding to asset prices is
generally found to be small in existing estimated models. For example, the FRB/US model
includes a wide variety of asset prices which may deviate from fundamentals. Nonetheless,
including asset price movements (or, alternatively, non-fundamental movements in asset prices)
to simple policy rules yields negligible benefits in terms of macroeconomic stabilization in this
model. One reason for this is that asset price movements unrelated to fundamentals lead to
movements in output and inflation in the model. The simple policy rule responds to and offsets
these movements in inflation and the output gap.6 Moreover, in practice it is difficult to

6

Of course, if the policy objective included the stabilization of asset prices, then the optimal simple rule
would need to contain the asset prices as well as the other objective variables.

21

accurately measure nonfundamental movements in asset prices, arguing for muted responses to
these noisy variables.

3. Robustness of Policy Rules
Much of the early research focused on the performance of simple policy rules under
“ideal” circumstances where the central bank has an excellent knowledge of the economy and
expectations are rational. But, it had long been recognized that such assumptions are unlikely to
hold in real-world policy applications and that policy prescriptions needed to be robust to
uncertainty (McCallum 1988, Taylor 1993b). Research has therefore focused on the issue of
designing robust policy rules that perform well in a wide set of economic environments (see, for
example, Brock, Durlauf, and West, 2003, 2007, Brock, Durlauf, Nason, and Rondina , 2007,
Levin and Williams, 2003, Levin, Wieland, Williams, 1999, 2003, Orphandies and Williams,
2002, 2006, 2007b, 2008, Taylor and Wieland , 2009, and Tetlow, 2006).
Evaluating policy rules in a variety of models has the advantage of helping identify
characteristics of policy rules that are robust to model misspecification and those that are not.
Early efforts at evaluating robustness took the form of taking evaluating candidate policy rules
through a set of models and comparing the results with regard to macroeconomic performance.
Later, this approach was formalized as a problem of decision making under uncertainty.
One example of robustness evaluation is the joint effort of several researchers to compare
the effects of policy rules in different models, reported in Taylor (1999b). In that project, five
different candidate policy rules were checked for robustness across a variety of models. These
policy rules were of the form of equation (3); the parameters are reported in Table 1. Note that
the interest rate reacts to the lagged interest rate with a coefficient of one in Rules I and II, with

22

Rule I having higher weight on inflation compared to output and Rule II has a smaller weight on
inflation compared to output. Thus these two rules have considerable “inertia” in the terminology
used above. Rule III is the Taylor Rule. Rule IV has a coefficient of 1.0 rather than 0.5 on real
output, which had been suggested by Brayton, Levin, Tryon, and Williams (1997). Rule V is the
rule proposed by Rotemberg and Woodford (1999); it places very little weight on real output and
incorporates a greater than unity coefficient on the lagged interest rate.

Table 1
Policy Rule Coefficients
_____________α_____β_____ ρ___
Rule I
3.0
0.8
1.0
Rule II
1.2
1.0
1.0
Rule III
0.5
0.5
0.0
Rule IV
0.5
1.0
0.0
Rule V
1.5
.06
1.3
_____________________________

In this exercise, nine models were considered (see Taylor 1999b). For each of the
models, the standard deviations of the inflation rate, of real output, and of the interest rate were
computed. Taylor (1999b) reports that the sum of the ranks of the three rules shows that Rule I
is most robust if inflation fluctuations are the sole measure of performance; it ranks first in terms
of inflation variability for all but one model for which there is a clear ordering. For output, Rule
II has the best sum of the ranks, which reflects its relatively high response to output. However,
regardless of the objective function weights, Rule V has the worst sum of the ranks of these three
policy rules, ranking first for only one model (the Rotemberg-Woodford model) in the case of
output. Comparing rules I, II, III with Rules III and IV) shows that the lagged interest rate rules

23

do not dominate rules without a lagged interest rate. Indeed, for a number of models the rules
with lagged interest rates are unstable or have extraordinarily large variances.
This type of exercise has been expanded to include other models and to formally search
for the “best” simple rule evaluated over a set of models. One issue that this literature has faced
is the characterization of the problem of optimal policy under uncertainty. Different approaches
have been used, including Bayesian, minimax, and minimax regret (see Brock, Durlauf, and
West, 2003, and Kuester and Wieland, 2010, for detailed discussions).
The Bayesian approach assumes that the existence of well-defined probabilities, pj, for
each model j in a set of n models The choice of the optimal rule under uncertainty then is the
choice of the parameters of the rule that minimizes the expected loss over the set of models. In
particular, denote the central bank loss generated in model j by Lj. The Bayesian central bank’s
expected loss, LB, is given by:
∑

.

(7)

This formulation treats the probabilities as constant; see Brock, Durlauf, and West 2003 for the
description of the expected loss in a dynamic context where the probabilities are updated each
period.
Levin and Williams (2003) apply this methodology to a set of three models taken from
Woodford (2003), Fuhrer (2000), and Rudebusch and Svensson (1999). They place equal
probabilities on these three models. They find that the Bayesian optimal simple three-parameter
rule is characterized by a moderate degree of policy inertia, with ρ no greater than 0.7. In the
two forward-looking models, the optimal response to the lagged interest rate is much higher than
0.7. In contrast, in the backward-looking Rudebusch-Svensson model, the optimal policy is

24

characterized by very little inertia. In fact, in that model, highly inertial policies can lead to
explosive behavior.
The robustness of simple rules to alternative parameterizations can be illustrated using
the concept of fault tolerance (Levin and Williams 2003). Figure 5 plots percent the deviations of
the central bank loss relative to the fully optimal policies for the three models studied by Levin
and Williams for variations in the three parameters of the policy rule. This figure shows results
for the case of λ = 0. The upper panel shows how the central bank loss changes in the three
models as the value of ρ ranges from 0 to 1.5. In constructing these curves, the other two
parameters of the policy rule are held constant at their respective optimal values. The middle and
bottom panels show the results when the coefficient on inflation and the output gap, respectively,
are varied. In cases where the curves are relatively flat, the policy is said to be fault tolerant,
meaning that model misspecification does not lead to a large increase in loss relative to what
could be achieved. If the curve is steep, the policy is said to be fault intolerant. Robust policies
are those that lie in the fault tolerant regions of the set of models under consideration.
As seen in the figure, inertial policies lead to very large increases in the central bank loss
in the Rudebusch-Svensson model. And highly inertial policies with values of ρ greater than one
are damaging in the Fuhrer model as well. The reason for this result in the Rudebusch-Svensson
models is that monetary policy effects grow slowly over time and there is no feedback of these
future effects of policy back onto the current economy. A highly inertial policy will be behind
the curve in shifting the stance of policy, amplifying fluctuations and potentially leading to
explosive oscillations. In forward-looking models, in contrast, expected future policy actions
help stabilize the current economy, which reduces the need for large movements in interest rates.

25

Nonetheless, excessive policy inertia with ρ > 1 is undesirable in forward-looking models with
strong real and nominal frictions such as the Fuhrer model and FRB/US.
The choice of the responses to inflation and the output gap can be quite different when
viewed from the perspective of robustness across models rather than optimality in a single
model. For example, in the case shown here, macroeconomic performance in the Fuhrer model
suffers when the response to inflation is too great. The case of the optimal response to the output
illuminates the tension between optimal and robust policies. In two of the models, the optimal
response is near zero. However, such a response is highly costly in the third (RudebuschSvensson) model. Similarly, the relatively large response to the output gap called for by the
Rudebusch-Svensson model performs poorly in the other two models. Evidently, the robust
policy differs significantly from each optimal policy by having a modest response to the output
gap that is suboptimal in each model, but highly costly in none.
Orphanides and Williams (2006) conduct a robustness analysis, where the uncertainty is
over the way that agents form expectations and the magnitude of fluctuations in the equilibrium
real interest rate and the natural rate of unemployment. Figure 6 plots the fault tolerances for
three models that they study. For this exercise, the coefficient on the lagged interest rate was set
to zero. In one model, labeled “perfect knowledge,” private agents possess rational expectations
and the equilibrium real interest rate and the natural rate of unemployment are constant and
known. The second model, labeled ‘learning,” replaces the assumption of rational expectations
with the assumption that private agents form expectations using an estimated forecasting model.
The third model, labeled “learning + natural rate misperceptions,” adds uncertainty about the
equilibrium real interest rate and the natural rate of unemployment to the model with learning.

26

The optimal policy in the “perfect knowledge” model performs poorly in the models with
learning and natural rate misperceptions. In particular, as seen in the upper panel of the figure,
the “perfect knowledge” model prescribes a modest response to inflation in the policy rule. Such
a policy is highly problematic in the other models with learning because it allows inflation
expectations to drift over time. The optimal policies in the models with learning feature much
stronger responses to inflation and thereby tighter control of inflation expectations. Such policies
engender relatively small cost in performance in the “perfect knowledge” model and represent a
robust strategy for this set of models.
As mentioned above, the Bayesian approach to policy rule evaluation under model
uncertainty requires one to specify probabilities on the various models. In practice, this may be
difficult or impossible to do. In such cases, alternative approaches are minimiax and minimax
regret. The minimiax criterion, LM, is given by:
max

,

,…,

.

(8)

Levin and Williams (2003) and Kuester and Wieland (2010) analyze the properties of minimax
simple rules. One problem with this approach is that it can be very sensitive to outlier models.
Hybrid approaches such as that of Kuester and Wieland (2010) and ambiguity aversion described
by Brock, Durlauf, and West (2003) allow one to combine the Bayesian approach with
robustness to “worst-case” models. This is done less formally by examining the performance of
the candidate policy not only in terms of the average performance across the models, but also in
each individual model.
A recurring result in the literature is that optimal Bayesian policy rules entail relatively
small stabilization costs, relative to the optimal policy, in nearly all the models in the set (see
Levin and Williams, 2003, Levin, Wieland, Williams, 1999, 2003, Orphandies and Williams,

27

2002, 2008, and references therein). That is, the cost of robustness to model uncertainty tends to
be relatively small, while the benefits can be very large.

4. Optimal Policy vs. Simple Rules
An alternative approach to that of simple monetary policy rules is that of optimal policy
(Giannoni and Woodford, 2005, Svensson, 2010, Woodford, 2010). The optimal policy
approach treats the monetary policy problem as a standard intertemporal optimization problem,
which yields optimalilty conditions in terms of first-order conditions and Lagrange multipliers.
As discussed in Giannoni and Woodford (2005), the optimal policy can be formulated as a single
equation in terms of leads and lags of the objective variables (inflation rate, output gap, etc.). A
key theoretical advantage of the optimal policy approach is that it, unlike simple monetary policy
rules, takes into account all relevant information for monetary policy.
The value of this informational advantage has been found to be surprisingly small in
model simulations, even when the central bank is assumed to have perfect knowledge of the
model. Of course, in small enough models, the optimal policy may be equivalent to a simple
policy rule, as in Ball (1999). But, in larger models, this is no longer the case. Williams (2003),
using the large-scale Federal Reserve Board FRB/US model, finds that a simple three-parameter
monetary policy rule yields outcomes in terms of the weighted sum of variances of the inflation
rate and the output gap that are remarkably close to those obtained under the fully optimal
policy. This result is illustrated in Figure 4, which shows the policy frontiers from the FRB/US
model between the fully optimal policy and the three-parameter rule. For a policymaker who
cares equally about inflation and the output gap (λ = 1), the standard deviations of both the
inflation rate and the output gap are less than 0.1 percentage point apart between the frontiers.

28

Similar results are obtained for a wide variety of estimated macroeconomic models
(Rudebusch and Svensson, 1999, Levin and Williams, 2003, Levin, Onatski, Williams, and
Williams, 2005, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2006, Edge, Laubach, and Williams 2010). Giononni
and Woodford (2005) provide the theoretical basis for why simple rules perform so well. They
show that the fully optimal policy can be described as a relationship between leads and lags of
the variables in the loss function. Evidently, simple rules of the type studied in the literature
capture the key aspects of this relationship between the objective variables.
One potential shortcoming of the optimal control approach is that it ignores uncertainty
about the specification of the model (see McCallum and Nelson 2005 for a discussion).
Although in principle one can incorporate various types of uncertainty to the analysis of optimal
policy, in practice computational feasibility limits what can be done. As a result, existing
optimal control policy analysis is typically done using a single reference model, which is
assumed to be true.
Levin and Williams (2003) and Orphanides and Williams (2008) find that optimal
policies can perform very poorly if the central bank's reference model is misspecified, while
simple robust rules perform well in a wide variety of models, as discussed above. This research
provides examples where optimal polices can be overly fine tuned to the particular assumptions
of the model. If those assumptions prove to be correct, all is well. But, if the assumptions turn
out to be false, the costs can be high. In contrast, simple monetary policy rules are designed to
take account of only the most basic principle of monetary policy of leaning against the wind of
inflation and output movements. Because they are not fine tuned to specific assumptions, they
are more robust to mistaken assumptions. Figure 7, taken from Orphanides and Williams (2008),
illustrates this point. The optimal control policy derived under the assumption of rational

29

expectations performs slightly better than the two simple rules if the model where expectations
are in fact rational. But, in the alternative models where agents form expectations using
estimated forecasting models, indexed by the learning parameter κ, the performance of the
optimal control policy deteriorates sharply while that of the simple rules holds up well.
One potential solution to this lack of robustness is to design optimal control rules that are
more robust to model misspecification. One such approach is to use robust control techniques
(Hansen and Sargent 2007). A n alternative approach is to bias the objective function so that the
optimal control policy is more robust to model uncertainty. The results for such a “modified
optimal policy” is shown in Figure 5. In this case, the modification is to reduce the weights
placed on stabilizing unemployment and interest rates in the objective function when computing
the optimal policy (see Orphanides and Williams 2008 for a discussion). Interestingly, although
this policy is more robust than the standard optimal policy, overall it doesn’t do as well as the
optimal simple inertial rule, as seen in the figure.
A final issue with optimal policies is that they tend to be very complicated and potentially
difficult to communicate to the public, relative to simple rules. In an environment where the
pubic lacks a perfect understanding of the policy strategy, this complexity may make it harder for
private agents to learn, creating confusion and expectational errors, as discussed by Orphanides
and Williams (2008).
These robustness studies characterize optimal policy in terms of an optimal feedback
rule—a function relating policy instruments to lagged policy instruments and other observable
variables in such a way that the objective function is maximized for a particular model. This
optimal feedback rule is then compared with simple (not fully optimal) rules by simulating the
rules in different models. There are a variety of ways other than feedback rules to characterize

30

optimal policy. For example, as mentioned above the policy instruments could depend on
forecasts of future variables, as discussed by Giannoni and Woodford (2005). In general there
are countless ways of representing optimal policy in a given model. When simulating how
optimal policy works in a different model, the results could depend on which of these
representations of optimal policy one uses An open question, therefore, is whether one
characterization of optimal policy might be more robust than those studied so far.

5. Learning from Experience Before, During and After the Great Moderation
Another approach to learn about the usefulness of simple policy rules is look at actual
macroeconomic performance when policy operates, or does not operate, close to such rules. The
Great Moderation period is good for this purpose because economic performance was unusually
favorable during that period, either compared to the period before or, so far at least, the period
after.
By all accounts the Great Moderation in the United States began in the early 1980s. In
particular, it is reasonable to date the beginning of the Great Moderation with the first month of
the expansion following the 1981-82 recession (November 1982) and to date its end at the
beginning of the 2007-09 recession (December 2007). Not only did inflation and interest rates
and their volatilities diminish compared with the experience of the 1970s, but the volatility of
real GDP reached lows never seen before. Economic expansions became longer and stronger
while recessions became shorter and shallower. No matter what metric you use—the variance of
real GDP growth, the variance of the real GDP gap, the average length of expansions, the
frequency of recessions, or the duration of recessions—there was a huge improvement in
economic performance. There was also an improvement in price stability with the inflation rate

31

much lower and less volatile than the period from the late 1960s to the early 1980s. This same
type of improved macroeconomic performance also occurred in other developed countries and
most developing countries (Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes, and Krause, 2006).
Is there evidence that policy adhered more to simple policy rules during the Great
Moderation? Yes. Indeed the evidence shows that not only the Fed, but also many other central
banks became markedly more responsive and systematic in adjusting to developments in the
economy when changing their policy interest rate. This is a policy regime change in the
econometric sense: one can observe it by estimating, during different time periods, the
coefficients of the central bank’s policy rule which describes of how the central bank sets its
interest rate in response to inflation and real GDP.
A number of researchers used this technique to detect a regime shift, including Judd and
Rudebusch (1998), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Woodford (2003), and Stock and Watson
(2002). Such studies have shown that the Fed’s interest rate moves were less responsive to
changes in inflation and to real GDP in the period before the 1980s. After the mid 1980s, the
reaction coefficients increased significantly. The reaction coefficient to inflation nearly doubled.
The estimated reaction of the interest rate to a one percentage point increase in inflation rose
from about three-quarters to about one-and-a-half. The reaction to real output also rose. In
general the coefficients are much closer to the parameters of a policy rule like the Taylor rule in
the post mid-1980s period than they were before. Similar results are found over longer sample
periods for the United States. The implied reaction coefficients were also low in the highly
volatile pre-World War II period (Romer and Romer 2002).

32

Cecchetti et al (2007) and others have shown that this same type of shift occurred in other
countries. They pinpoint the regime shift as having occurred for a number of countries in the
early 1980s by showing that deviations from a Taylor rule began to diminish around that time.
While this research establishes that the Great Moderation and the change in policy rules
began about the same time, it does not prove they are connected. Formal statistical techniques or
macroeconomic model simulation can help assess causality. Stock and Watson (2002) used a
statistical time-series decomposition technique to assess the causality. They found that the
change in monetary policy had an effect on performance, though they also found that other
factors—mainly a reduction in other sources of shocks to the economy (inventories, supply
factors)—were responsible for a larger part of the reduction in volatility. They showed that the
shift in the monetary policy rule led to a more efficient point on the output-inflation variance
tradeoff. Similarly, Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes, and Krause (2006) used a more structural model
and empirically studied many different countries. For 20 of the 21countries which had
experienced a moderation in the variance of inflation and output, they found that better monetary
policy accounted for over 80 percent of the moderation.
Some additional evidence comes from establishing a connection between the research on
policy rules and the decisions of policy makers. Asso, Kahn, and Leeson (2007) have
documented a large number of references to policy rules and related developments in the
transcripts of the FOMC in the 1990s. Meyer (2004) makes it clear that there was a framework
underlying the policy based on such considerations. If you compare Meyer’s (2004) account with
Maisel’s (1973), you see a very clear difference in the policy framework.
So far we have considered evidence in favor of a shift in the policy rule and improved
economic performance during the Great Moderation. Is it possible that the end of the Great

33

Moderations was due to another monetary policy shift? In thinking about this question, it is
important to recall that the Great Moderation was already nearly 15 years old before economists
started noticing it, documenting it, determining the date of its beginning, and trying to determine
whether or not it was due to monetary policy. It will probably take as long to draw definitive
conclusions about the end of the Great Moderation, and after all we hope that Great Moderation
II will start soon. Nevertheless, Taylor (2007) provides evidence that in 2003-2005, policy
deviated from the policy rule that worked well during the Great Moderation.

Rules as Measures of Accountability
This review of historical performance distinguishes periods when policy is close to a
policy rule and when it is not. In other words, it focuses on whether or not there is a deviation
from a policy rule. In a sense, such deviations from policy rules—at least large persistent
deviations—can serve as measures of accountability for monetary policy makers. Congressional
or parliamentary committees sometimes use such measures when questioning central bankers,
and public debates over monetary policy decisions are frequently about whether policy is
deviating from a policy rule or not.
It is important to point out that using policy rules in this way, while quite natural, was not
emphasized in the many of the original proposals for interest rate rules, such as the one in Taylor
(1993a). Rather the policy recommendation was that the rule should be used as an aid for
making decisions in a more predictable, rule-like, manner: Accordingly, the Federal Reserve
staff would show to the FOMC the paths of the federal funds rate under the Taylor rule and other
policy rules, and the FOMC would then use the information in making the decision about
34

whether or not to change the interest rate. Policy rules would thus inform policy decisions; it
would serve as a rough benchmark for making decisions not a mechanical formula. As Kohn
(2007) has described in his analysis of the 2002-2004 period and the response to Taylor (2007),
this is how policy rules came to be used at the FOMC.
The rationale for using deviations from policy rules as measures of accountability came
later and is based on historical and international experience over the past two decades. Historical
work has shown that there were big deviations from policy rules at the times that performance
was less than satisfactory. A question is whether in the future policy rules will be used more
often in this more specific way as a measure of accountability rather than as simply a guide or
aid for policy decisions. If rules become more commonly used for accountability, then policy
makers will have to explain the reasons for the deviations from the rules and be held accountable
for them. As stated by Levin and Taylor (2009) “on occasion, of course, policymakers might
find compelling reasons to deviate from the prescriptions of any simple rule, but in those
circumstances, transparency and credibility might well call for clear communication about the
rationale for that policy strategy.”

Conclusion
Research on rules for monetary policy rules over the past two decades has made
important progress in understanding the properties of simple policy rules and their robustness to
model misspecification. Simple normative rules to guide central bank decisions for the interest
rate first emerged from research on simulations of empirical monetary models with rational
expectations and sticky prices in the 1970s and 1980s; this research built on work going back to
Smith, Ricardo, Fisher, Wicksell, and Friedman in the sense that the research objective was to
35

find a monetary policy which both cushioned the economy to shocks and did not cause its own
shocks.
Over the past two decades, research on policy rules has shown that simple rules have
important robustness advantages over fully optimal or more complex rules in that they work well
in a variety of models. Experience has shown that simple rules also have worked well in the real
world. Progress has also been made in understanding how to adjust simple rules to deal with
measurement error, expectations, learning, and the lower bound on interest rates. That said, the
search for better and more robust policy rules is never done and further research is needed that
incorporates a wider set of models and economic environments, especially models that take
account international linkages of monetary policy and economies. In addition, many of the
studies of robustness have looked at only a handful of models in isolation from all the other
potential models. A desirable goal is to include large numbers of alternative models in one
study. Another goal of future research should be to gain a better understanding of the
implications of deviations from policy rules due to discretionary policy actions.

36

References
Asso, Francesco, George Kahn, and Robert Leeson (2007) “Monetary Policy Rules: from Adam
Smith to John Taylor,” presented at Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Conference, October
2007 http://dallasfed.org/news/research/2007/07taylor_leeson.pdf
Ball, Lawrence (1999) “Efficient Rules for Monetary Policy,” International Finance, Vol. 2, No.
1, 63-83.
Batini, Nicoletta and Andrew Haldane (1999). “Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary Policy,” in
John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 157–
92.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Matin Uribe (2001), “The Perils of Taylor Rules,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 96(1-2), January, 40-69.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (1999), Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, Fourth quarter, 18-51.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Vincent R. Reinhart (2004), “Conducting Monetary Policy at Very Low
Short-Term Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 94(2),
85-90.
Brayton, Flint, Andrew Levin, Ralph Tryon, and John C. Williams (1997), “The Evolution of
Macro Models at the Federal Reserve Board,” Carnegie-Rochseter Conference Series on
Public Policy, December, 47, 43-81.
Brock, William A., Steven N. Durlauf, James Nason, and Giacomo Rondina (2007),” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 54(5), 1372-1396.
Brock, William A., Steven N. Durlauf, and Kenneth D. West (2003), “Policy Analysis in
Uncertain Economic Environments,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 235322.
Brock, William A., Steven D. Durlauf, and Kenneth D. West (2007), “Model Uncertainty and
Policy Evaluation: Some Theory and Empirics,” Journal of Econometrics, 136, 2, 629664.
Bryant, Ralph, Peter Hooper and Catherine Mann (1993), Evaluating Policy Regimes: New
Empirical Research in Empirical Macroeconomics, Brookings Institution, Washington,
D.C.

37

Cecchetti, Stephen G., Alfonso Flores-Lagunes, and Stefan Krause (2006) “Has Monetary Policy
Become More Efficient? A Cross-country Analysis” Economic Journal, Vol. 116, No.
115, pp. 408-433.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Peter Hooper, Bruce C. Kasman, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Mark W.
Watson (2007), “Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process,” presented at the U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum 2007.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (2000), “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
(February), 115, 1, 147-180.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (2001), “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open
Versus Closed Economics: An Integrated Approach,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 91, May, 248-252.
Coenen , Guenter, Athansios Orphanides, and Volker Wieland (2004), “Price Stability and
Monetary Policy Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero,”
Advances in Macroeconomics, 4(1).
Dewald, William G., and Harry G. Johnson (1963), ``An Objective Analysis of the Objectives of
American Monetary Policy, 1952-61,'' in Banking and Monetary Studies, edited by
Deane Carson, 171-189. Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irvin.
Edge, Rochelle M., Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2010), “Welfare-Maximizing
Monetary Policy under Parameter Uncertainty,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25,
January/February, 129-143.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003), “The Zero Interest-Rate Bound and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 139-211.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2006), ``Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a
Liquidity Trap,” NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2004, Richard H.
Clarida, Jeffrey Frankel, Francesco Giavazzi and Kenneth D. West, eds., Cambridge,
MA.: MIT Press, 75-131.
Evans, George W., Eran Guse, and Seppo Honkapohja (2008), “Liquidity Traps, Learning and
Stagnation,” European Economic Review, 52, 1438 – 1463.

38

Fair, Ray C. (1978), “The Sensitivity of Fiscal Policy Effects to Assumptions about the Behavior
of the Federal Reserve,”' Econometrica, 46, 1165-1179.
Fair, Ray C. and Howrey, E. Philip (1996), “Evaluating Alternative Monetary Policy Rules,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 38(2), 173--193.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. (1997), Inflation/Output Variance Trade-offs and Optimal Monetary Policy.''
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May, 29(2), 214-234.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. (2000), “Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for MonetaryPolicy Models,” American Economic Review, June, 90(3), 367-90.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., and Brian Madigan (1997), “Monetary Policy when Interest Rates are
Bounded at Zero,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, November, 573-85.
Giannoni, Marc P. and Michael Woodford (2005), “Optimal Inflation Targeting Rules,'' In:
Bernanke, B.S., Woodford, M. (Eds.), The Inflation Targeting Debate, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 93—162.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent (2007), Robustness, Princeton University Press .
Henderson, Dale W., and Warwick J. McKibbin (1993), “An Assessment of Some Basic
Monetary Policy Regime Pairs: Analytical and Simulation Results from Simple MultiRegion Macroeconomic Models,” in R. Bryant, P. Hooper, and C. Mann (eds),
Evaluating Policy Regimes: New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics, Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C., 45–218.
Judd, John, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (1998), “Taylor's Rule and the Fed: 1970-1997,” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review 3, pp. 1-16.
Kohn, Donald (2007), “John Taylor Rules,” paper presented at a conference at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas, October, 2007.
Kuester, Keith, and Volker Wieland (2010), “Insurance Policies for Monetary Policy in the Euro
Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association.
Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2004), “A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence,” in
Christopher Kent and Simon Guttmann (ed.), The Future of Inflation Targeting, Sydney,
Australia: Reserve Bank of Australia, November, 6-42.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85(3), 473–491.

39

Laubach, Thomas and John C. Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), November, 1063-1070.
Levin, Andrew T., Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah Williams (2005), “Monetary
Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2005, 229-289.
Levin, Andrew T., and John B. Taylor (2009), “Falling Behind the Curve: A Positive Analysis
of Stop-Start Monetary Policies and the Great Inflation,” NBER Working Paper.
Levin, Andrew T., Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams (1999), "Robustness of Simple
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty." In Monetary Policy Rules, John B.
Taylor (Ed), pp. 263-299. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Levin, Andrew T., Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams (2003), “The performance of forecastbased policy rules under model uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 93 (3), 622–
645.
Levin, Andrew T., and John C. Williams (2003), “Robust Monetary Policy with Competing
Reference Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 945--975.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1976), “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 1, 19-46.
Maisel, Sherman J. (1973), Managing the Dollar, W.W. Norton, New York.
McCallum, Bennett T. (1988), “Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Autumn, 29, 173--203.
McCallum, Bennett T. (1999) “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules,” Handbook of
Macroeconomics, John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds).
McCallum, Bennett T. (2000), “Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on
Nominal Interest Rates,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32(4), November.
McCallum, Bennett T. (2001), “Should Monetary Policy Respond Strongly to Output Gaps?''
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 91(2), May, 258-62.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (2005), “Targeting versus Instrument Rules for
Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, September/October, 87(5),
597-611.
McNees, Stephen K. (1986), “Modeling the Fed: A Forward-Looking Monetary Policy Reaction
Function,” New England Economic Review, November/December, 3-8.
40

Meyer, Laurence (2004), A Term at the Fed: An Insider’s View, HarperCollins, New York.
Meyer, Laurence (2009), “Dueling Taylor Rules,” unpublished paper, August.
Mishkin, Frederick (2007), “Housing and the Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Conference.
Orphanides, Athanasios (1998), “Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,” Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FEDS 1998-50, October.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2001), “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data,” American
Economic Review, 91(4), September, 964-985.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2002), "Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation", American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 92(2), 115-120, May.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2008), “Taylor rules,” in S.N. Durlauf and L. E. Blume (eds) The New
Palgrave, Second Edition, New York: Palgrave Macmillian.
Orphanides, Athanasios, Richard D. Porter, David Reifschneider, Robert Tetlow, and Frederico
Finan (2000), “Errors in the Measurement of the Output Gap and the Design of Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Economics and Business, 52(1-2), 117–41.
Orphanides, Athanasios and Simon van Norden (2002), “The Unreliability of Output Gap
Estimates in Real Time,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(4), 569-583, November.
Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams (2002). “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with
Unknown Natural Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:2002, 63-118.
Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams (2006), "Monetary Policy with Imperfect
Knowledge,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3), 366-375.
Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams (2007a), “Inflation Targeting under Imperfect
Knowledge,” in Frederic Mishkin and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (ed.) Monetary Policy
under Inflation Targeting, Central Bank of Chile.
Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams (2007b), “Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect
Knowledge,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, August, 1406-1435.
Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams (2008) “Learning, Expectations Formation, and
the Pitfalls of Optimal Control Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.
55S, pp. S80-S96, October.

41

Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2010), “Monetary Policy Mistakes and the
Evolution of Inflation Expectations,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working
Paper, April.
Patinkin, Don (1956), Money, Interest and Prices: An Integration of Monetary and Value
Theory, Evanston: Row, Peterson.
Reifschneider, David L. and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a
Low Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32(4), November, 936-966.
Reifschneider, David L. and John C. Williams (2002), “FOMC Briefing,” Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002), “A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in The
1950's,” American Economic Review, 92(2), May, 121-127.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Ben
S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg (Eds.) pp. 297 – 361.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Woodford, Michael (1999), ``Interest-Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky
Price Model.'' in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 57-119.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2001), “Is the Fed Too Timid? Monetary Policy in an Uncertain World,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, May, pp. 203-217.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2002), “Assessing Nominal Income Rules for Monetary Policy with
Model and Data Uncertainty,” The Economic Journal, 112, 402-432.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2006), “Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?” International Journal
of Central Banking, 2(4), December, 85-135.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. and Svensson, Lars E. O. (1999). “Policy Rules for Inflation Targeting,”
in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
203-53.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2007), “Optimal Simple and Implementable
Monetary and Fiscal Rules,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (6), September, 17021725.

42

Smets, Frank (1999), “Output Gap Uncertainty: Does it matter for the Taylor Rule?” in:
Benjamin Hunt and Adrian Orr, eds., Monetary Policy under Uncertainty, Wellington,
New Zealand: Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 10--29.
Stock, James and Mark Watson (2002), “Has the Business Cycle Changed,” in Monetary Policy
and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, Jackson Hole Conference, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp 9-56.
Svensson, Lars E. O. (1999), “Price-Level Targeting vs. Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch?''
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31, 277-295.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2001), “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of
Escaping from a Liquidity Trap,” Monetary and Economic Studies, 19(S-1), February,
277-312.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003), “What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary
Policy through Targeting Rules,” January, Journal of Economic Literature, 41, 426-477.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010), “Inflation Targeting,” prepared for Handbook of Monetary
Economics.
Taylor, John B. (1979), “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational
Expectations,” Econometrica, 47, September 1979.
Taylor, John B (1993a). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.
Taylor, John B (1993b), Macroeconomic Policy in a World Economy: From Econometric Design
to Practical Operation, W.W. Norton, New York.
Taylor, John B. (1999a), Monetary Policy Rules, (Editor), University of Chicago Press.
Taylor, John B (1999b), “The Robustness and Efficiency of Monetary Policy Rules as
Guidelines for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, June, 43(3), 655-79.
Taylor, John B. (2007), ``Housing and Monetary Policy,'' In: Housing, Housing Finance, and
Monetary Policy, Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 463-476.
Taylor, John B., and Volker Wieland (2009), “Surprising Comparative Properties of Monetary
Models: Results from a New Data Base,” NBER Working Papers 14849, National Bureau
of Economic Research.

43

Taylor, John B., and Michael Woodford (Editors), (1999), Handbook of Macroeconomics,
Elsevier.
Tetlow, Robert J. (2006), “Real-time Model Uncertainty in the United States: ‘Robust’ policies
put to the test,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, May 22.
Walsh, Carl E. (2009), “Using monetary policy to stabilize economic activity,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Conference.
Williams, John C. (2003), “Simple Rules for Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Economic Review, 2003.
Williams, John C. (2006), “Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Economy with Learning,” in:
Monetary Policy in an Environment of Low Inflation; Proceedings of the Bank of Korea
International Conference 2006, Seoul: Bank of Korea, 199-228.
Williams, John C. (2010), “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009, 1-37.
Woodford, Michael (1999), “Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia,” Manchester School, Supplement,
67, 1-35.
Woodford, Michael (2001), “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy,” American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 91, No. 2, 232-7.
Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Woodford, Michael (2010), “Optimal Monetary Stabilization Policy,” prepared for Handbook of
Monetary Economics.

44

Figure 1
σy

Policy Frontiers in the FRB/US Model

5
4.5

λ=0
Policy rule responds to:

4

Price level

3.5

Inflation rate

3
2.5
2
1.5

λ=1/3
λ=1

1

λ→∞

λ=3

0.5
0
1.2

1.4

1.6

σπ

1.8

2

2.2

2

2.2

Figure 2
σy

Level vs. Inertial Rules in FRB/US Model

5
4.5
Inertial Rule

4

Level rule

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
1.2

1.4

1.6

σπ

45

1.8

Figure 3
Optimal Response to Inflation (α)

Optimal Response to Lagged Interest Rate (ρ)
1

0.5

0.9
0.8

0.4

0.7
0.6

0.3

0.5
0.4

0.2

0.3
0.2

0.1

0.1
0

0
0

1
Degree of misperceptions

2

3

0

1
Degree of misperceptions

2

3

Optimal Response to Change in Unemployment Rate (δ)

Optimal Response to Unemployment Gap (γ)
0

0

-1
-0.5

-2

-3

-1

-4
-1.5

-5

-6

-2
0

1
Degree of misperceptions

2

3

46

0

1
Degree of misperceptions

2

3

Figure 4
σy

Simple Rules vs. Optimal Policies in the FRB/US Model

5
4.5
Inertial Rule

4

Optimal Control Policy

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
1.2

1.4

1.6

σπ

47

1.8

2

2.2

Figure 5
Coefficient on Lagged Interest Rate (ρ)

%ΔL
200

RudebuschSvensson

150

Fuhrer

100
Woodford

50

0
0

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

1.5

Coefficient on Inflation Rate (α)

%ΔL
200

150

100

50

0
0

1

2

3

4

Coefficient on Output Gap (β)

%ΔL
200

150

100

50

0
0

1

2

48

3

Figure 6
Optimal Coefficient on Inflation Rate (α)

%ΔL
200

Private learning

150

100

Private learning +
natural rate misperceprions

50
Perfect knowledge

0
0

%ΔL

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Optimal Coefficient on Unemployment Gap (γ)

200

150

100
Private learning

50

Private learning +
natural rate misperceptions

Perfect knowledge

0
-6

-5

-4

-3

49

-2

-1

0

Figure 7
Robustness to Learning

L
18

16

Optimum Control
Policy

14

Modified Optimum
Control Policy

12

10
Inertial Rule

Difference Rule
8

6
0

0.005

0.01

0.015
κ

50

0.02

0.025

0.03

