NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DECOUPLING AND RECOUPLING
Anton Korinek
Agustín Roitman
Carlos A. Végh
Working Paper 15907
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15907

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

We are grateful to Olivier Jeanne and participants at the 2010 AEA meetings for helfpul comments
and to Alejandro Izquierdo (IDB) for kindly providing us with data for emerging countries. A shorter
version of this paper will be published in the American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
(May 2010). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Anton Korinek, Agustín Roitman, and Carlos A. Végh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Decoupling and Recoupling
Anton Korinek, Agustín Roitman, and Carlos A. Végh
NBER Working Paper No. 15907
April 2010
JEL No. E44,F34,F41
ABSTRACT
We develop a stylized model that captures the phenomena of decoupling and recoupling in an environment
where heterogeneous entrepreneurial sectors face financial constraints in their relationship with a common
set of lenders. In response to adverse shocks, a financially constrained sector must reduce its borrowing
and cut down on production. In particular, as the constrained sector absorbs less and less capital, the
real interest rate in the economy declines. Other sectors that compete for the same inputs (including
capital) thus experience lower costs, which boosts investment, output, and profits, reflecting the phenomenon
of "decoupling." As long as the shock is small, the entrepreneurial sector repays what is owed and
the lenders' ability to supply funds is unaffected. For large shocks, however, the constrained sector
is no longer able to honor its debts in full and lenders experience losses that erode their lending base.
This induces them to cut their supply of credit to the rest of the economy, which reduces output and
profit for all other entrepreneurial sectors, capturing the phenomenon of "recoupling" or contagion.

Anton Korinek
University of Maryland
Tydings Hall 4118F
College Park, MD 20742
akorinek@gmail.com
Agustín Roitman
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
roitman@econ.umd.edu

Carlos A. Végh
Department of Economics
Tydings Hall, Office 4118G
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
vegh@econ.bsos.umd.edu

The financial crisis that has engulfed the world over the past three years
started out in a relatively small set of sectors in a select number of countries,
particularly the real estate sector in the United States. The rise in U.S. interest rates from about 1 to 5 percent between 2004 and 2006 combined with
excessively lax lending standards triggered a wave of defaults on mortgages –
particularly in the sub-prime sector – that led to a slowdown in the housing
market. As illustrated in Figure 1, Panel A, housing starts peaked in early 2006
and have fallen dramatically ever since. At first (February 2007 to May 2008),
however, financial problems seemed to stay confined to the sectors and countries in which they originated, with little repercussion on other sectors in the
United States or on emerging countries. Business loans from commercial banks
in the United States, for instance, continued to increase steadily throughout
this period (Panel A). And, if anything, capital inflows into emerging countries became stronger (Panel B). In fact, policymakers in the developing world
would brag about this “decoupling” from the United States as a sign of the
economic maturity reached by their domestic economies.1 This period of decoupling is also evident from looking at corporate bond yields in the United
States (Panel C) and sovereign bond prices for emerging markets (Panel D),
both of which remained relatively unaffected during this period. The decoupling, however, began to unravel starting around May 2008 – and particularly
after the collapse of Lehman (September 15, 2008) – as the financial crisis
began to spread like wildfire, affecting countries all around the world, with
asset and stock prices collapsing in unison. In the United States, business
loans plummeted (Panel A) and corporate yields spiked violently (Panel C).
In emerging markets, capital inflows collapsed and bond prices fell dramatically (Panel D).2
1

In mid-September 2008, Brazil’s president, Lula da Silva, was quoted as saying “What

crisis? Go ask Bush.” A few weeks later, Brazil’s stock market and currency plummeted
by 20 and 13 percent, respectively (Bloomberg.com, December 3, 2008, “Lula, Like Bush,
Gives Bad Shopping Advice”).
2
This “decoupling-recoupling” sequence is well documented in Dooley and Hutchinson
(2009) for emerging markets as a whole and in Izquierdo and Talvi (2009) for Latin America.

2

Figure 1: Decoupling and Recoupling During the Global Crisis of 2008-2010
B. LAC-7 capital inflows

A. Housing starts and business loans
$1,800bn

2,500k

$250bn

$1,600bn
2,000k

$1,400bn

$200bn

$1,200bn
1,500k

$1,000bn

$150bn

$800bn

1,000k

$100bn
$600bn
$400bn

500k
Housing starts

Decoupling

Recoupling

$50bn
Decoupling

$200bn

Recoupling

Business loans

C. US Corporate bond yield

Jun-09

Jun-08

Dec-08

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-06

Dec-06

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-04

Dec-04

Jun-03

Dec-03

Dec-02

Jul-09

$0bn

Jan-10

Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-07

Jan-08

Jul-06

Jan-07

Jul-05

Jan-06

$0bn

Jan-05

0k

D. Sovereign bond prices. Latin EMBI

10%

110
100

9%

90
80

8%

70
60

7%

Decoupling

Recoupling

50

Jan-10

Oct-09

Jul-09

Apr-09

Oct-08

Jan-09

Jul-08

Apr-08

Oct-07

Jan-08

Jul-07

Jan-07

Jan-10

Jul-09

Jan-09

Jul-08

Jan-08

Jul-07

Jan-07

Jul-06

Jan-06

Jul-05

Jan-05

Apr-07

40

6%

Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, U.S. Census Bureau, and Inter-American Development Bank

3

This paper develops a stylized model of decoupling and recoupling that captures these phenomena in an environment where heterogeneous entrepreneurial
sectors face financial constraints in their relationship with a common set of
lenders. In response to adverse shocks, a financially constrained sector must
reduce its borrowing and cut down on production.

In particular, as the

constrained sector absorbs less and less capital, the real interest rate in the
economy declines. Other sectors that compete for the same inputs (including
capital) thus experience lower costs, which boosts investment, output, and
profits, reflecting the phenomenon of “decoupling.” As long as the shock is
small, the entrepreneurial sector repays what is owed and the lenders’ ability
to supply funds is unaffected. If the adverse shock exceeds a certain threshold,
however, the constrained sector is no longer able to honor its debts in full and
lenders experience losses that erode their lending base. This induces them to
cut their supply of credit to the rest of the economy, which reduces output
and profit for all other entrepreneurial sectors, capturing the phenomenon of
“recoupling” or contagion.3

1

Model

We assume an economy with one homogenous consumption/investment good
that spans over two time periods t = 1, 2. The economy consists of a combined
household/banking sector that provides finance and values consumption, and
N entrepreneurial sectors that access finance to engage in production and value
final profits.4 We can interpret this set-up alternatively as a world in which
(i) households provide finance to N different countries through global capital
markets or (ii) a closed economy with N different productive sectors.
3

For empirical documentation that episodes of contagion typically involve common

lenders, see Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Végh (2003).
4
For analytical simplicity, we combine households and banks in our model. As discussed
below, our results would be magnified if we separated the two sectors and allowed for leverage
in the banking sector.

4

1.1

Household/Banking Sector

The consolidated household/banking sector consists of a continuum of identical
agents that have an exogenous and constant endowment e per period and consume ct , which provides utility according to the function U = log (c1 )+log (c2 ).
A representative household obtains repayments R1 d1 from the entrepreneurial
sectors at the beginning of period 1, where d1 is the total amount owed by
the entrepreneurs and R1 is an average gross real interest rate. The household
also provides d2 in loans to the entrepreneurial sectors at a gross real interest
rate of R2 to be repaid in period 2. We assume that d1 > 0 to ensure that
households have an incentive to lend, i.e. d2 > 0. The optimization problem
of households/banks is
max log (e + R1 d1 − d2 ) + log (e + R2 d2 ) ,
d2

(1)

leading to the first-order condition
R2 =

c2
.
c1

It is easy to show that c1 is a decreasing function of R2 .5 Since
d2 = e + R1 d1 − c1 ,

(2)

this implies that d2 , the supply of loans to entrepreneurs in period 1, is increasing in R2 . Further, a reduction in d1 will shift leftward the supply of
loans for a given R2 .

1.2

Entrepreneurial Sector

We assume that each of the N entrepreneurial sectors consists of a continuum
of identical entrepreneurs of mass 1 that are risk-neutral and value their profits
π i , which they consume at the end of period 2, according to the linear utility
5

As shown in the appendix, this result holds for more general utility functions under

certain regularity conditions.

5

function U i = π i (i = 1, .., N ). Let di1 be the initial debt obligation of a
representative entrepreneur in sector i and R1i the corresponding gross real
interest rate.6 The entrepreneur enters period 1 with a predetermined debt
obligation of R1i di1 that is due in period 1 and with productive output of


Ai1 F (k1i ), where Ai1 is a productivity parameter that can take values in 0, Ā ,
k1i is a predetermined level of capital that fully depreciates at the end of period
1, and F (·) is a decreasing returns-to-scale production function.7 If production
is insufficient to cover the debt, the entrepreneur goes bankrupt and lenders
obtain the entire output. Formally, the entrepreneur repays the lender


R1i dˆi1 = min R1i di1 , Ai1 F k1i ,
where R1i dˆi1 is the actual payment. Hence, the total repayments from the N
entrepreneurial sectors to households is R1 d1 = ΣRi dˆi .
1 1

The entrepreneur’s net worth after this repayment at the beginning of
period 1 is


ni1 = max Ai1 F k1i − R1i di1 , 0 .
The entrepreneur then decides how much debt di2 to issue as a function
of R2 and how much to invest in next-period production. Total period 2
investment is financed from net worth and borrowing:
k2i = ni1 + di2 .
This capital investment produces period 2 output of Ai2 F (k2i ), where we set
for simplicity Ai2 = A ∀ i. This implies that we can rule out bankruptcy in
period 2.
However, we assume that there is a moral hazard problem in period 1, which
imposes a credit limit on di2 . After having borrowed in period 1, a producer has
an opportunity to move the project into a scam that hides income in period
6

We index R1i by i because, even though this falls outside the scope of our model, different

sectors could have faced different gross real interest rates in light of the possibility of default.
7
Alternatively, the value of Ai1 could be interpreted as the outcome of a random productivity shock that was realized before we begin our analysis.

6

2. Creditors can challenge this in court but can recover at most a fraction
[α/(1 + α)] ∈ (0, 1) of the entrepreneur’s total assets because of imperfect
enforcement. To avoid losses from potential fraud, creditors limit the amount
of borrowing by entrepreneurs to
α i
k or di2 ≤ αni1 .
1+α 2
The optimization problem of a representative entrepreneur in sector i condi2 ≤

sists of choosing di2 to maximize profits subject to the borrowing constraint
and is described by the Lagrangian:


Li = AF ni1 + di2 − R2 di2 − λi di2 − αni1 ,
where λi is the shadow price on the borrowing constraint. The problem results
in the first-order condition

AF 0 k2i = R2 + λi .
If the constraint is loose, this reduces to the standard neoclassical condition.
Entrepreneurs invest and borrow optimally:
k2∗ (R2 ) = F 0−1 (R2 /A) ,
di2 = k2∗ (R2 ) − ni1 .

(3)

The optimal capital stock is independent of individual-specific variables and
only depends on the cost of capital R2 in the economy. This yields period 2
profits of


π iunc = AF (k2∗ (R2 )) − R2 k2∗ (R2 ) − ni1 ,
where it is straightforward to show that ∂π i /∂ni1 > 0 and ∂π i /∂R2 < 0 as long
as the entrepreneur is a net borrower, i.e. ni1 < k2∗ (R2 ).
If the constraint is binding, a wedge opens between the entrepreneur’s cost
of funds and the marginal product, in which case the level of borrowing and
investment are determined by the constraints
di2 = αni1 ,
k2i = (1 + α) ni1 .
7

The capital stock is now independent of the real interest rate in the economy
and only depends on entrepreneurial net worth. This results in period 2 profits
given by

π icon = AF (1 + α) ni1 − αR2 ni1 ,
which also satisfies ∂π i /∂ni1 > 0 and ∂π i /∂R2 < 0.
Note that if ni1 = 0 because of bankruptcy in period 1, the entrepreneur
cannot borrow and invest due to the constraint, and thus produces and consumes zero in period 2.

2

Equilibrium

For given initial conditions, a decentralized equilibrium in the economy consists
N

of a bundle {(di2 , k2i , R2 )}i=1 that is a solution to the maximization problems of
the household/banking and the entrepreneurial sectors and satisfies the market
clearing condition for debt
d2 = Σdi2 .
Our characterization of the economy’s equilibrium allows us to study the
phenomena of decoupling and recoupling. For simplicity, we assume there are
two productive sectors labeled by i = X, Z, of which sector Z has a value of AZ1
that is sufficiently high so as to be always unconstrained during the ensuing
experiment. We study how the equilibrium changes as we vary the productivity


of sector X over the range 0, Ā for given initial capital and debt positions. To
capture the traditional role of entrepreneurs as net demanders of finance, we
assume that the initial debt and capital levels of both entrepreneurial sectors
are such that they remain net borrowers in period 1.

2.1

Unconstrained Economy

X
If period 1 productivity in sector X is sufficiently high AX
1 ≥ Aunc , the sector

is unconstrained and the economy follows standard neoclassical rules. The

8

X
threshold AX
unc is determined by the productivity level A1 that leads to a

sectoral net worth nX
1 such that
∗
(1 + α) nX
1 = k2 .
Z Z
Households receive the promised amount R1 d1 = R1X dX
1 + R1 d1 in period 1

and supply loans according to (2), and both entrepreneurial sectors demand
loans according to their optimality condition (3).
Within this region, greater sector X productivity means higher entrepreneurial
X
net worth nX
1 and therefore a lower demand for loans d2 (R2 ). As a result, the

interest rate R2 declines, and the optimum amount of investment as well as
profits in both sectors increase. A positive shock in sector X therefore spills
over positively to sector Z.

2.2

Decoupling

If the productivity of sector X drops below AX
unc , the sector becomes constrained. As long as net worth nX
1 is positive, the sector can honor its repayments and households receive the promised amount R1 d1 in period 1. This is
the case as long as

X X
X
AX
≥
R
d
/F
k
≡ AX
1
1 1
1
fail .
Within this region, lower period 1 productivity for a constrained entrepreneur
tightens the constraint, leads to lower loan demand and a lower interest rate
R2 . Sector Z reacts by increasing investment and profits, i.e., a negative shock
in sector X spills over positively to sector Z. The worse the productivity shock
for sector X, the better off is sector Z – there is decoupling.8
8

Note that there are two effects on the welfare of sector X: on the one hand, it is hurt

by the binding constraint, but on the other hand it benefits from the lower interest rate.
The net effect of the two can initially be positive. However, as productivity declines further
and the sector approaches the bankruptcy threshold, sectoral welfare will unambiguously
decline until it reaches zero at the threshold.

9

Figure 2: Decoupling and Recoupling
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

R2
π
Z
πX

0.2
0
0.2

2.3

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

AX
1

Recoupling

X
For AX
1 < Afail , sector X defaults and households receive a total repayment of

X
R1 d1 = R1Z dZ1 + AX
1 F k1 . With sector X being wiped out, period 1 produc-

tivity in this region affects directly the capital position of households/bankers.
A lower period 1 productivity for a constrained entrepreneur reduces period
1 wealth of households/bankers, which makes them less willing to lend and
increases the interest rate R2 that they charge. As a result, sector Z invests
less and obtains lower profits. Within this region, negative shocks to sector X
spill over negatively to sector Z – there is recoupling (i.e., contagion).

3

Illustration

In Figure 2, we illustrate the three regions that arise as we reduce the productivity parameter AX
1 from Ā (= 1.3) to 0.2 (i.e., as we move from right to left):
unconstrained, decoupling, and recoupling, each separated by a dotted vertical
√
line. We use F (k) = k for the production function and set the following
parameters: α = .5, e = 0, A = 1.2, AZ1 = 1, k1i = 1, and R1i di1 = .5 in each

10

sector i.
For high values of the productivity parameter AX
1 , i.e., to the right of
the figure, both sectors are unconstrained and lower productivity in sector X
decreases profits (i.e., welfare) in both sectors as the cost of capital increases.
In the center of the figure, there is decoupling: since the demand for loans
of sector X is progressively constrained, the interest rate declines and sector
Z is better off. In the left region of the figure, sector X goes bankrupt and
the supply of loans to the entrepreneurial sector is reduced, pushing up the
interest rate R2 .9 This hurts sector Z, i.e., there is recoupling.

4

Extensions

There are several dimensions in which our benchmark model can be extended
to provide further insights:
(i) Dynamics In the recent financial crisis, decoupling and recoupling occurred sequentially, whereas in our model we are, strictly speaking, conducting a comparative statics exercise. In a multi-period version of our
model, recoupling could occur after an episode of decoupling, if a series
of adverse shocks progressively depletes the net worth of a constrained
sector to the point where it is pushed into bankruptcy.
(ii) Factor Prices In our benchmark model, the only factor of production
is capital. More generally, other factors, such as labor or commodities,
are complements to capital in standard production functions. The less
capital is employed in the economy, the lower is the demand for other
factors. This would lead to a fall in commodity prices and, in labor
markets with sticky wages, to unemployment.
9

Note that this channel of transmission is consistent with the evidence presented in Figure

1, where we can see that business loans begin to fall (Panel A) and corporate yield rates
spike sharply (Panel C) at the begining of the recoupling period.

11

Figure 3: Recoupling with Bankruptcy Costs
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

R2
π
Z
πX

0.2
0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

AX
1

(iii) Bankruptcy Costs If we add to our model bankruptcy costs that reduce
the recovery rate on assets seized by banks by a factor δ in case of
bankruptcy, then there is a discontinuity at Afail that would cause the
interest rate to jump up and welfare to fall, magnifying the impact of
defaults. An example of this is given in Figure 3.
(iv) Leveraged Banks Modifying our benchmark model by separating households and the banking sector and introducing leverage in the latter can
amplify the propagation of defaults. Leverage implies that the impact
of a shock on the net worth of banks is magnified. Hence, if banks experienced financial constraints in their relationship with households, our
contagion results would be strengthened.
(v) Efficiency Considerations In the framework we have described in this
paper, the decentralized equilibrium is constrained-efficient, since there
are no actions that a planner could undertake to coordinate the economy
on a better equilibrium. However, if we introduce additional degrees of
freedom for our agents, such as the possibility to choose the amount
of initial debt, inefficiencies may arise. This is particularly the case if
12

there are relative prices, such as exchange rates or asset prices, that are
adversely affected by contagion dynamics (see e.g. Korinek, 2010).
We explore these extensions in more detail in our companion paper (Korinek, Roitman and Végh, 2010).

5

Conclusions

We have presented a stylized model that captures the decoupling-recoupling
phenomenon observed after the subprime crisis erupted in the United States
in February 2007 There are two “sectors” in our model that experience first
decoupling and then recoupling as productivity falls in one of them. These
two sectors could be given a literal interpretation (i.e., the real estate and
manufacturing sectors within a country being financed by the financial sector)
or a broader interpretation in terms of different countries (i.e., United States
and Brazil being financed by international capital markets). In our companion
paper, we embed this mechanism in a model with leverage and show how this
decoupling-recoupling cycle is further amplified.

References
[1] Dooley, Michael P., and Michael M. Hutchison. 2009. “Transmission of the
U.S. Subprime Crisis to Emerging Markets: Evidence on the DecouplingRecoupling Hypothesis,“ NBER Working Paper No. 15120.
[2] Izquierdo, Alejandro, and Ernesto Talvi. 2009. Policy Trade-offs for Unprecedented Times. Washington, DC: IDB.
[3] Kaminsky, Graciela L., Carmen M. Reinhart and Carlos A. Végh. 2003.
“The Unholy Trinity Of Financial Contagion.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4): 51-74.
13

[4] Korinek, Anton. 2010. “Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets:
An Externality View.” Unpublished.
[5] Korinek, Anton, Agustı́n Roitman, and Carlos A. Végh. 2010. “A Dynamic
Model of Decoupling and Recoupling.” Unpublished.

6

Mathematical Appendix

6.1

Household/Banking Sector

For general utility functions, the first order condition to the optimization problem of the household/banking sector (1) is
u0 (c1 ) = R2 u0 (c2 ) .
By implicitly differentiating this Euler equation, we obtain the slope of the
supply of lending

dd2
u0 (c2 ) + R2 d2 u00 (c2 )
.
= − 00
dR2
u (c1 ) + R2 u00 (c2 )

Since the denominator is negative, this expression is unambiguously positive
as long as the following condition is met:
Condition 1

∂R2 u0 (c2 )
∂R2

= u0 (c2 ) + R2 d2 u00 (c2 ) > 0

Intuitively, the condition states that the consumer’s marginal period 2 utility from lending in period 1 responds positively to higher interest rates – the
effect consists of the (positive) marginal utility u0 (c2 ) gained from the higher
interest rate minus the (negative) indirect effect that the marginal utility declines at rate u00 (c2 ) as consumption rises.
There are two alternative sufficient conditions under which the condition is
satisfied. First, it is met whenever the curvature of the households utility function as measured by the coefficient of risk aversion u00 (·) /u0 (·) is sufficiently
14

low so that increases in consumption do not depress the marginal utility at too
fast of a rate. This is for example the case for log-utility as in our specification
of the household’s problem in (1). For that case we find that


1
R2 d2
0
00
u (c2 ) + R2 d2 u (c2 ) =
1−
> 0,
c2
c2
since the payment obtained R2 d2 < e + R2 d2 = c2 and the fraction is always
less than one.
Secondly, the condition is met for arbitrary utility functions whenever the
amount lent d2 is sufficiently low. For example, for the class of CRRA utility
functions with a coefficient of relative risk aversion θ, we find


R 2 d2
0
00
−θ
u (c2 ) + R2 d2 u (c2 ) = c2 1 − θ
.
c2
As long as d2 is sufficiently low so that θR2 d2 < c2 , the condition is satisfied.
For the standard value θ = 2 that is often chosen in the literature, the repayment received has to constitute less than half of total consumption. This is
generally satisfied in models where households derive approximately two thirds
of their income from labor.
The response of the period 2 lending rate R2 to changes in the period 1
repayment is

dR2
u00 (c1 )
.
= 0
d (R1 d1 )
u (c2 ) + R2 d2 u00 (c2 )

This derivative is negative whenever condition 1 is met, as is the case for the
log-utility that we used in problem (1).

15

