                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DEEP FINANCIAL INTEGRATION AND VOLATILITY

                                       Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
                                           Bent Sørensen
                                        Vadym Volosovych

                                         Working Paper 15900
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15900


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              April 2010
We thank Nick Bloom, Nicola Cetorelli, Philipp Harms, Jean Imbs, Jens Iversen, Jan De Loecker,
Eswar Prasad, Romain Ranciere, Jae Sim, Robert Vermeulen, seminar participants at the University
of Alberta, Boston College, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Board, George Washington
University, University of Maryland, Geneva International Institute, University of Lausanne, Kyiv School
of Economics, University of Piraeus, University of Southern California, University of Virginia, University
of Zurich, and the World Bank as well as participants in the Fifth Annual CEPR Workshop on Global
Interdependence, the 2009 UCLA-DEGIT XIV Workshop, the 2009 Summer Meetings of Econometric
Society in Boston, the 7th INFINITI conference in International Economics and Finance in Dublin,
the 2009 Midwest Macro Meetings (International Trade), the Globalization Conference at Trinity College,
the 2009 NBER Universities Research Conference, the 2009 Spring Meeting of NBER-IFM group,
the 2009 NBER Summer Institute-Productivity group, and in the 2008 IEFS World Congress in Istanbul.
Essential parts of this paper were prepared while Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan was visiting the European
Central Bank as 2008 Duisenberg Fellow. She thanks the economists at the Bank for providing a stimulating
research environment. Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan is also grateful for financial support from the Marie
Curie Actions of the 7th Framework Programme for the EU Enlargement. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent Sørensen, and Vadym Volosovych. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deep Financial Integration and Volatility
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent Sørensen, and Vadym Volosovych
NBER Working Paper No. 15900
April 2010
JEL No. E32,F15,F36,O16

                                               ABSTRACT

We investigate the relationship between financial integration and output volatility at micro and macro
levels. Using a very large firm-level dataset from EU countries over time, we construct a measure
of "deep" financial integration at the regional level based on foreign ownership at the firm level. We
find a positive effect of foreign ownership on volatility of firms' outcomes. This effect survives aggregation
and carries over to regional output. Exploiting variation in the transposition dates of EU-wide legislation,
we find that high trust regions in countries who harmonized capital markets sooner have higher levels
of financial integration and volatility.


Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan                                  Vadym Volosovych
University of Houston                                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                               Florida Atlantic University
Houston, TX 77204                                     Boca Raton, FL 33431
and NBER                                              vvolosov@fau.edu
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu

Bent Sørensen
Department of Economics
University of Houston
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
bent.sorensen@mail.uh.edu
1     Introduction

Macroeconomists increasingly recognize the importance of interactions between firm- and aggregate-
level outcomes; in particular, aggregate economic growth and volatility is tightly linked to hetero-
geneity of firm-level activity. Our objective here is to empirically investigate the relationship be-
tween financial integration and output growth volatility at the firm level as well as at the aggregate
level.

    Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009) conclude that there is no systematic relationship between
volatility and financial integration at the country level. This may be due to differences in institu-
tions, industrial structures, financial markets, and/or macro policies but due to endogeneity and
small country samples, it is not possible to sort this out. Figure 1 illustrates this identification
challenge. The relationship between volatility, and financial integration changes dramatically with
the sample of countries.1 The figure suggests there is no relation between volatility and financial
integration in the largest sample of 25 EU countries. However, if we omit small, open, and volatile
countries, such as Ireland, Malta, and Cyprus, it seems there is a strong negative relation between
volatility and integration. If we focus on 15 long-standing EU countries, the relationship turns
positive.2

    We employ a novel empirical approach. Starting from the micro level using direct observations
on foreign ownership over time we first study the relation between foreign ownership and firm-level
volatility. Next, we “aggregate our way up” to regions within countries by 1) calculating a weighted
average of firm-level foreign ownership,3 which we call “deep” financial integration, and 2) aggregate
the output of firms by region and calculate regional volatility. Aggregate results will be different
due to aggregation of ownership or due to aggregation of output. To explore this issue we aggregate
the data in several “steps.” We first regress the volatility of the typical firm; i.e., median volatility
in each region, on regional deep integration and, next, we regress volatility of regional aggregated
output on deep integration in order to explore if the relation between ownership and volatility
carries over to the aggregated data. Finally, we combine our firm-level dataset from AMADEUS
with macroeconomic (regional) data from Eurostat and regress volatility of region-level GDP per

   1
     We use the standard deviation of GDP growth between 1995 and 2005 for volatility. Financial integration
measured as sum of foreign assets and liabilities divided by GDP and averaged over 1995–2005, using data from Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2007).
   2
     If one does a similar exercise using a larger sample of countries, including both developed world and emerging
markets, the results are equally unstable as shown by Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009).
   3
     Our measure of financial integration is based on firm-level foreign ownership and captures foreign direct investment
(FDI) and equity liabilities.


                                                           2
capita on deep financial integration.

       This is the first integrated investigation of the relationship between finance and volatility at
the micro and macro levels. Focusing on firms and regions within countries is important to solve
the identification problem that plagues cross-country studies. Using country-, industry-, and time-
fixed effects (and their combinations) and focusing on firms allow us to investigate the affect of
foreign finance on firm-level volatility in isolation from the first-order general equilibrium effects
that affect country-level data. Focusing on regions allows us to investigate whether aggregation
“averages away” firm-level patterns and help us to answer the question of whether there is an effect
of financial integration on aggregate volatility.

       Many micro-founded models suggest a positive relationship between financial integration and
volatility at the firm level. Foreign investors may acquire domestic firms for two reasons: a)
“diversification” or b) “control.” If investors buy stakes in firms for the purpose of diversification
we expect to find a positive correlation between foreign ownership and firm-level volatility. Foreign
investors are likely to be better diversified against shocks to the domestic economy and therefore
more tolerant of domestic risk and more likely to invest in volatile firms.4 This implies volatility
affects foreign ownership but there may also be a causal effect of foreign ownership on volatility.
When a firm is more diversified the domestic majority owner is less impacted by the firm’s volatility
and hence more willing to undertake high variance-high return investments. This argument is
detailed in Obstfeld (1994) who shows how diversified capital ownership allows firms to choose
riskier projects.5

       Foreign firms may buy stakes in domestic firms for reasons of control ; for example, to control
their supply chain, or to obtain competitive advantage, economies of scale, market access, etc. Such
multinational investors will typically hold majority stakes and therefore decide on the business
strategy of their target and they are likely to be better diversified against domestic risk than
domestic majority owners, because such investors often are firms with operations in their home
economy. They are therefore more willing to accept exposure to domestic risk. As a result volatility
will be positively correlated with foreign majority ownership with causation running from ownership
to volatility.

       The predictions regarding aggregate volatility are ambiguous because the theoretical effects of
aggregation rests on a plethora of assumptions about firm heterogeneity, sectoral co-movements and

   4
    We outline a model of such investors in Appendix C.
   5
    Comin and Mulani (2009) develop a model where availability of financing leads to more research and development,
causing firms to take on more risk; i.e., become more volatile.


                                                        3
so forth.6 This ambiguity underlines the importance of studying financial integration and output
volatility in a quantitative framework. Surprisingly, the empirical literature so far fails to deliver
a robust relationship—positive or negative—between financial integration and volatility at either
the firm level7 or the aggregate level.8

       We use firm-level accounting and ownership data from AMADEUS and region-level data from
Eurostat for the period 1996–2006. We focus on 15 EU countries and Switzerland, with 100+ regions
and 4.7 million unique firms (an unbalanced panel), in order to have a homogenous sample.9 Europe
provides an ideal “laboratory” because financial integration there has dramatically increased cross-
country ownership over the last fifteen years. Figure 2 displays foreign equity (FDI+portfolio)
and debt liabilities for the aggregate of our 16 countries during 1990–2006. The figure reveals a
better-than quadrupling of each liability component as a share of GDP. Foreign debt liabilities are
more than twice as large as equity liabilities but the rate of increase is higher for the latter leading
to a bigger increase in the share of equity as shown in the second panel.10

       Most of the firm-level variation in our data is cross-sectional and we start by running cross-
sectional regressions. Next, we undertake a panel analysis using firm-fixed effects to control for
unobserved heterogeneity. We find a significant positive relation between foreign ownership and
firm-level volatility in both cross-sectional and in panel-fixed effect frameworks. Firms with higher
levels of foreign ownership are more volatile and changes in foreign ownership over time are pos-

   6
      See the literature survey in the next section. An additional concern is that financial market integration within
countries may not be the same for different countries, as shown by Ekinci, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Sørensen (2009).
In this case, any analysis conducted at the country level, based on a representative agent framework, may not be
representative of typical agents or regions. It is important to separate the effects of within-country regional integration
from international financial integration because international and intra-national integration may be complements or
substitutes. Recently Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2007) emphasize the role of domestic financial development
for determining patterns of external borrowing and lending.
    7
      Thesmar and Thoenig (2004) find an increase in firm-level volatility for listed French companies following financial
deregulation, while Correa and Suarez (2007) find less volatile firm-level sales and employment in a sample of listed
firms after bank deregulation in the United States.
    8
      Bank deregulation dampened U.S. state-level business cycles; see Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004), while
increased financial openness lead to increased volatility of both consumption and output at the country level; see
Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003). Similarly, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2006) find increased volatility of
output and consumption as a result of trade and financial openness although equity-market liberalizations were
followed by a decrease in output and consumption volatility in some countries. di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009a),
using industry-level data, find that financial openness leads to an increase in aggregate volatility due to higher sectoral
specialization.
    9
      For our 16 countries, AMADEUS lists a total of 9.9 million firms of which many have very limited data. 4.7 million
firms have at least one year with reported assets and an outcome variable—either sales, revenue, or employment.
Appendix Table B-1 lists the exact number of firms available by year and variable.
   10
      Debt liabilities are non-contingent and hence will not be ideal for the purposes of risk diversification. Equity
liabilities are subject to large capital gains and losses which may explain the temporary decline after the “dot-com
bust” of the early years of the Millennium.



                                                            4
itively associated with changes in volatility. The effect is economically significant: if the largest
owner of a given firm is a foreign company, sales growth is 20 percent more volatile than the sample
mean. Volatility is also positively correlated with foreign minority ownership; however, the effect
is stronger for foreign ownership involving control, suggesting that this might be the channel of
causality.

       The micro-level patterns carry over to the macro level and are robust to using our aggregation
or actual “macro-regional” data from Eurostat which provides validation of our methodology. The
macro-level estimates from the regional analysis are economically significant. After removing the
effect of other regressors, the estimated coefficient to financial integration explain around 12 percent
of the variation in regional volatility.

       To study causality, we undertake two exercises at the firm level. First, we use propensity
score matching methods to obtain a sample of domestic firms with no foreign ownership that are
observationally similar to the firms with foreign ownership. Combining these firms with our firms
with foreign ownership and repeating the regressions we obtain similar results. Second, we find
that lagged foreign ownership predicts changes in volatility. While possibly such patterns could be
non-causal, the results are consistent with a causal effect of foreign ownership on volatility.

       At the regional level, we obtain evidence of causality exploiting variation from the Financial
Services Action Plan of the EU (FSAP) launched in 1999 by the European Commission to integrate
EU financial markets. The FSAP focuses on financial services, securities regulation, and corporate
governance and was implemented during the following five years. Each member state transposed
these policies into national laws at different times.11

       We argue that country-level financial harmonization policies effect regions differently depending
on their level of social capital which we proxy by measures of trust obtained from responses in the
European Social Survey. These measures predict many financial decisions according to Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2004, 2009)—of particular relevance is their 2004 finding that individuals
in high-trust regions are more likely to hold stock and their 2009 finding that savers invest in
countries that they trust. While these papers consider the side of investors, a similar pattern can
be expected when looking at the hosting economy. High social capital regions will likely to be more
receptive to foreign investments, especially because capital owners in these regions are themselves

  11
    The coding of these EU-wide policies comes from Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Peydró (forthcoming) who
find a positive association between implemented harmonization policies and bilateral financial integration of EU
countries.




                                                       5
more diversified.12

         We instrument time-varying regional financial integration—based on weighted average of foreign
ownership—with regional trust interacted with country-wide financial laws. We find that a one-
standard-deviation change in the instrument (corresponding to three laws implemented in a region
with average trust) results in an increase in regional financial integration of about 35 percent
while the second-stage estimates imply that financial integration may explain about a third of the
variation in volatility across regions.

         The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 describes our data
and variable definitions. Section 4 discusses our empirical specification and presents our results.
Section 5 concludes.



2         Aggregate Volatility: Literature

Higher firm-level volatility does not necessarily imply larger aggregate fluctuations. Predicting
theoretically how micro-level volatility affects aggregate fluctuations requires assumptions on the
patterns of correlation between the firm-level shocks. For example, in the Obstfeld (1994) model,
more risk-taking by firms will affect aggregate fluctuations only if firm-level shocks are correlated
such that shocks do not average out.13 Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, and Yosha (2003) find a positive
effect of risk sharing on industrial specialization using regional data. However, it is possible that
a higher level of sectoral specialization is associated with lower co-movement between sectors, as
argued by Koren and Tenreyro (2007). In this case specialization may lead to lower aggregate
volatility. Another mechanism that will create dependence between firm-level shocks is Caballero
and Engel (1999) where aggregate investment fluctuations are born out by “lumpy” firm-level
investments with adjustment costs.14

         If firm-level shocks are caused by independent firm-level innovations, on the other hand, the law-

    12
      Another mechanism might be at work through the organizational structure of the firm as shown by Bloom, Sadun,
and Van Reenen (2009). They argue that areas with higher trust specialize in industries that rely on decentralization
allowing more efficient firms to grow in scale. It is plausible there will be more foreign investment in such areas as
well.
   13
      An example could be a region where most activity is in a certain industry such as Alaska which is highly dependent
on oil. If the risk of oil-price shocks is shared with outsiders, more firms will be willing to undertake investments
in oil-related industries and if more firms are in the same (oil) industry aggregate (oil) shocks result in aggregate
volatility.
   14
      Recently, Bloom, Floetotto, and Jaimovich (2009) propose that time-varying uncertainty combined with micro
rigidities can have important general equilibrium effects. If a change in foreign ownership leads to a change in
uncertainty across a firms this may in turn impact aggregate volatility.


                                                           6
of-large numbers makes such shocks irrelevant in the aggregate assuming the economy consists of a
large number of small firms. The model of Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997) implies that integration
may lead to a larger number of smaller firms.15

         Firm-level shocks may also carry over to the aggregate level if firm-sizes follow a power law, or
fat-tailed distribution. In this case, a few large firms can drive aggregate volatility as suggested by
Gabaix (2009).16

         Finally, aggregate correlations between financial integration and volatility may be determined
by how aggregate foreign capital flows respond to aggregate shocks. The multi-region extension of
the Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) model by Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004) predicts, on the one
hand, a positive association between financial integration and state business cycles if negative shocks
are associated with loss of collateral value of firms in a region. In this case, foreign lenders may
contract capital provision in bad times (and vice versa in good times), exacerbating fluctuations. On
the other hand, if negative shocks affect the supply of credit while having little effect on collateral,
foreign lenders will supply scarce capital in times where local credit contracts cannot, smoothing
fluctuations.

         All said, the literature regarding aggregate shocks fails to deliver robust predictions and findings
regarding the effect of financial integration on volatility.17 We believe that in order to estimate
the effect of financial integration on aggregate fluctuations, one must first pin down the effect of
foreign ownership on firm-level volatility.



3         Data and Construction of Variables

We construct a unique data set composed of firm-level observations from the AMADEUS database
(Analyze Major Databases from European Sources), provided by Bureau van Dijk Electronic Pub-
lishing (BvD), and region-level observations corresponding to the Nomenclature of Territorial Units

    15
      Black and Strahan (2002), Kerr and Nanda (2007), and Cetorelli and Strahan (2006) find an increase in the
number of firms and a decrease in the average size of firms as a result of various financial innovations.
   16
      Gabaix provides evidence of fat-tailed distributions for the United States while di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009b)
find evidence of fat tails using firm-level data from AMADEUS/ORBIS for several countries.
   17
      The evidence on the co-evolution of the firm- and aggregate-level volatility is also mixed. There has been a
significant decline in aggregate volatility in the United States and in most other industrial countries over the last
thirty years, (e.g., McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), and Stock and Watson (2003)). But findings regarding U.S.
firm-level volatility during the same period are not conclusive: Chaney, Gabaix, and Philippon (2002) find increased
volatility of sales and employment while Davis and Kahn (2008) and Davis Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2007)
find declining firm-level volatility.



                                                           7
for Statistics of Europe (NUTS-2), provided by Eurostat. We focus on 16 countries: Austria, Bel-
gium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom which gives us a fairly homogenous sample.
The time coverage of each firm is a subset of the sample period 1996–2006, leading to an unbalanced
panel.

       The AMADEUS database comes in two modules: AMADEUS Financials, which provides finan-
cial information—both balance-sheet and off-balance sheet items such as income statements and
profit and loss accounts—and AMADEUS Ownership, which provides information on foreign and
domestic owners of each firm. Data on ownership are available biennially since 2000. For each
firm, we have locational information which allows us to assign firm-level data from AMADEUS to
Eurostat’s NUTS-2 level regions.


3.1       Firm-Level Data and Variables

From the AMADEUS Financials database, we draw firm-level information for 1996–2006 requiring
that firms have at least one of the three outcome variables non-missing (sales, operating revenue,
or employment) in a given year.18 We combine these data with data on foreign ownership from
the AMADEUS Ownership database, using firm IDs. During this process, we loose firms for which
data are not available in both samples, as documented in Appendix Table B-1.

       We work with two types of samples. In the permanent firm sample over a specified period, say,
2000–2006, we keep all firms with outcomes non-missing in every year. In the sample of all firms,
we allow firms to have missing outcomes at the beginning or the end of any given regression sample
but we drop firms that have “holes” in the time-series. In other words, we allow firms to disappear
or appear; but not appear, disappear, and reappear.

       Figure 3 presents the distribution, with the number of firms on the vertical axis, of the logarithm
of the firm-level operating revenue for four years and Figure 4 shows total assets and other outcomes
for 2006. Assets, sales, and operating revenue are measured in euros while employment is in persons.
The distribution of these (logged) variables does not change much over time and is very close to
normal; i.e., the distribution of the data before the log-transformation is very close to log-normal.
One noticeable thing is the skewed distribution of employment with many small firms with as

  18
    While the Financials database reports financial information over 1996–2008, the best firm coverage is for 2001–
2006. Delays in financial reporting make the database incomplete for later years while earlier years have relatively
few firms.



                                                         8
little as one employee (lawn mowers, painters, house repairs, etc.). To limit the potential impact
of outliers, we winsorize variables before performing our empirical analysis (Figure 4 displays the
distribution of assets both before and after winsorizing).

Volatility Measures

       We calculate firm-level volatility using three different outcomes: firm sales, operating revenue,
and number of employees. Operating revenue is sales plus other revenues such as interest. For
robustness and comparability with previous work, we experiment with three different measures of
volatility. We follow the literature on firm-level volatility, which mostly focuses on large publicly
traded firms, and use the standard deviation of firm outcome growth (“sd”) as our first measure.19
The distributions of (winsorized) standard deviations of sales and operating revenue are displayed
in Figure 5. The distributions are fairly close to normal except for the pile-ups at the points of
winsorizing.

       For small firms, measures based on standard deviations may have bad properties because, say,
a firm growing from 1 to 2 employees in a given year will have a growth rate of 100 percent and
such large growth rates some years but not in others will lead to correspondingly large standard
deviations. Because we have many small private firms, we use the coefficient of variation (“cv”)
as our second measure of volatility.

       These measures are well-suited for cross-sectional analysis or for a panel analysis where there
are enough time-series observations to be able to calculate time-varying standard deviations (or
coefficients of variation) over “rolling windows.” Given our limited time-series dimension (ten years
of accounting data and only four years of ownership data), we construct a year-by-year volatility
measure that can be used for panel-data analysis. We follow Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004)
and construct a year-by-year measure of volatility as follows. First, we regress firm-level outcome
growth on firm-fixed effects and year-fixed effects:

                                          Yit − Yit−1
                                                      = φi + γt + vit .                                           (1)
                                             Yit−1

       The residuals vit reflect how much outcome growth differs from average (across firms) growth in
year t and from the average (over time) growth of firm i. For each firm, we use the absolute value
of these residuals as our time-varying volatility measure: sdt ≡ |vit |. Intuitively, the sdt measure

  19
    We calculate firm outcome growth as a rate of change (rather than log-differences since at the firm level, growth-
rates are so large that the usual logarithmic approximation sometimes is a bad approximation to the growth-rate.


                                                          9
is the one year equivalent of the standard deviation measure, sd.20

Foreign Ownership

       The AMADEUS Ownership database contains detailed information on firms’ owners for both
listed and private firms including name, country of residence, and type (e.g., bank, industrial
or financial company). The database refers to each record of ownership as an “ownership link”
and BvD traces a link between two entities even when the ownership percentage is very small
(sometimes less than 1 percent). For listed firms, very small stock holders are typically unknown.21
At the firm-level, we compute Foreign Ownership (FO) as follows. For a firm i, FOi is the sum of all
percentages of direct ownership by foreigners as reported in AMADEUS. For example, if a Company
A has three foreign owners with stakes 10 percent, 15 percent, and 35 percent, respectively, FO for
this company is 60 percent. Owners of unknown origin (typically small) are assigned to the home
country.

       Figure 6 presents the distribution of foreign ownership for different years. The distribution is
concentrated around 0 with less than 1 percent of firms 100 percent foreign owned. In order to get
a clearer picture, Figure 7 presents the distribution of foreign ownership for the subset of firms with
strictly positive foreign ownership. There is a noticeable spike in the number of firms around 50
percent ownership which likely reflects the desire of large investors to obtain a controlling interest
over 50 percent.

Other Measures of Ownership

       We measure each firm’s Foreign Minority Ownership (FMO) by computing the sum of all
percentages of foreign direct ownership after excluding the largest stake in the company; Domestic
Minority Ownership (DMO) is computed analogously, for domestic owners. If a Company A has
two foreign owners with stakes 50 percent and 15 percent, and two domestic owners with stakes
25 percent and 10 percent, the largest owner for this company is foreign (with stake 50 percent),
FMO is 15 percent, and DMO is 35 percent. We define a binary variable Largest Owner is Foreign

  20
     Using data from the ZEPHYR database, we dropped firms involved in a merger or acquisition when the merger
resulted in spuriously high growth for the acquirer. The number of firms involved in M&A activity as defined in
ZEPHYR is, however, a small fraction of our sample so our results do not depend on whether we drop such firms or
not.
  21
     Countries have different rules for when the identity of a minority owner needs to be disclosed; for example, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, and Sweden demand that listed firms disclose all owners with more than a five percent
stake, while disclosure is required at three percent in the UK, and at two percent in Italy. See Schouten and Siems
(2009).




                                                           10
(LOF) taking the value unity if the largest owner is foreign and zero otherwise.22

    Figure 8 shows the distribution of foreign ownership for the sample of firms where the largest
owner is foreign. Not surprisingly, the majority of these firms have a foreign ownership share of
100 percent. Few of the firms have a foreign ownership share under 40 percent and there is a spike
around 50 percent.

    Figure 9 presents the distribution of FMO and DMO in 2006. Most companies have a very small
degree of minority ownership and firms are more diversified domestically than internationally, an
observation that is consistent with the home bias literature. The upper right graph shows that
among all firms with non-zero foreign ownership, the amount of foreign minority ownership is
concentrated at ownership shares up to 20 percent. Domestic minority owners’ share (DMO)
exhibits much more variation as can be seen from the lower right panel. Overall we have companies
with very diffused ownership as can be detected from the histograms, where largest owner might
be owning 1.1 percent, and the rest 98.9 percent is all owned by minority owners.

    Finally, we use the number of foreign and domestic owners, respectively, listed in AMADEUS as
alternative measures of ownership. The number of owners can also be thought as a concentration
measure.

Firm-Level Controls

    We use firms’ total assets as a size control because large firms potentially are better able to
smooth shocks through averaging of shocks to different products, processes, etc. We control for
firm age because young firms tend to be more volatile.


3.2    Region-Level Data and Variables

We use regional NUTS-2 level data for 100+ regions from our 16 countries. Countries with only
one NUTS-2 region during the years of our analysis, such as Denmark, are left out in the regional
analysis.

Regional Volatility Measures

    We measure regional volatility in three ways. First, we use volatility of the median firm in the
region. Second, we aggregate firm-level outcomes to the regional level and calculate the volatility

  22
     In the rare case of a tie between the largest foreign and the largest domestic investor, we assign the value 1 to
the LOF-dummy.


                                                         11
of the aggregated outcomes. Third, we calculate regional volatility using data on regional output
from Eurostat. We use nominal GDP per capita in euros, deflated by national CPI.23 Volatility is
calculated from formulas similar to those used at the firm level.

Deep Financial Integration

      Our measure of deep financial integration is calculated using firm-level measures of foreign own-
ership aggregated to the regional level. We have different firm-level foreign ownership variables, such
as total amount of foreign ownership (F O), largest-owner-is-foreign dummy (LOF ), and foreign
minority ownership (F M O) and our regional equivalents—proxies for regional financial integration
which we label F I, F I (majority), and F I (minority). For the domestic integration we use F I (do-
mestic). All these regional variables are the asset-weighted averages of the corresponding firm-level
ownership measures:
                                                    X
                                            FIj =         wij FOij ,                                 (2)
                                                     i

where FOij is the percentage foreign ownership at the firm-level for a firm i located in region j,
and wij represents the weight for firm i in region j. We find the sum of total assets in region
               P
j, TOASTj =      i TOASij , where TOASij is the total assets of company i and use as weights
wij = TOASij /TOASTj .

      Figure 10 displays distributions of ownership for small, medium, and large firms for two regions,
Scotland and Bavaria (Bayern), in 2006. The upper panel displays the distribution of direct foreign
ownership FOi . In Bavaria about 30,000 firms have foreign ownership shares less than 20 percent—
of these more than 20,000 are small, about 5,000 are medium size, and the rest are large. The
majority of companies within each size group have no foreign owners. The mid-panel shows that
the share owned by the largest owner most commonly is 100 percent. The lower panel shows,
for Bavaria, the distribution of foreign and domestic minority ownership; i.e., when the ownership
share of the largest owner is excluded and it appears that foreign minority owners typically hold
very small stakes while the stakes of domestic minority owners are quite evenly distributed.

Regional Controls

      We compute average firm size in a region as the sum of total assets divided by the number of
firms. This variable partially controls for selection problems in AMADEUS where some countries
are less likely to collect data for smaller firms. We proxy region size by the sum of total assets of the

 23
      We use the Harmonized Consumer Price Index from Eurostat.


                                                         12
firms in that region and, as another control, use annual average population series from Eurostat.
It is important to control for region size because volatility may be lower in large regions due to
averaging over a larger number of firms.


3.3    Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 shows mean, standard deviation, min and max values of our variables both at the firm
level as well as at the regional level. The statistics displayed are for filtered and winsorized data.
Volatility has a mean of 0.34 with a standard deviation of 0.62 with a maximum of 4.79 and a
minimum very close to 0. Foreign ownership is 1.26 percent on average with a standard deviation
of about 11. Foreign minority ownership is typically small while domestic minority ownership is
larger at 4.13 percent with a large standard error of about 14 percent. Average firm assets are
about 3.7 million euros but the standard deviation of assets is very large and the (winsorized)
maximum is 43 billion euros. Average assets of foreign owned firms are much larger, 32 million and
maximum is 24 billion. Clearly foreign owned firms are larger firms in general. Firm age is 18 year
on average with a large standard deviation and a maximum of 907.24

    About 4 percent of all firms have some foreign ownership while 7 percent are exporters and 0.1
percent are listed. Exporters appear to have lower volatility on average, maybe due to diversified
markets. Of firms with some foreign ownership, 27.1 percent are fully owned by foreigners while
18.6 percent are “subsidiaries;” i.e., firms with only one foreign owner. More than half of the firms
with some foreign ownership have more than 50 percent foreign ownership.

    Panel B displays region-level statistics. The time varying volatility measure, using AMADEUS
data, has a mean of 2 percent with a standard deviation of 3 percent, a minimum near 0 and a
maximum of 24 percent. Average volatility and its dispersion is lower when calculated from Eurostat
regional GDP data. On average, in a region about 8 percent of companies’ assets are majority-
owned by foreigners, where we have one region having more than 50 percent of assets controlled
by foreign majority owners. Asset-weighted foreign minority ownership is small on average while
domestic minority ownership is 5 percent of assets in a region on average. The average amount of
assets in a given region is about 26 billion euros. We also report statistics to gauge the importance

  24
     We checked on some of the firms of very high age and while we cannot with certainly rule out typos, it appears that
some European firms indeed are extremely old. The oldest firm is an Italian publishing house in Rome“A.T.S. ITALIA
EDITRICE S.R.L.” while the hotel “HOTEL PICHLMAYRGUT GMBH & CO KG” in Austria is incorporated in
1117 according to AMADEUS. The latter date corresponds to the date given on the cote of arms displayed at the
hotel’s WEB-page.



                                                          13
of the foreign owned firms for regional volatility. These foreign-owned firms make up a significant
share of regional economic activity as shown; 17 percent of the regional assets are owned by firms
that have some foreign ownership in a typical region with the maximum being 73 percent for one
region.



4     Empirical Analysis

We start by examining the relation between firm-level ownership patterns and firm-level volatility.
We focus on the sd measure for cross-sectional regressions and the sdt measure for the panel
regressions. For firm-level outcomes, we use operating revenue and sales, and we briefly show
results for employment for completeness. Sales are typically used to study volatility but we prefer
operating revenue because sales are not available for firms in Denmark, Ireland, Norway, and the
UK. Employment is less appropriate for our purposes since many European countries have labor
regulations aimed at limiting employment volatility.


4.1   Firm-Level Specifications and Results

We regress volatility of firm outcomes on indicators of foreign and domestic ownership and firm
size and age. We include country (or region) and sector dummies implying that these regressions
solely exploit firm-level variation. Our specification is in log-log form in order to limit the influence
of firms with extremely high levels of volatility. The firm-level regression data are winsorized at
the 99 percent level to remove large outliers.

Cross-Sectional Regressions

    For the cross-sectional specifications, we estimate models using various samples for calculating
volatility and foreign ownership. The majority of the results are presented for firm-level volatility
measured over 2002–2006 and ownership variables measured in 2002. Our regressions use two basic
specifications:
                     log(V OLijc ) = µc + µs + α log(1 + F Oijc ) + X0ijc δ + ijc ,                 (3)

and


 log(V OLijc ) = µc + µs + α LOFijc + β log(1 + F M Oijc ) + γ log(1 + DM Oijc ) + X0ijc δ + ijc , (4)




                                                   14
where V OLijc is one of our cross-sectional volatility measures for firm i in region j in country c.
µc is a country or region-specific constant and µs is a set of industry dummies that are based on
the firm’s primary industry code at the 2-digit NACE level.F Oijc is percent foreign ownership,
LOFijc is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the largest owner is foreign, F M Oijc is percent foreign
minority ownership, and DM Oijc is domestic minority ownership. We take the logarithm of the
ownership data to make the distribution less skewed—the number 1 is added because most firms
have 0 foreign ownership. X0ijc is a vector of controls.

   Table 2 displays the results of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of equation (3) in
panel A and equation (4) in panel B, using the sample of “all firms.” We display results in each
panel using sd for all our outcomes—sales, operating revenue, and employment. In panel A, we
find that foreign ownership has a positive and highly significant effect on volatility of all three
firm-level outcomes, regardless of using country- or region-fixed effects. When we divide the foreign
ownership into largest owner and minority owners in panel B, we find that firms for whom the
largest owner is foreign have significantly higher volatility of sales and operating revenue than firms
for which the largest owner is domestic (with t-statistics of about 20). The estimated coefficient
implies that foreign ownership is of economic importance: the coefficient of about 0.2 implies that
firms whose largest owner is foreign has 20 percent higher volatility. Foreign minority ownership
is associated with higher volatility while domestic ownership is associated with lower volatility.
The coefficients to these regressors are also highly significant although the economic significance
appears smaller with coefficients around 0.04 for foreign minority ownership and –0.02 for domestic
minority ownership. A coefficient of 0.04 implies that an increase in foreign minority ownership
of 50 percentage points will increase volatility by about 2 percent. Large firms (as measured
by assets) are less volatile with strong statistical and economic significance. Finally, firm age is
highly statistically significant, although the elasticity of –0.01 makes this variable less important
in economic terms. While the results are very similar for sales and operating revenue, they differ
quite a bit for employment. The foreign ownership variables are barely significant—the dummy is
significant at the 5 percent level, which is not impressive given the sample sizes, and foreign minority
ownership is insignificant. Domestic minority ownership has a negative effect of the size found for
sales and operating revenue, with very large statistical significance. The elasticity for age is similar
to the age elasticities of sales and operating revenue but the elasticity of employment volatility with
respect to firm size is very large at about –0.20. Large firms clearly tends to avoid employment
volatility. When we use region-fixed effects the effect of foreign ownership on employment volatility
turns out to be insignificant.


                                                  15
   The OLS results are driven by small firms because there are many more small than large firms;
however, large firms may be more important for macroeconomic volatility. We perform Weighted
Least Squares (WLS) regressions, weighting the observations by log-assets, but the WLS-results
are very similar and we do not tabulate them.

   Table 3 explores robustness to the choice of volatility measure and to the samples of firms
used. We show results for operating revenue for which sample is largest—the results for sales are
similar and therefore not displayed. The two left-most columns consider the volatility measures,
cv or sdt . The latter measure is constructed for use in panel-data regressions but we wish to
ascertain beforehand that the change of measure in itself doesn’t change the results. We find
very similar coefficients for these volatility measures, with highly significant positive coefficients to
foreign ownership and negative coefficients to domestic ownership.

   Column (3) considers large firms—a sample closer to the samples used in many previous studies.
The impact of foreign ownership on volatility is somewhat smaller for these firms as we get a
coefficient of about 0.11 to the foreign ownership dummy compared to an estimate of about 0.21
in Table 2. Nonetheless, the value is still large in economic terms and the t-statistic remains huge
at about 10 even if the sample of large firms is much smaller at about 55,000. The coefficients to
other variables for ownership and age are also about half the size found for the full sample while
the coefficient to assets is much larger numerically at –0.16. The decline in volatility with size is
even accelerating as the firms get larger.

   One may worry that firms that enter or drop out of our sample are affecting the results so we
alternatively select “permanent” firms. These are firms for which operating revenue is available in
all years 2002–2006 with no missing values. The results, in column (4), are quite close to those
found for all firms and do not warrant further comments. The same is true for permanent large
firms in column (5) for which the results are quite similar to those of all large firms in column (3).

   Our results so far are strongly in agreement with our assumption that foreign investors invest in
more volatile firms and firms that are foreign owned are more willing to take risk than domestically
owned firms. We do not have a set of firm-level instruments which deliver “smoking gun” evidence
on causality but we proceed as follows in an attempt to advance on this issue.

Propensity Score Matching

   Propensity score matching addresses a self-selection problem arising if firms’ foreign-owned sta-
tus is non-random. In particular, systematic correlations between foreign-ownership and other firm



                                                   16
characteristics could lead to biased estimates. The matching procedure controls for this potential
selection bias by creating an appropriate control group of domestic firms and repeating our re-
gressions using this, smaller, matched sample. This is particularly relevant in our case as only a
minority of firms have foreign owners. The matching proceeds as follows.

       We match domestic firms with no foreign ownership to the set of firms with non-zero foreign
ownership. The matching is done for the year 2002. The match is based on the estimated “propen-
sity score,” the logistic probability of having some foreign ownership. We allow the probabilities to
depend on firm age, total assets, country- and industry-dummies at the 2-digit NACE level. The
coefficients obtained from the logistic estimation reveals, not surprisingly, that firm size is the most
important determinant of foreign ownership (with a t-statistic of 175), age is a negative predictor of
foreign ownership (with a t-statistic of around 9), and certain countries and sectors are significantly
more likely to attract foreign ownership.

       Based on the estimated propensity scores we select the sample of firms with no foreign ownership
which best match the sample of firms with non-zero foreign ownership. We apply nearest neighbor
propensity score matching without replacement, a procedure which matches each firm with foreign
ownership to the firm without foreign ownership that have the closest propensity scores.25 In
Figure 11, we display the frequency distributions of estimated propensity scores for firms with non-
zero foreign ownership, for the matched firms with no foreign ownership, and for the un-matched
firms with no foreign ownership. The sample of matched firms with no foreign ownership displays
a distribution of propensity scores which is very similar that of the firms with foreign ownership
indicating that these are observationally similar. Average age and average size are very close in the
matched samples.26

       The results for the volatility regression using the matched sample, in Table 4, indicate that our
findings are not spurious due to certain observable characteristics being different for foreign owned
firms since matching results are very similar to those obtained using the full sample. The average
effect of foreign ownership is estimated to be about 0.1—close to our un-matched estimates. We
have 24,697 firms with foreign ownership in the matched sample resulting in matched sample of
49,294 firm.

“Granger Causality”

  25
    We use Stata’s psmatch2 command, ver 3.0.0 written by Leuven and Sianesi (2003).
  26
    The mean of log-assets in the sample with foreign ownership is 15.29 and in the matched sample of firms with
no foreign ownership is 15.33, compared to 13.69 in the sample of unmatched firms. Formally doing the balancing
tests, we find that 40 out of 48 variables that we match on pass the test as 5 percent level.


                                                      17
       We explore the dynamic patterns in the data. We verified that our results are robust to further
lagging of the ownership variables but since those results are very similar to those displayed we
do not tabulate them. Table 5 asks the harder question, if volatility tends to increase more in
firms that are foreign owned. We calculate yearly volatility for 2005–2006 and for 2003–2004 and
use the change in volatility as the dependent variable which we regress on 2002 ownership. We
display results for both the sd and cv measures and find that firms whose largest owner is foreign
increase volatility by about 5 percent over a two-year period. This effect is estimated with statistical
significance at the 10 percent level. The other regressors, except for firm age, are not significant
(older firms are, somewhat surprisingly estimated to increase volatility more, although the size of
this effect appears negligible in terms of economic relevance). These results are consistent with
more diversified owners allowing firms to take more risk and hence suggest a causal effect from
foreign ownership to volatility—although it should be kept in mind that such “Granger causality”
regressions are not the final word on causality. It appears that although domestic investors a priori
prefers less volatile firms, once firms has obtained domestic diversification they are not averse to
increasing volatility.

Robustness Regressions

       We show a large number of robustness exercises in Appendix Tables A-1 and A-2. In the first
column of Table A-1, we use average values of the independent variables over all years for which
data are available for a given firm (including the smaller year 2000 sample). The results are quite
similar to those of the first column of Table 2 except that the effect of size, which isn’t our focus,
is estimated to be smaller. In column (2), we regress volatility calculated for 2004–2006 on 2004
ownership which gives us a much larger sample of 1.3 million observations but with a more noisy
volatility measure. The results are similar to those found earlier with the estimated coefficients
slightly smaller (0.17 versus 0.21 for the foreign ownership dummy) but with similar statistical
significance. Clearly, our cross-sectional results are highly robust to how the sample is chosen.

       In columns 3–5 of Table A-1, we include average firm-level growth during 2002–2006. Growth is
a potentially important variable as many models stress a trade-off between volatility and growth.27
We find that growth is highly significant with a t-statistic of 120 and a magnitude of high economic
importance consistent with a trade-off between high growth and high volatility of sales. The results

  27
    Arnold and Javorcik (2009) use propensity score matching combined with a difference-in-difference approach to
establish that foreign ownership leads to significant productivity improvements in acquired plants. See also Chari,
Chen, and Dominguez (2009).



                                                        18
are quite similar for operating revenue and employment. The coefficient to foreign ownership
is virtually unchanged whether growth is included or not. Thus, we prefer to not include the
endogenous growth variable in our main regressions.

       Appendix Table A-2, using sales, reports a large number of sensitivity regressions. One might
worry that trade is an omitted variable or the effect of foreign ownership differs among exporters and
non-exporters. There might also be issues such as transfer pricing where multinational companies
setting up exporter affiliates (which will show up as foreign owned firms) for the purpose of paying
less taxes on imported inputs. Hence, we run our regressions for these two samples obtaining
similar results. We also drop listed firms and subsidiaries to examine if our results are driven by
these certain firms. We want to ascertain that our results are not driven by 100 percent foreign
owned companies, because Alfaro and Charlton (2009) show that foreign subsidiaries often produce
highly specialized inputs for their parents. These robustness exercises show that our results remain
unaffected. We exclude government-owned firms since these firms might be in strategic industries.
We use a sample of limited liability companies since these companies are all required to file and
hence we have minimum selection issues. We run our regressions on a sample of firm with non-zero
foreign ownership. We split the sample into firms in countries with good and bad coverage. Finally
we report a regression with only 9 Central and Eastern European countries to examine whether
the effect of foreign ownership on volatility differs in a developing country context.

       The results are amazingly robust to all of these sample adjustments. In the case of “foreign
owned” which is a sample of firms with some foreign ownership, the coefficient to the foreign
ownership dummy is smaller (although still strongly significant) while the coefficient to foreign
minority ownership becomes close to zero.28 This result is, however, not surprising as we remove
a lot of the variation in foreign ownership across firms by dropping every single fully domestically
owned firm. We repeat the analysis for operating revenue, but the results are similar and not
reported.

Panel Regressions
       For our panel regressions we use permanent firms only and run the specification:

 log(SDijct ) = µi + µt + µc · µt + µs · µt + α LOFijct + β log(1 + F M Oijct ) + γ log(1 + DM Oijct ) + X0ijct δ + ijct , (5)


 where SDijct is the time-varying volatility measure for firm i in region j in country c at time

  28
    While we have 40,000 firms with some foreign ownership, we have less in the regressions, in particular because
we drop financial firms.


                                                             19
t. µi is a firm-specific constant, µt is a time-fixed effect and µc · µt and µs · µt are country×year
(or region×year) and industry×year fixed effects. The time-varying volatility measure allows us to
track year-to-year changes in volatility and hence the purpose of these regressions is to examine
if the results still hold when we include firm-fixed effects which control for firm-level unobserved
heterogeneity. We also include country×year and industry×year dummies—if foreigns invest in
countries/regions or sectors that they correctly anticipate will be volatile over the relevant years,
the interacted dummies will absorb the impact of this. Of course, by including these effects we
stack the cards against finding results because some sectors may become more volatile because they
have gained in foreign diversification.

   Table 6 shows the results. The first column in Table 6 includes year dummies but no other
dummies and the results are similar to those of Table 2 with the exception of domestic cross-
ownership which is now estimated to be positive—an estimate which reverses sign when we include
dummy variables for country×year and industry×year. This may reflect that domestic investors
prefer certain sectors. Overall, the first two columns establish that the results found in the cross-
sectional regressions are quite robust to the change in measure and inclusion of country×year and
industry×year fixed effects.

   The focus of Table 6 is columns (3) and (4), where firm-specific fixed effects are included—
these fixed effects remove permanent differences between firms and therefore remove most of the
variation in the data. The results are then driven by changes over time and reveal if increasing
foreign ownership goes hand-in-hand with increasing volatility. It does: the largest foreign owner
dummy is significant at the 5 percent level with a positive sign although the coefficient is smaller
than found in the cross-section. The economic effect is not that big but considering the limited
time variation this coefficient is identified from, this result is about as strong as one could expect.
Firm size remains significant indicating that volatility becomes smaller when assets grow.

   The largest-owner-is-foreign dummy variable has limited time variation and we show results, in
columns (4) and (5), using overall foreign ownership as our regressor of interest. This variable is
significant at the 1 percent level for all firms. The estimated coefficient is an elasticity of 0.01 which
is not large in economic terms but the point of the regression is to make the qualitative point that
increasing foreign ownership and increasing volatility goes hand-in-hand, not just cross-sectionally
but also for firms over time. A positive effect of foreign ownership on volatility in these regressions
points to foreign diversification allowing for more risk taking, although these results do not rule
out that foreigners invest based on expected future volatility growth. The impact of firm size is
estimated to be negative for all firms.

                                                   20
   In column (5), we include the number of domestic owners, which we interpret as a measure
of ownership concentration. The results indicate a negative effect—as found in cross-section—
for domestic diversification with a t-statistic that is significant at the 10 (near 5) percent level.
For completeness, in columns (6) and (7), we include the concentration of foreign ownership as
measured as the number of foreign owners. This variable is insignificant in column (6), but this
is explained by the results in column (7) which includes both the foreign ownership share and the
number of foreign owners. The former is now more significant than found in columns (4) and (5)
and the latter is negatively significant. This pattern is consistent with foreign owned firms being
more volatile. However, this partial effect gets weaker when the number of foreign owners are high
for given total foreign ownership share. Possibly, this is due to foreign minority owners having a
hard time being influential, maybe due to the cost of traveling abroad for meetings. These results
suggest that indeed when a low number of foreign shareholders own a controlling stake, they might
have a bigger say in the production decision of the firm, inducing more risk-taking.

   Overall, the results of Tables 5 and 6 are consistent with a direction of causality going from
foreign ownership to volatility as one would expect given the strong cross-sectional results. To
make stronger statements on causality, one needs instrumental variables.


4.2    Region-Level Specifications and Results

We now shift attention to region-level regressions with much lower degrees of freedom. We construct
region-level deep financial integration measures by aggregating our firm-level ownership variables.
These are noisy measures because we don’t have all the firms in any given region and this will
tend to attenuate significance in our regressions. In order to minimize this measurement error, we
use only regions that have observations for 50 or more firms. As before, we restrict ourselves to
permanent firms so changes in the ownership variable will not be due to some large firms switching
in or out of the sample.

Median Volatility

   We first ask if average foreign ownership affects median volatility, which we interpret as the
typical level of volatility for a firm in a given region. We expect to find results similar to those at the
firm level. We might find no significant result; for example, if variation in ownership is concentrated
in a small section of the distribution which do not include the median firm. We estimate the relation




                                                    21
between regional financial integration and median volatility using the specification:

                         M ED
                   log(SDjct  ) = µj + µt + µc · µt + α log(1 + F I)jct + X0jct δ + jct ,                         (6)

        M ED is the median firm volatility in region j in country c, µ is a region-specific constant,
where SDjct                                                           j

and µt is a year-specific constant, and µc · µt are country×year dummies. In this regression, F Ij
refer to the asset-weighted average percent foreign ownership in the region. We will also investigate
the majority ownership based integration measure that is the asset weighted average of the largest
owner foreign dummy, which has the interpretation of the share of assets in a region that belongs
to firms whose largest owner is foreign. X0jt is a vector of regional controls.

       Table 7, panel A considers whether volatility of the median firm correlates with deep financial
integration; that is, the average level of foreign ownership in the region.29 The volatility of the
median firm is of some interest in itself but one of our goals in this paper is to examine how
aggregation affects the patterns of ownership and volatility across regions. The regression in Table 7
can be seen as a step towards this goal, as the ownership variable here is aggregated but the outcome
variable is not—such a regression will not give significant results unless the aggregation of ownership
shows variation across regions over time. There is a positive significant effect of financial integration
on the volatility of the typical firm with significance at the 10 percent level for the operating revenue
but not for sales. The coefficient is larger and significant for both outcomes when country×year
dummies are included in the right-most two columns.

       Panel B shows that the financial integration measure based on shares of largest foreign owners
is important for median volatility with statistical significance levels between 1 and 5 percent when
we include country×year effects, while the shares owned by minority owners and domestic owners
are not robustly estimated.

Aggregate Volatility

       The volatility of aggregated (by us) and aggregate (Eurostat) outcomes may or may not show
the same patterns as median volatility. For example, if the majority of variation for the firm-level
outcomes is distributed i.i.d. across firms and regions, aggregate volatility will be low and unlikely
to co-vary with average foreign ownership. Figure 12 compares the volatility of our aggregated data
and the Eurostat data. Both measures are high in 2001 and decline in 2002; the trend for both

  29
    Note that as regional size controls we have total number of firms, average firm size, and total assets and only two
of these variables are linearly independent. We choose to include the latter two in our regressions.



                                                          22
measures is downwards although Eurostat volatility has a peak in 2003 which is not found in the
AMADEUS aggregate. The volatility of the Eurostat output data is the lowest, which is intuitive
as this is the average over a much larger set of firms (including the government sector).

    We estimate the effect of regional financial integration on aggregate volatility using a specifica-
tion similar to the one used for median volatility:

                         AGG
                   log(SDjct ) = µj + µt + µc · µt + α log(1 + F I)jct + X0jct δ + jct ,                         (7)

        AGG is the time-varying standard deviation of aggregated firm outcome growth, (i.e., the
where SDjct
sum of, say, firm-level operating revenue, in 2005 constant prices) or the time-varying standard
deviation of Eurostat output. As before, µj is a region-specific constant, µt is a year-specific
constant, and µc · µt is a country×time dummy. F I is the asset-weighted average of the total
foreign ownership (or majority foreign ownership). X0jct is the vector of controls.

    The left-most four columns of Table 8 display results for the volatility of AMADEUS aggregated
outcomes while the right-most two columns display results for the volatility of regional GDP from
Eurostat. Using asset-weighted foreign ownership for financial integration we find a coefficient
of around 0.7 (0.635–0.862) with significance at 5 percent (1 percent for operating revenue when
country×year dummies are included).

    The variation in region-level financial integration, which is a weighted average of foreign own-
ership, is obviously smaller than the variation in firm-level foreign ownership so we evaluate the
economic significance of the coefficient by comparing the implied variation in volatility when finan-
cial integration moves from the 10th percentile to the 90th percentile, evaluated after controlling for
other regressors, in particular the dummy variables, to the actual variation in volatility.30 We find
that the 90-10 range of integration (after controlling for other regressors) explains 12 percent of the
90-10 percent range in the (raw) volatility data. The result for Eurostat volatility is similar with a
coefficient of 0.603 without the country×year dummies and 0.573 with. The statistical significance
is at the 1 percent and 10 percent level, respectively, and the economic significance is that, for the
last column, the 90-10 range of financial integration (after controlling for other regressors) explains
8 percent of the 90-10 range of volatility. The similarity of the Eurostat results to the results using
the AMADEUS aggregate is extremely reassuring because the Eurostat data contain the output of

  30
     If X90 and X10 denote the 90th and 10th percentile of the residual of log(1 + F I), respectively, m is mean log-
volatility, and the regression coefficient is α, we consider the predicted variation to be exp(m + α ∗ X90 ) − exp(m +
α ∗ X10 ). The variation need to be evaluated around the mean of log-volatility because the exponential function is
highly non-linear.


                                                         23
all establishments in a region while AMADEUS is a sample of firms. The main drawback of our
aggregation is that there are not a lot of firms in many regions and a few outliers can therefore
easily distort the results. Another issue is that the location of a firm’s headquarters may not indi-
cate where most of the firm’s output is produced. The similarity of the two sets of results indicates
strongly that our results are not spuriously driven by these issues. In the case of Eurostat volatility,
we, with high significance, find lower volatility in large populous regions, likely due to averaging
over a larger number of firms.


4.3      Endogeneity

It is important to know whether there is a causal effect of financial integration on volatility. We
attack this issue using a policy experiment, namely the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP)
of the EU. The FSAP was a major policy initiative aimed at removing regulatory and legislative
barriers in the financial sector. To achieve this goal, the FSAP was launched at the end of 1998 and
introduced a host of legislative-regulatory harmonization policies. The plan included 27 Directives
which are legal acts that do not become immediately enforceable in member countries which are
given time to adopt, modify, and eventually transpose the Directives into domestic law. This
transposition may take many years as some countries delay adaptation for various reasons.

       We use this time variation in the number of directives adapted to instrument our financial
integration measure—different directives are adopted at different times by different member coun-
tries. In order to obtain regional variation within countries, we interact the FSAP directives with
regional indicators of social capital, which we proxy with trust. We argue that country-level fi-
nancial harmonization policies effect regions differently depending on their distribution of trust.
This instrumental variable strategy is appealing because one can link policy changes in financial
sector with outcomes in the same industry. Our assumption is that the effect of these country-wide
policies on regional integration depends on the extent of the regional trust. The trust data come
from the European Social Survey and has been shown by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004,
2006, 2009) to predict many financial decisions.31

       Our instrument is the interaction of the level of regional trust with the index of financial
harmonization. Specifically, we use 3 different indictors of trust and 10 directives out of 27 that are

  31
    The European Social Survey were designed to enable cross-national, cross-cultural comparisons of values and
norms on a wide variety of topics and to monitor changes in values and attitudes across the globe. We take the
average of individual responses for each region.



                                                      24
related to easing restrictions on foreign ownership.32 Our index of financial harmonization will be
a sum of indicator variables where each indicator will be one in the year the particular directive is
adapted and after. The 3 indicators for regional trust are “trust in other people,” “general level of
trust,” and “trust in institutions.33 ” We use each of the trust variables interacted with the index
of financial harmonization as instruments.

       We first show results from a reduced form regression. We regress the standard deviation of
GDP per capita from Eurostat on our instrument. The reduced form estimates are proportional
to the causal effect of interest. We find a strong positive effect of our instrument regardless of
the trust variable used, see Table 9. The estimated coefficients to the instrument are significant
at the 5-10 percent level. It is highly reassuring that the estimated effect is very robust to which
trust measure is used. The reduced form coefficient to the instrument in the first column, to pick
one, implies that the 90-10 range of the instrument (after controlling for other regressors) explains
15 percent of the 90-10 range in the raw volatility data. The results are consistent with the OLS
findings and say that financial laws interacted with social capital, which can be interpreted more of
a structural measure of financial integration, having a statistical and economically significant effect
on volatility.

       Next, we proceed with 2SLS estimation. The bottom panel of Table 10 displays the first-
stage regression results. For either of the trust measures, the instrument predicts an increase in
deep financial integration across regions with high levels of significance at better than 1 percent.
The effect is also economically significant. A one-standard-deviation change in the instrument
(corresponding to 3 laws implemented in a region with average trust) will imply an increase in
regional financial integration of about 35 percent.34 The F-test for the exogenous instrument is
about 10 and satisfies the rule-of-thumb for instruments not being weak suggested by Stock and
Yogo (2002). Overall, the first-stage results are quite convincing. Figure 13 shows a strong first-
stage fit when we plot financial integration against our instrument.

       Financial integration is statistically significant in all the second-stage regressions with confidence
levels around 10 percent. Given that we have large number of dummy variables and limited time
variation, we find these results convincing—especially because of the robustness to measure of trust
is used. The estimated coefficients are large: between 1.97 and 2.44. Considering the 90-10 range

  32
     We exclude the directives that relate to banking integration. See Appendix B for details.
  33
     See Appendix B for the exact questions.
  34
     The standard deviation is about 1.5 and average trust is about 0.5. Multiplying 1.5 with a coefficient of around
0.7 results in a value of log(1 + F I) about 1 which corresponds to a value of F I of about 1.6, corresponding to 35
percent of the mean value of F I.


                                                         25
of instrumented financial integration after controlling for other regressors we find, picking the first
column, that the estimated coefficient of 2.44 implies that financial integration explains a large
share, 34 percent, of the 90-10 range of raw volatility. The fact that the IV results are larger than
OLS results suggests that the OLS results are biased downwards. This is the direction of bias one
should have expected given the possibility of classical measurement error in our regional financial
integration measure.

   The validity of our results rests on the exclusion restriction that the instruments do not affect
volatility directly but only through the effect of regional financial integration which is proxied by
the average level of foreign ownership. This restriction is plausible for two reasons: First, we use the
directives that relate specifically to increasing foreign ownership. Second, the dummy for adoption
of a directive turns on at the same time for all regions in a country, independently of volatility or
other characteristics of regions.


4.4   Reconciling the Results with the Macro Literature

Going back to Figure 1, our firm- and region-level results might be different from country-level
regressions for three reasons: First, the effect of financial integration on volatility might be different
for developed and developing countries and so far we have used a set of developed countries. Table 11
tackles this issue by repeating our estimation for the entire sample of the 25 EU countries, including
emerging economies, but the results are very similar to those of Table 2. This is also consistent
with the previously shown robustness result in Table A-2, where we did our regression only for 9
developing CEE countries.

   Second, our measure of financial integration (which is a weighted average of firm-level foreign
ownership) might capture a different aspect of financial integration than the standard country-level
measures used in Figure 1. Our measure is based on FDI and portfolio equity holdings and does
not include any debt liabilities. However, our measure is highly correlated with various standard
country-level measures of financial integration as shown in Table 12. The cross-country correlations
in panel A are 0.80 for both equity and total liabilities and the time-series correlations, displayed
for 8 random countries, are very high for most countries, especially considering the fact that the
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti measures are constructed in a quite different manner. In particular, the
large valuation movements in equity over the last two decades creates large variation in country
level asset-liability shares of GDP while our ownership shares do not, everything else equal, vary
with valuation.


                                                   26
    The third reason why our results might differ from the literature is classic identification problems
in country-level studies. At the aggregate level integration and volatility are determined simultane-
ously and both are affected by country-level omitted factors such as policy shocks. Industry-level
shocks and global factors may also contribute to spurious results at the country level. We can deal
explicitly with these type of identification problems in this paper. We therefore believe our results
show a more robust and well-identified effect of financial integration on volatility.



5    Conclusion

We uncovered a strong, highly significant, positive association between firm-level volatility and
foreign ownership. A firm whose largest owner is foreign is 20 percent more volatile. The positive
association between foreign ownership and volatility carries over to the regional level where our
results imply that financial integration can explain up to 15 percent of the variation in aggregate
volatility.

    Our results hold in both static and dynamic regressions with firm- and region-fixed effects. Our
results are, at the least, strongly consistent with a causal effect from foreign ownership to volatil-
ity using different identification techniques such as propensity score matching, dynamic patterns,
and IV-regressions. We argue that country-level studies deliver ambiguous results due to omitted
variables such as country- and industry-level shocks which we control for.

    Our IV-regressions exploit variation from a policy experiment, the Financial Services Action
Plan (FSAP) of the EU. The instrument is constructed by interacting the regional distribution of
social capital (measured as trust) with an index of financial harmonization, which is derived from
the transposition dates of the FSAP to country-level laws. Using this instrument, we find quite
strong support for a causal effect of deep financial integration on volatility—the IV-estimates imply
that variation in financial integration can explain 30 percent of the variation in aggregate volatility.

    Our results further suggest that some foreign investors purchase small stakes in domestic com-
panies for the purpose of diversification. Because such investors are diversified they are relatively
more willing to purchase shares of high-volatility firms. We sketch a simple mean-variance model of
foreign diversification in Appendix C with two otherwise symmetric countries with different volatil-
ities of aggregate output. However, a large share of foreign investment are due to investors—often
other firms—taking majority stakes in domestic companies. Because majority owners control pro-
duction, our results suggest that the causal effect of foreign ownership on volatility to a large extent



                                                  27
is due to foreign controlling majority owners being willing to engage in more risky production.

   Our results do not imply that financial integration is undesirable because of higher volatility.
Foreigners invest in high return-high variance projects which are likely to increase growth and
volatility can be seen as a side-effect. Further, theory suggests that financial integration reduces
consumption volatility because capital income, and possibly wage income, gets smoothed via diver-
sification. A promising area for future research is to examine this question using combined micro
and macro data.




                                                28
References


Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance? Risk, Diversifi-
     cation and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 105 (1997), 709–51.

Alfaro, Laura, and Andrew Charlton, “Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment,” American Eco-
     nomic Review 99 (2009), 2096–19.

Arnold, Jens Matthias and Beata S. Javorcik, “Gifted Kids or Pushy Parents? Foreign Direct In-
     vestment and Plant Productivity In Indonesia,” Journal of International Economics 79 (2009),
     42–53.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, “Growth Volatility and Financial
     Liberalization,” Journal of International Money and Finance 25 (2006), 370–03.

Black, Sandra E. and Philip E. Strahan, “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability,” Jour-
     nal of Finance 57 (2002), 2807–33.

Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, “The Organization of Firms Across Coun-
     tries,” NBER Working Paper no. 15129 (2009), National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, and Nir Jaimovich, “Really Uncertain Business Cycles,” mimeo,
     Stanford University (2009).

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, “Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S. Man-
     ufacturing: A Generalized (S,s) Approach,” Econometrica 67 (1999), 783–26.

Chaney, Thomas, Xavier Gabaix, and Thomas Philippon, “Firm Volatility,” mimeo, Massachusetts
     Institute of Technology (2002).

Chari, Anusha, Wenjie Chen, and Kathryn M.E. Dominguez, “Foreign Ownership and Firm Per-
     formance: Emerging-Market Acquisitions in the United States,” NBER Working Paper no. 14786
     (2009), National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc..

Cetorelli, Nicola and Philip E. Strahan, “Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank Competition and
     Industry Structure in Local U.S. Markets,” Journal of Finance 61 (2006), 437–61.

Comin, Diego and Sunil Mulani, “A Theory of Growth and Volatility at the Aggregate and Firm
     Level,” Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (2009), 1023–1042.


                                              29
Comin, Diego and Thomas Philippon, “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and Consequences,”
     in: Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff (Eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005 (2006),
     167–28, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Correa, Ricardo and Gustavo Suarez, “Firm Volatility and Banks: Evidence from U.S. Banking
     Deregulation,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board (2007).

Davis, Steven J. and James A. Kahn, “Interpreting the Great Moderation: Changes in the Volatil-
     ity of Economic Activity at the Macro and Micro Levels,” Journal of Economic Perspectives
     22 (2008), 155–80.

Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Volatility and Dispersion
     in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” in: Daron Ace-
     moglu, Kenneth Rogoff and Michael Woodford (Eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006
     (2007), 107–80, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.

di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Trade Openness and Volatility,” Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics 91 (2009a), 558–85.

di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “International Trade and Aggregate Fluctuations in
     Granular Economies,” RSIE Discussion Paper no. 585 (2009b).

Ekinci, Mehmet, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Bent E. Sørensen, “Capital Flows within EU Coun-
     tries: The Role of Institutions, Confidence and Trust,” in Richard H. Clarida, Jeffrey A.
     Frankel, Francesco Giavazzi, and Kenneth D. West (Eds.) NBER International Seminar on
     Macroeconomics 2007 (2009), 325–400, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.

Gabaix, Xavier, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” NBER Working Paper no. 15286
     (2009), National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “The Role of Social Capital in Financial Devel-
     opment,” American Economic Review 94 (2004), 526–56.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Does Culture Affect Economics Outcomes?” Jour-
     nal of Economic Perspectives 20 (2006), 23–4.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange,” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 124 (2009), 1095–31.



                                                 30
Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real Sec-
     tor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1997), 663–91.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent E. Sørensen, and Oved Yosha, “Risk Sharing and Industrial Special-
     ization: Regional and International Evidence,” American Economic Review 93 (2003), 903–
     18.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou, and José-Luis Peydró, “What Lies Beneath the Euro’s
     Effect on Financial Integration? Currency Risk, Legal Harmonization, or Trade?” Journal of
     International Economics (2010), forthcoming.

Kerr, William and Ramana Nanda, “Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulations, Financing Con-
     straints, and Entrepreneurship,” Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau. Working
     Paper no. 07-33 (2007).

Koren, Miklos and Silvana Tenreyro, “Volatility and Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     122 (2007), 243–87.

Kose, Ayhan M., Eswar Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, “Financial Integration and Macroeconomic
     Volatility,” IMF Staff Papers 50 (2003), International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Kose, Ayhan M., Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei “Financial Globalization: A
     Reappraisal,” IMF Staff Papers 56 (2009), International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Re-
     vised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of In-
     ternational Economics 73 (2007), 223–50.

Leuven and B. Sianesi, ”PSMATCH2: Stata module to perform full Mahalanobis and propen-
     sity score matching, common support graphing, and covariate imbalance testing.” (2003)
     http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html.

McConnell, Margaret M. and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, “Output Fluctuations in the United States:
     What Has Changed since the Early 1980’s?” American Economic Review 90 (2000), 1464–76.

Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, “Financial Integration, Fi-
     nancial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” NBER Working Paper no. 12909 (2007), National
     Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.



                                                31
Morgan, Donald, Bertrand Rime, and Philip E. Strahan, “Bank Integration and State Business Cy-
     cles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2004), 1555–85.

Obstfeld, Maurice, “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American Economic Re-
     view 84 (1994), 1310–29.

Schouten, Michael C. and Mathias M. Siems, “The Evolution of Ownership Disclosure Rules Across
     Countries,” Working paper no. 393 (2009)), Centre for Business Research, University of Cam-
     bridge.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” In: Mark
     Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002 (2003), 159–30,
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,”
     NBER Technical Working Papers no. 0284 (2002), National Bureau of Economic Research,
     Inc.

Thesmar, David and Mathias Thoenig, “Financial Market Development and the Rise in Firm Level
     Uncertainty,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 4761 (2004).




                                              32
Appendix A: A Model of International Diversification

We present a stylized static model. For simplicity, we consider a two country framework where
the two countries are symmetric, except for different volatilities of output. The notation for the
foreign country is similar to that of the domestic country, except the variables are labeled with a
“*.” Assume that each of the two countries has two types of investors: small investors (households)
has an amount S i available for financial investment while large (institutional) investors has an
amount S I . Investors can chose to invest in a safe asset with gross return R and in two types of
“representative” firms with exogenous output (“fruit on trees”). One type of firm has low variance
of output (and thus dividends) while the other type has high variance. We assume there is one unit
of equity available to investors (“one tree”) for each type of firm.

   We assume each representative low (high) variance firm has output YL (YH ) normalized to have
mean 1. The variance of low volatility output is (σLY )2 while that of high volatility output is (σH
                                                                                                   Y )2 .

Output is sold to investors and the price of one unit of low (high) variance output is 1/µL (1/µH ).
With our normalization this is also the market value of each type of production (“tree”). The
expected gross returns to investing in, say, low volatility output, is then µL while the standard
deviation of the return from investing in one unit of output is


                                             σL = σLY /µL ,                                          (8)


and
                                                  Y
                                            σH = σH /µH .                                            (9)

Next, we assume a simple structure for dividends. This is equivalent to making assumptions on
the exogenous output, but simplifies notation. We then postulate a mean variance trade-off for
investors and solve for both home and foreign investors’ demands for different types of output.
Investors take the mean returns from investing in home and foreign high- and low-volatility output
as given. Finally, we use the market clearing conditions to determine the mean returns and solve
for the general equilibrium.

   We denote the gross dividends from investing in the low variance firm by XL (= YL /µL ) and
dividends from investing in high variance firms with XH (= YH /µH ). We assume that firm shocks
are composed of an aggregate shock  and a idiosyncratic firm shock L (H ) that is specific to low




                                                   33
(and high) variance firms. The shocks are best thought of as productivity shocks.35 Given these
assumptions, we can write the dividends as;


                                             XL = µL + γL ×  + L ,

and
                                            XH = µH + γH ×  + H .

The country-wide shock  affects all firms but the effect differs between low and high variance firms
due to the respective γ parameters. All shocks are identically independently distributed (i.i.d.)
across firms with the following mean and variances:  ∼ (0, σ 2 );              L ∼ (0, σL2 );             2 ).
                                                                                                  H ∼ (0, σH
The i.i.d. assumption implies: cov(, L ) = 0;              cov(, H ) = 0;       cov(L , H ) = 0 . We assume
shocks in the foreign country have a similar structure and all foreign shocks are independent of
domestic shocks.

      There is a fixed cost κ of investing abroad such that small investors will only invest domestically.
A small home investor can invest a share λiL in domestic low variance firms and a share λiH in high
variance firms while large home investors can invest a share λIL in domestic low variance firms, a
share λIH in high variance firms, and a share λIHF in foreign high variance firms. Companies do not
have access to low variance technology in the foreign country. We assume this is due to frictions in
information or communication.36

      A small investor maximizes his or her utility, Ui , from investing a given amount of savings.
We assume that the utility for each dollar invested can be couched in terms of mean and variance
consistent with approximating utility with a quadratic utility function, and the optimal investment
shares being independent of the total amount invested. This approximation is reasonable as we only
model the allocation of given savings (since we do not observe savers a more ambitious approach
would serve little purpose for us).

      Thus the small investor maximizes (with respect to λiL and λiH ):


  U i = (1 − λiL − λiH )R + λiL × µL + λiH × µH − Var(  + λiL (γL ×  + L ) + λiH (γH ×  + H )) ,


where R is the gross safe world rate of return. We assume the country-wide shock  enters the
utility function directly, in addition to its effect on production. We refer to this as “background

 35
      Note that aggregate shocks can also be thought of country or industry specific.
 36
      See Iacoviello and Minetti (2008).


                                                          34
noise” (this may enter the decision problem, for example, because country-wide shocks also affect
wage income of the domestic investor).

     A large investor can invest also in foreign firms and hence maximizes




             UI    =      (1 − λIL − λIH − λIHF )R + λIL × µL + λIH × µH + λIHF × µ∗H                   (10)
                                                                              ∗
                   − var( + λIL (γL ×  + L ) + λIH (γH ×  + H ) + λIHF (γH × ∗ + ∗H )) .


     Using the abbreviation V i for the variance of the portfolio of small savers, we find:


                       V i = Var( + λiL (γL ×  + L ) + λiH (γH ×  + H ))
                           = σ 2 (1 + γL × λiL + γH × λiH )2 + σL2 (λiL )2 + σH
                                                                              2
                                                                                (λiH )2 .


Taking the first order condition for optimum wrt. λiL , we find

                                        (µL − R)/2 − γL (1 + γH × λiH ) × σ 2
                                λiL =                                                                   (11)
                                                  σ 2 × γL2 + σL2

and by symmetry
                                        (µH − R)/2 − γH (1 + γL × λiL ) × σ 2
                               λiH =                     2 + σ2               .                         (12)
                                                  σ 2 × γH    H

     We have

                                                                               ∗
                V I = var  + λIL (γL ×  + L ) + λIH (γH ×  + H ) + λIHF (γH × ∗ + ∗H )
                                                                                            


so


     V I = σ 2 {(1 + γL × λIL + γH × λIH )2 } + σ ∗2 (γH
                                                       ∗ 2 I
                                                         ) (λHF )2 + σL2 (λIL )2 + σH
                                                                                    2            ∗2 I
                                                                                      (λIH )2 + σH (λHF )2


     The derivative of V I wrt. λIL and λIH are similar to those found earlier, so

                                        (µL − R)/2 − γL (1 + γH × λIH ) × σ 2
                               λIL =                                          ,                         (13)
                                                  σ 2 × γL2 + σL2

and
                                        (µH − R)/2 − γH (1 + γL × λIL ) × σ 2
                               λIH =                     2 + σ2               .                         (14)
                                                  σ 2 × γH    H


                                                       35
The share invested abroad is
                                                          µ∗H − R
                                        λIHF =                 ∗2 + σ ∗2 )                                    (15)
                                                  2 × (σ ∗2 × γH     H

   The market clearing conditions for low and high-variance output, respectively, are:


                                             S i λiL + S I λIL = 1/µL ,                                       (16)


and
                                     S i λiH + S I λIH + S ∗I λ∗I
                                                               HF = 1/µH ,                                    (17)

where S ∗I denotes the savings of large foreign investors, and λ∗I
                                                                HF denotes the investments share of
these investors in the home economy.

   The nine equations, together with the equivalent equations for the foreign country, (two resource
constraints, five equations for investment shares, and the relations between means and variances)
form a set of non-linear equations which can be solved for mean returns and investment shares.

   We numerically solved the model with the following values:



                                  Exogenous values for model simulation


                                       Si    SI     σ      σLY      Y
                                                                   σH    γL      γH         R

                         Home          10    10    0.3     0.2     0.3   0.05    0.1    1.05
                         Foreign       10    10    0.1     0.2     0.3   0.05    0.1    1.05

which yields the solutionss:



                                µL          µH      λiL          λiH      λIL         λIH       λIHF

                  Home         1.064     1.069     0.047        0.0002   0.047    0.0002        0.039
                  Foreign      1.055     1.057     0.047        0.028    0.047     0.028        0.093
            Notes: Variances are not displayed as they are trivially determined from equations (8) and (9).



We do not observe mean returns and risk premiums in our data but for our choice of exogenous
variables, the solutions for the risk premium µ − R are reasonable (i.e., positive, higher for high


                                                           36
volatility output than for low volatility output, and higher in the home country with higher aggre-
gate “background” volatility).

      Our simple model sketch is designed to interpret patterns of foreign investment and implies by
design that domestic small investors only invest in domestic firms given the fixed cost of investing
abroad. The model implies that domestic investment in high volatility firms is small (shares of
0.0002 for both small and large investors) relative to own-country investment in high volatility
firms in the foreign economy (shares of 0.028) with lower background noise. The more interesting
implication of the model is the clear difference between domestic investment abroad and foreign
investment in the home economy. Large investors abroad behave similarly to large domestic in-
vestors, but the high domestic background noise makes foreign investment in the domestic economy
much larger. This shows that our simple framework captures the positive correlation between re-
gional volatility and foreign investment, although our static framework cannot model the dynamic
patterns found in our data.

      In reality, and outside of our model, entrepreneurs who create firms will typically need to hold
some equity in the firm—whether it is of high- or low-variance type.37 In our regressions, we include
a dummy that is unity if the largest owner is foreign and the left-out dummy, which is captured by
the constants, is then the largest domestic owner. We implicitly interpret the constant as capturing
domestic entrepreneurs. A reasonable assumption, we believe, is that domestic entrepreneurs typi-
cally are individuals who happen on a business idea, independently of whether this leads to high or
low variance output. By contrast, domestic minority investors seek out low-variance investments
and, therefore, domestic minority ownership will have a negative coefficient. The model deliver the
solution that high-volatility firms are partly owned by foreign investors although the foreigners’
choice between being minority owner or largest owner is not modeled. (Our empirical analysis
reveals that foreigners most often prefer to be the largest owner for reasons such as information or
control.)

 37
      This is due to moral hazard. A standard reference is Holmstrom and Tirole (1997).




                                                         37
Appendix B: Data

Sample Selection

AMADEUS is a database of firm-level information such as sales, employment, and assets for 41
countries with varying coverage. The database totals over 15 million public and private companies
of large, medium, and small size with listed companies comprising only a small fraction of about
10 thousand companies.38 A company which has subsidiaries is required to prepare consolidated
accounts; however, we use only unconsolidated accounts to avoid double counting.39

    We focus on 16 countries with 9.9 million unique firms, of which many have missing outcomes
and/or assets. Once we require firms to have at least 1 year of assets and 1 year of an outcome—
either sales, operating revenue, or employment, we have 4.7 million firms. From this sample we drop
all financial firms, firms that in any year have assets less than 1,000 euros, employment negative,
zero, or larger than 2 million, negative sales, or negative operating revenue. We drop firms that do
not have ownership information and firms below the 0.1th percentile and above the 99.9th percentile
in the distribution of sales to assets, operating revenue to assets, and employment to assets in any
year. For the ratio of revenue to sales we drop firms above the 95th percentile in order to eliminate
firms with high financial income. Although we drop all financial firms, many companies that are not
financial but have significant investment income. An extreme example is Warren Buffett’s Berkshire
Hathaway, even that started as a textile firm and then became only an investment company over
time. We also eliminate firms with sales larger than operating revenue. Overall, these filters allow
us to get rid of phantom firms, tax-fronts, etc. In addition, we drop firms where growth of sales,
operating revenue, or employment is more than 100 percent for larger companies (100 employees),
more than 300 percent for medium-sized companies (20-100 employees), and more than 500 (1000)

   38
      While collecting firm-level data, BvD takes advantage of legal requirements for European companies to file their
accounts at official government registries. The data are then organized in a standardized format.
   39
      Even though the number of consolidated accounts is less than 1 percent of all accounts, it is important to use
just the unconsolidated accounts. AMADEUS categorizes all companies as subsidiaries regardless of the percentage
of ownership: In standard accounting, a company A will be classified as a subsidiary of a company B if company
B owns more than 50 percent of company A, while in AMADEUS company A will be called a subsidiary even
company B owns a 1 percent stake. There can be direct subsidiaries and also indirect subsidiaries owned by the
direct subsidiaries. For example, BMW has 186 recorded subsidiaries, 54 of which are outside Europe (like BMW
United States) and hence not in our data set. 77 out of the remaining 132 are direct subsidiaries owned more than
50 percent by the parent company. The remaining 55 companies are subsidiaries of these 77 companies. Another
example is LEGO, that has 38 subsidiaries where only 3 of these are directly owned while the rest are subsidiaries
of these 3. By using unconsolidated accounts outcomes do not include the outcome of parents and subsidiaries. By
looking at the consolidated accounts of the 3 direct subsidiaries, we verified that the sum of sales and employment of
the indirect subsidiaries is less than the numbers reported in the consolidated accounts of the 3 direct subsidiaries.
(It will not be an exact match since we do not have data for subsidiaries outside Europe).


                                                         38
percent for smaller companies with 11-20 (0-10) employees. If employment is missing we drop firms
with growth rates over 2000 percent.

   Firms that acquire other companies may experience “spurious” increases in assets, sales, and
employees. For example, if two firms with 100 employees merge to a firm with 200 employees which
continue to operate as one of the original firms this will appear as a growth rate of 100 percent
for the continuing firm and –100 percent for the acquired firm. However, there might have been
no change in employment of the combined firm. We use the global ZEPHYR database from the
BvD which contains “deal records;” i.e., in each M&A, the target, the acquiring party or parties,
the dates when the deal was announced and completed, and the type of the deal (e.g., Acquisition,
Acquisition of 15%, Merger, Joint Venture, etc.). The ZEPHYR data can easily be matched with
our data because a BvD company identifier is included in both databases. We eliminate acquirer
firms which may have spurious growth following an acquisition. After this selection process we end
up with a sample of a little over 1 million unique firms.

   To give an example how each step eliminates firms consider 2006 in which we have 3 million
firms with at least 1 year of assets and outcome. Out of these, 100,000 do not report ownership
information and 500,000 firms have assets less than 1000 euros. 100,000 are financial firms and 1
million has faulty records such as no, or negative, employment. Another 100,000 firms are dropped
due to our procedures explained above that filters out firms in the tails, etc., which brings us to
1.2 million firms.

   One might worry about selection issues where firms that report ownership information are
unrepresentative. Figure 14 shows the distribution of assets for all available firms in 2006, and for
firms that report ownership information and for the non-reporting firms. The distribution of assets
is very similar across these groups indicating that the firms which report ownership are similar to
the sample as a whole.

   Our firms represent a wide range of industries. We drop firms in certain industries for robustness
checks as detailed in the paper. The classification of 2 digit NACE industries are as follows:




                                                 39
Code   Name of the Level 2 NACE sector


AA     Agriculture, hunting, and forestry
BA     Fishing
CA     Mining and quarrying of energy producing materials
CB     Mining and quarrying, except of energy producing materials
DA     Manufacturing of food products, beverages, and tobacco
DB     Manufacturing of textile products
DC     Manufacturing of leather products
DD     Manufacturing of wood products
DE     Manufacturing of pulp, paper products, publishing and printing
DF     Manufacturing of coke, refined petroleum products, and nuclear fuel
DG     Manufacturing of chemical products
DH     Manufacturing of rubber and plastic products
DI     Manufacturing of other non-metallic mineral products
DJ     Manufacturing of basic metals and fabricated metal products
DK     Manufacturing of machinery and equipment n.e.c.
DL     Manufacturing of electrical and optical equipment;
DM     Manufacturing of transport equipment
DN     Manufacturing n.e.c.
EA     Electricity, gas and water
FA     Construction
GA     Wholesale and retail trade; repair
HA     Hotels and restaurants
IA     Transport, storage, and communication
JA     Financial intermediation
KA     Real estate, renting, and business activities
LA     Public administration and defence, compulsory social security
MA     Education
NA     Health and social work
OA     Other community, social and personal service activities
PA     Activities of households
QA     Extra-territorial organizations and bodies (such as UN, EC, etc)




                                  40
What does Foreign Ownership capture and why does it change over time?

As explained in the data section, we construct foreign ownership F O using the information from
the AMADEUS Ownership database. We verified that this database completely includes the in-
formation in the ZEPHYR database of Mergers and Acquisitions and adds to this since foreign
ownership can change over time due to other reasons then M&As.

   Let us consider some examples. Example 1 is the French steel company Usinor SA which is
now part of the world’s largest steel company ArcelorMittal. Based on the information from the
AMADEUS Ownership database the FO for the Usinor SA was 2.9 percent in 2000, 97.58 percent in
2002, and 100 percent in 2006 and 2008. In 2000, F O consists of two identified non-French owners
(Lucchini International SA and Gruppo Lucchini, both Italian) and the company had a significant
stake owned by “public” (>70 percent), which we assume consists of French small investors. In
2002 the company has just two owner records: Arcelor SA (Luxembourg) with 97.58 percent and
“public” with 2 percent. In 2006 the company changes the name to Arcelor France and the single
owner is Arcelor SA (Luxembourg) with a 100 percent stake. In 2008 the company changes the
name to ArcelorMittal France with the same owner and stake. The BvD ID of the company remains
unchanged in all 4 Ownership vintages despite the name changes.

   Using this BvD ID for Usinor SA, we can locate the records for this company in ZEPHYR we
find a single record where Usinor SA was involved in the deal “Acquisition 97.58 percent” by the
Arcelor SA of Luxembourg, announced on 12/12/2001 and completed on 14/03/2002.

   Example 2 is the French lawn care company Top Green SAS (www.topgreen.com). Based
on the information in the AMADEUS Ownership database FO for the Top Green SAS was 50
percent in 2004, 67 percent in 2006, and 66 percent in 2008. From 2004 to 2008, F O consists of
one identified non-French owner DLF Trifolium A/S of Denmark which holds stakes in the French
company. The only other owner is the French firm Vilmorin Clause et Compagnie.

   Using the BvD ID for Top Green SAS we locate the records for this company in ZEPHYR
and obtain a single record where Top Green SAS was involved in the deal “Acquisition increased
from 50 percent to 67 percent” by DLF Trifolium A/S which was announced on 19/09/2006. As a
result, the stake of DLF in Top Green SAS went up from 50 percent to 67 percent between 2004
and 2006. The 1 percent sale by DLF between 2006 and 2008 is not found in ZEPHYR.

   Example 3 is the French software firm PTV Online (www.ptv-vision.fr). Based on information
in the AMADEUS Ownership database FO for PTV Online was 40 percent in 2004 and 100 percent



                                               41
in 2006. In 2004, F O consists of one identified non-French owner PTV Planung Transport Verkehr
AG (PTV AG) of Germany, owning 40 percent. The additional two owners of the company in 2004
are the French company 01Direct with 40 percent and an individual, Mr. Stern, with 20 percent.

   Using the BvD ID for PTV Online we locate the records for this company in ZEPHYR and
obtain a single record where PTV Online was involved in the deal “Acquisition increased from 40
percent to 100 percent” by PTV AG which was announced and completed on 12/9/2005. PTV
AG is a global company with the head office is located in Karlsruhe which specializes in traffic and
logistics software, and transport consulting and has branches in 11 countries.

   The examples demonstrate that ownership information in ZEPHYR is clearly reflected in our
FO variable, but there is some additional information in the AMADEUS Ownership database which
ZEPHYR misses. The following examples show companies that had changes in FO based on the
Ownership database but which do not appear in ZEPHYR.

   The French defense company NHIndustries SAS (NHI) is, according to the company website,
the prime contractor for design and development, industrialization, production and logistic support
of the naval/tactical helicopter NH90 used by the armed forces of several European NATO countries.
Based on information in the AMADEUS Ownership database FO for NHI was 37 percent in 2002,
68 percent in 2004, 68.01 percent in 2006, and 68.51 percent in 2008. In 2002, F O consists of two
identified non-French owners: Agusta Westland (Italy) with 32 percent and Stork Fokker Aerospace
NV (The Netherlands) with 5 percent. The other owner of the company is the French company
Eurocopter France with 32 percent. In 2004 FO becomes 68 percent due to the divestment of
Eurocopter France in favor of the German company Eurocopter Deutschland GmbH. In 2006 an
Italian firm Finmeccanica - Societa’ Per Azioni appears as a new owner with a small stake and in
2008 the stake of Stork NV increases to 6 percent.

   The French fashion and perfume company Parfums Nina Ricci SA (www.ninaricci.com) has
operated since 1932 and is a private company. Based on information in the AMADEUS Ownership
database FO for Nina Ricci SA was 50 percent in 2000 and 2002, 51 percent in 2004, and 0 percent
in 2006 and 2008. In 2000–2004 the company was 50 percent owned by Jorba BV of the Netherlands
and a Spanish company Antonio Puig SA appears to hold a minority stake of around 1 percent in
2004. The domestic owners are Paco Rabanne Parfums with 36 percent and Puig France and Puig
International SA with 5 percent each. From 2006 on the only owner of the company is the French
Puig France with a 100 percent stake. According to the company website, Parfums Nina Ricci SA
now operates as a subsidiary of Puig Prestige Beaute (France).



                                                42
Constructing the Instrument

The Financial Harmonization Directives Index is the sum of individual financial directive dummies.
Directive dummies take the value of 1 if a Directive has been implemented in given year in given
country; 0 otherwise. The Directives that we use are as follows:




 1998/26/EC     Implementation of the Settlement Finality Directive
 2001/86/EC     Directive supplementing the Statute for a European Company
                with regard to the involvement of employees
 2002/13/EC     Directive amending the solvency margin requirements in the insurance directives
 2003/48/EC     Directive on the taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments
 2002/83/EC     Directive amending the solvency margin requirements in the insurance directives
 2003/41/EC     Directive on the prudential supervision of pension funds
 2003/71/EC     Directive on prospectuses
 2004/25/EC     Directive on Take Over Bids
 2006/48/EC     Directive relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business
                of credit institutions
 2006/49/EC     Directive on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions

   The regional trust variables are as follows: “Trust in Other People” varies from 0 to 10 and is
the answer on an increasing scale to the question “Most people can be trusted”; “General Level of
Trust” takes values 0–10 and averages answers on an increasing scale to the questions “Most people
can be trusted” and “Most people try to be fair”; “Trust in Institutions” varies between 0 and 10
and averages answers to the following questions: “Do you trust in country’s parliament”, “Do you
trust in the legal system”, “Do you trust in the police”, “Do you trust in political parties”, “Do
you trust in the European Parliament”, “Do you trust in the United Nations.”


Regions Excluded from Region-Level Regressions

“Island” and Overseas Regions

   We exclude all islands and overseas regions: Ciudad Autónoma de Ceuta (ES63), Ciudad
Autónoma de Melilla (ES64); Canarias (ES70), Åland (FI20), Guadeloupe (FR91), Martinique
(FR92), Guyane (FR93), Reunion (FR94), Valle d’Aosta/Vallée d’Aoste (ITC2), Região Autónoma
dos Açores (PT20), Região Autónoma da Madeira (PT30).

Underdeveloped and Small Regions


                                                43
   We exclude sparsely populated regions with population density less than the 10th percentile.
These are Extremadura (ES43), East Finland (FI13), West Finland (FI19), Agder og Rogaland
(NO04), and Alentejo (PT18).

   We also exclude relatively small and poor regions with the average GDP per capita less than
15th percentile in the distribution within the corresponding country. These are Hainaut (BE32),
Campania (ITF3), East Middle Sweden (SE12), Tees Valley and Durham (UKC1), Merseyside
(UKD5), South Yorkshire (UKE3), and Lincolnshire (UKF3).

   We exclude regions with high share of agriculture, specifically a share of agriculture larger than
85th percentile in the distribution across all regions. The regions excluded are Murcia (ES62),
Champagne-Ardenne (FR21), Poitou-Charentes (FR53), Algarve (PT15), and Alentejo (PT18).

Outlier Regions

   We exclude regions which experienced a change in ownership above 20 percent during our
sample period: Auvergne (FR72), Border, Midland and Western (IE01), Friuli-Venezia Giulia
(ITD4), North Middle Sweden (SE31), Upper Norrland (SE33), and Gloucestershire, Wiltshire and
North Somerset (UKK1);

   Some regions are outliers in partial correlation plots in a particular year only. These regions
might have coverage related issues because certain years look very different and we eliminated those.
These are Antwerpen (BE21), Limburg (BE22), Vlaams-Brabant (BE24), Brabant Wallon (BE31),
Namur (BE35), Dresden (DED2), Comunidad Foral de Navarra (ES22), Midi-Pyrénées (FR62),
Provincia Autonoma Bolzano/Bozen (ITD1), Abruzzo (ITF1), Sardegna (ITG2), Cheshire (UKD2),
Kent (UKJ4), Shropshire and Staffordshire (UKG2), Rhône-Alpes (FR71), Greater Manchester
(UKD3), Surrey, East and West Sussex (UKJ2), Eastern Scotland (UKM2), and Highlands and
Islands (UKM4).




                                                 44
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics


                                                                         Panel A: Firm-level data
         Firm Outcome                                            Operating Revenue (1,047,463 firms)

                                                        Mean       Std. Dev.       Min                Max
         Volatility, sd                                   0.34           0.62        0                  4.79
         Foreign Ownership (%)                            1.26          10.75        0                  100
         Foreign Minority Ownership (%)                   0.04           1.23        0                 75.00
         Domestic Minority Ownership (%)                  4.13          14.06        0                 95.87
         Total Assets (million 2005 euros)                3.73          81.98        0                43,620
         Firm Age (years)                                17.89          12.09        1                  907
         Total Assets, Firms w. Non-Zero                 32.89          257.7        0                24,430
         Foreign Ownership (million 2005 euros)

                                                          Percent Firms                  Average Volatility

                                                                  Out of All Firms (1,047,463 firms)
         Non-Zero Foreign Ownership                               4.1                          0.37
         Exporters                                                7.0                          0.24
         Listed                                                   0.1                          0.36

                                                        Out of Firms with Non-Zero Foreign Ownership
                                                                        (42,428 firms)
         100% Foreign Ownership                                   27.1                         0.36
         Foreign Subsidiaries                                     18.6                         0.37
         Largest Owner is Foreign                                 43.3                         0.34
         Foreigners Hold > 50%                                    52.7                         0.38


                                                                     Panel B: Region-Level data

                                                        Mean       Std. Dev.       Min                Max
         Time-varying Volatility (AMADEUS), sdt          0.02           0.03      0.00003             0.24
         Time-varying Volatility (EUROSTAT), sdt         0.01           0.01      0.00006             0.07
         Financial Integration (%)                       7.00           7.91         0                51.84
         Financial Integration (Majority Owners) (%)     8.36           8.99         0                51.98
         Financial Integration (Minority Owners) (%)     0.25           0.61         0                 5.74
         Financial Integration (Domestic) (%)            4.79            4.91     0.0002              25.51
         Total Assets (billion 2005 euros)               25.85          45.90       0.32              349.8
         Fraction of Foreign-Owned Assets                 0.17           0.16         0                0.73



Notes: “Exporters” are firms reporting non-zero export revenue. “Listed” are public companies listed on stock
exchanges. “100% Foreign Ownership” are companies that are fully owned by foreigners, while “Foreign subsidiaries”
are companies that are fully owned by a single foreign owner. “Largest Owner is Foreign” refers to firms where the
owner with the largest stake is foreign, while “Foreigners Hold > 50%” are companies where foreigners own more
than 50 percent. “Fraction of Foreign-Owned Assets” is the fraction of assets owned by firms who have non-zero
foreign ownership in a given region. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.
                            Table 2: Firm-Level Volatility and Foreign Ownership

                                                          Sample: All firms

                                          (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)               (6)


                                                            Dependent variable: Log Volatility of firm outcome
Volatility Measure                                                   Std. dev. of firm outcome growth, sd
Firm Outcome                            Sales         Operating         Employment          Sales        Operating        Employment
                                                      Revenue                                            Revenue

                                                                     Panel A: Effects of Foreign Ownership

Log Foreign Ownership                  .050***         .040***             .004**         .043***           .032***            –.000
                                        (.002)          (.001)             (.002)          (.002)            (.002)            (.002)
Log Total Assets                       –.079***        –.081***           –.204***        –.078***        –.081***            –.203***
                                        (.001)          (.001)             (.001)          (.001)          (.001)              (.001)
Firm Age                               –.011***        –.011***           –.009***        –.011***        –.011***            –.009***
                                        (.000)          (.000)             (.000)          (.000)          (.000)              (.000)


                                                         Panel B: Effects of Majority/Minority Foreign Ownership

Largest Owner is Foreign               .211***         .168***             .015*          .178***           .134***            –.004
                                        (.010)          (.008)             (.008)          (.010)            (.008)            (.008)
Log Foreign Minority Ownership         .036***         .038***             –.007          .033***           .033***            –.008
                                        (.008)          (.008)             (.008)          (.008)            (.008)            (.008)
Log Domestic Minority Ownership        –.014***        –.027***           –.016***        –.015***        –.027***            –.016***
                                        (.001)          (.001)             (.001)          (.001)          (.001)              (.001)
Log Total Assets                       –.079***        –.081***           –.203***        –.077***        –.080***            –.202***
                                        (.001)          (.001)             (.001)          (.001)          (.001)              (.001)
Firm Age                               –.011***        –.011***           –.008***        –.011***        –.011***            –.009***
                                        (.000)          (.000)             (.000)          (.000)          (.000)              (.000)


Country Fixed Eff.                       yes             yes                 yes             no               no                no
Region Fixed Eff.                        no              no                  no              yes              yes               yes
Industry Fixed Eff.                      yes             yes                 yes             yes              yes               yes
Firms                                  760,260        1,047,463            577,196        745,047        1,030,619            567,706


  Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, * and † denote significance
  at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, resp. sd is the standard deviation of growth of firm outcome over 2002–2006. The
  explanatory variables are for 2002. Log Foreign Ownership denotes the logarithm of 1+percent ownership share that
  belongs to foreigners. Largest Owner is Foreign is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the largest owner
  of a given firm is a foreigner. Log Foreign Minority Ownership denotes the logarithm of 1+the remaining percent
  ownership share belonging to foreigners after the share of the largest owner is excluded; Log Domestic Minority
  Ownership is calculated similarly. Firm Age is the difference between the end year in our sample and the date of
  incorporation. Sales, Operating Revenue, and Assets are all in 2005 constant euros. For firms in Denmark, Ireland,
  Great Britain, and Norway, sales are not available. Employment is the number of full-time employees. Industry-fixed
  effects at the 2-digit NACE level. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                                46
                     Table 3: Firm-Level Volatility and Foreign Ownership: Alternative Volatility Measures and Samples

                                                           (1)              (2)                    (3)              (4)                    (5)


                                                                       Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of Firm Outcome
           Firm Outcome                                                                     Operating Revenue

           Volatility Measure                              cv               sdt                                           sd


           Firm Sample                                  All firms        All firms               Large         Permanent          Large permanent
                                                                                                 firms           firms                  firms


           Largest Owner is Foreign                      .210***          .155***               .111***          .163***                .089***
                                                          (.007)           (.007)                (.013)           (.009)                 (.013)
           Log Foreign Minority Ownership                .037***          .027***                .021*           .037***                .026***
                                                          (.007)           (.007)                (.013)           (.008)                 (.012)




47
           Log Domestic Minority Ownership              –.012***         –.023***              –.011***          –.025***              –.013***
                                                         (.001)           (.001)                (.004)            (.001)                (.004)
           Log Total Assets                             –.064***         –.067***              –.161***          –.078***              –.158***
                                                         (.001)           (.001)                (.005)            (.001)                (.005)
           Firm Age                                     –.008***         –.008***              –.005***          –.011***              –.005***
                                                         (.000)           (.000)                (.000)            (.000)                (.000)
           Country Fixed Eff.                              yes              yes                   yes               yes                    yes
           Industry Fixed Eff.                             yes              yes                   yes               yes                    yes
           Firms                                        1,083,902        1,047,463               55,099          808,055                 45,639


     Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, * and † denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%
     levels, resp. cv is the standard deviation of the level of the firm outcome normalized by the mean level of outcome, estimated over 2002–2006; sdt is
     a time-varying volatility measure based on firm outcome growth as in Eq. (1), averaged over 2002–2006; and sd is the standard deviation of growth of
     firm outcome over 2002–2006 . The explanatory variables are for 2002. The “Large firms” sample excludes firms with assets less than 10 million euros.
     The “Permanent firms” sample is composed of firms with non-missing outcomes in every year between 2002–2006. Log Foreign Ownership denotes the
     logarithm of 1+percent ownership share that belongs to foreigners. Largest Owner is Foreign is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the largest
     owner of a given firm is a foreigner. Log Foreign Minority Ownership denotes the logarithm of 1+the percent ownership share that belonging to foreigners
     after the share of the largest owner is excluded; Domestic Minority Ownership is calculated similarly. Firm Age is the difference between the end year in
     our sample and the date of incorporation. Operating Revenue and Assets are in 2005 constant euros. Industry-fixed effects at the 2-digit NACE level.
     See Appendix B for detailed explanations.
         Table 4: Firm-Level Volatility and Foreign Ownership: Propensity Score Matching


                                                                          (1)                      (2)


                                                                         Dependent Variable:
                                                                    Log Volatility of Firm Outcome
         Volatility Measure                                     Std. dev. of firm outcome growth, sd
         Firm Outcome                                                       Operating Revenue


         Firm Sample                                                  All firms               Large firms


         Average Effect of                                             .152***                   .117***
         Foreign Ownership                                              (.010)                    (.014)

                                                                  Regressions using Matched Sample


         Largest Owner is Foreign                                      .121***                   .085***
                                                                        (.010)                    (.014)
         Log Foreign Minority Ownership                                .028***                    .019*
                                                                        (.008)                    (.011)
         Log Domestic Minority Ownership                              –.015***                   –.015**
                                                                       (.005)                     (.007)
         Log Total Assets                                             –.081***                  –.149***
                                                                       (.003)                    (.010)
         Firm Age                                                     –.006***                  –.004***
                                                                       (.000)                    (.000)
         Country Fixed Eff.                                               yes                      yes
         Industry Fixed Eff.                                              yes                      yes
         Firms                                                          49,394                   19,326


Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, * and † denote significance
at levels 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%, resp. Matching is performed on firm age, total assets, country, and industry at
the 2-digit NACE level. In col (1), the matching is based on the “All firms” sample; in col (2) it is based on the
“Large firms” sample. sd is the standard deviation of growth of the firm outcome over 2002–06. The explanatory
variables are for 2002. In the lower panel, we estimate our main OLS specification using the matched sample. Foreign
Ownership denotes the percent ownership share that belongs to foreigners. Largest Owner is Foreign is a dummy
variable that takes a value of one if the largest owner of a given firm is a foreigner. Foreign Minority Ownership
denotes the remaining percent ownership share that belongs to foreigners after the share that belongs to the largest
owner is excluded; Domestic Minority Ownership is calculated similarly. Firm Age is the difference between the
end year in our sample and the date of incorporation. Operating Revenue and Assets are in 2005 constant euros.
Industry-fixed effects at the 2-digit NACE level. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.
                   Table 5: Changes in Firm-Level Volatility and Lagged Ownership

                                      Sample: Permanent firms, 2002–2006

                                                                      (1)                                  (2)


                                                                      Dependent Variable: Change
                                                                   in Log Volatility of Firm Outcome

 Volatility Measure                                                   sd                                   cv
 Firm Outcome                                               Operating Revenue                    Operating Revenue


 Firms Included                                                       All                                  All
 Lagged Largest Owner is Foreign                                    .056*                                .051*
                                                                    (.030)                               (.031)
 Log Lagged Foreign Minority Ownership                               .006                                –.001
                                                                    (.026)                               (.024)
 Log Lagged Domestic Minority Ownership                              .004                                –.001
                                                                    (.003)                               (.003)

 Log Lagged Total Assets                                            –.014                                .003†
                                                                    (.002)                               (.002)
 Firm Age                                                          .001***                               .001*
                                                                    (.000)                               (.000)
 Country Fixed Eff.                                                   yes                                  yes
 Industry Fixed Eff.                                                  yes                                  yes
 Firms                                                             296,515                              296,513


Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, * and † denote significance
at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, resp. The “Permanent firms” sample is composed of firms with non-missing outcomes
in every year between 2002–2006. Changes in volatility are computed between 2005–06 and 2003–04. The explanatory
variables are for 2002. Log Foreign Ownership denotes the logarithm of 1+percent ownership share belonging to
foreigners. Largest Owner is Foreign is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the largest owner is foreign.
Log Foreign Minority Ownership denotes the logarithm of 1+the percent ownership belonging to foreigners after
the share of the largest owner is excluded; Domestic Minority Ownership is calculated similarly. Firm Age is the
difference between the end year in our sample and the date of incorporation. Operating Revenue and Assets are in
2005 constant euros. Industry-fixed effects at the 2-digit NACE level. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                           49
                    Table 6: Firm-Level Volatility and Foreign Ownership: Dynamics

                                           Sample: Permanent firms, 2000–2006

                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)


                                                        Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of Firm Outcome
 Volatility Measure                                      Time-varying std. dev. of firm outcome growth, sdt
 Firm Outcome                                                               Operating Revenue


 Largest Owner is Foreign                 .207***     .188***       .028**
                                           (.007)      (.007)       (.014)
 Log Foreign Minority Ownership            .009       .017***        .006
                                          (.007)       (.007)       (.010)
 Log Domestic Minority Ownership          .021***     –.010***      –.001
                                           (.001)      (.001)       (.001)
 Log Foreign Ownership                                                           .009***      .007**                   .014***
                                                                                  (.003)      (.003)                    (.003)
 Log Number of Domestic Owners                                                                –.010*      –.014**      –.011*
                                                                                              (.006)       (.006)      (.006)
 Log Number of Foreign Owners                                                                              –.011      –.047***
                                                                                                           (.013)      (.017)
 Log Total Assets                        –.077***     –.080***     –.023***     –.024***    –.023***     –.023***     –.023***
                                          (.001)       (.001)       (.003)       (.003)      (.003)       (.003)       (.002)
 Firm Fixed Eff.                            no           no           yes          yes          yes         yes          yes
 Year Fixed Eff.                            yes          yes          yes          yes          yes         yes          yes
 Country×Year Fixed Eff.                    no           yes          yes          yes          yes         yes          yes
 Industry×Year Fixed Eff.                   no           yes          yes          yes          yes         yes          yes
 Observations                            2,262,723   2,235,264    2,235,264     2,235,264   2,235,264    2,235,264    2,235,264
 Firms                                    763,360     754,126      754,126       754,126     754,126      754,126      754,126


Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, *, and † denote significance
at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, resp. The “Permanent firms” sample excludes all firms with missing outcomes in any
year of the specified period; however, many firms have missing ownership information in one or more years, making
the estimation panel unbalanced. sdt is the time-varying volatility measure based on firm outcome growth as in
Eq. (1). Log Foreign Ownership denotes the logarithm of 1+the percent ownership share that belongs to foreigners.
Largest Owner is Foreign is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the largest owner is foreign. Log Foreign
Minority Ownership denotes the logarithm of 1+the percent ownership share belonging to foreigners after the share
of the largest owner is excluded; Domestic Minority Ownership is calculated similarly. Number of Owners give the
number of foreign and domestic owners, respectively. Firm Age is the difference between the end year in our sample
and the date of incorporation. Operating Revenue and Assets are in 2005 constant euros. Industry-fixed effects at
the 2-digit NACE level. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                           50
                 Table 7: Regional Volatility and Financial Integration: Typical Firm

                                             (1)               (2)            (3)               (4)


                                                    Dependent Variable: Log Median Volatility
           Volatility Measure              Time-varying std. dev. of regional outcome growth, sdt
           Firm Outcome                     Sales         Operating          Sales          Operating
                                                          Revenue                           Revenue

                                                      Panel A: Effects of Foreign Ownership


           Log Financial Integration        .020              .022*          .034*            .030*
                                           (.021)             (.013)         (.020)           (.017)
           Log Region Total Assets        .212***           .140**            .010             .022
                                           (.079)           (.070)           (.092)           (.084)


                                          Panel B: Effects of Majority/Minority Foreign Ownership


           Log Financial Integration        .024               .013         .059**            .038*
           (Majority Owners)               (.024)             (.017)        (.029)            (.021)
           Log Financial Integration       –.030*             –.002          –.027             .013
           (Minority Owners)               (.017)             (.025)         (.029)           (.039)
           Log Financial Integration       .029*               .007           .009            .020*
           (Domestic)                      (.015)             (.008)         (.013)           (.011)
           Log Region Total Assets        0.199***          0.133*            .006             .029
                                           (.078)           (.069)           (.090)           (.078)


           Region Fixed Eff.                 yes               yes            yes              yes
           Year Fixed Eff.                   yes               yes            yes              yes
           Country×Year Fixed Eff.           no                no             yes              yes
           Observations                      248               368            248              368
           Regions                           62                92             62                92

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the region level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, *, and † denote
significance at 1%, 5%, 10%,and 15% levels, resp. Denmark, Ireland, Great Britain, and Norway firms and hence
regions have no data for sales. See appendix B for the excluded outlier regions. sdt is a time-varying volatility
measure based on firm outcome growth as in Eq. (1). Log Financial Integration (Total) is the logarithm of 1+the
weighted average of firm-level foreign ownership percentages within a given region using firm assets as weights. Log
Financial Integration (Majority Owners) represents the logarithm of 1+the percentage share of total assets of all
firms whose largest owner is foreign in a given region. Log Financial Integration (Minority Owners) is the logarithm
of 1+the weighted average of firm-level foreign Minority Ownership percentages using firm assets as weights; regional
Financial Integration (Domestic) is calculated similarly from firm-level domestic Minority Ownership percentages.
Region Total Assets is the sum of total assets of firms within a given region. Sales, Operating Revenue, and Assets
are all in 2005 constant euros. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                         51
                 Table 8: Regional Volatility and Financial Integration: Aggregation


                                   (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)               (5)             (6)


                                                        Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of
                                                     Aggregated Firm Outcome or Regional GDP
 Volatility Measure                            Time-varying std. dev. of regional outcome growth, sdt
 Aggregated Firm Outcome          Sales       Operating           Sales       Operating
                                              Revenue                         Revenue
 Regional Outcome                                                                                     Regional GDP
                                                                                                        per capita

 Log Financial Integration       .635**         .649**           .681**         .862***           .603***         .573*
                                 (.318)         (.305)           (.321)          (.259)            (.246)         (.304)
 Log Region Total Assets          –.187          1.01             –.880         –.124
                                  (1.92)        (1.65)            (2.14)        (1.66)
 Log Population                                                                                  –20.4***        –18.2***
                                                                                                  (6.08)          (6.19)


 Region Fixed Eff.                 yes            yes              yes            yes               yes             yes
 Year Fixed Eff.                   yes            yes              yes            yes               yes             yes
 Country×Year Fixed Eff.           no             no               yes            yes               no              yes
 Observations                      186            276              186            276               255            255
 Regions                           62             92               62             92                85             85

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the region level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, *, and † denote
significance at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%, resp. sdt is a time-varying volatility measure based on firm outcome growth
as in Eq. (1). Log Financial Integration (Total) is the logarithm of 1+the weighted average of firm-level foreign
ownership percentages within a given region using firm assets as the weights. Log Financial Integration (Majority
Owners) is the logarithm of 1+the percentage share of total assets of all firms whose largest owner is foreign in a
given region. Log Financial Integration (Minority Owners) is the logarithm of 1+the weighted average of the firm-
level foreign Minority Ownership percentages using firm assets as weights; Log Financial Integration (Domestic) is
calculated similarly from firm-level domestic Minority Ownership percentages. Region Total Assets is the sum of
total assets of firms within a given region. Sales, Operating Revenue, and Assets are all in 2005 constant euros. See
Appendix B for detailed explanations. Population data are from Eurostat.
         Table 9: Regional Volatility and Financial Integration: Reduced Form Regressions


                                          (1)                         (2)                            (3)


                                     Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of Regional GDP per Capita
 Volatility Measure                     Time-varying std. dev. of growth of operating revenue, sdt


 Social Capital Measure           Trust in People         General Level of Trust           Trust in Institutions

 (Social Capital ×                      1.69**                      2.08**                          1.88*
 Financial Harmonization)               (.731)                      (.980)                          (1.12)

 Log Population                       –23.4***                     –24.8***                       –23.4***
                                       (6.15)                       (6.45)                         (6.77)
 Region Fixed Eff.                        yes                         yes                            yes
 Year Fixed Eff.                          yes                         yes                            yes
 Country×Year Fixed Eff.                  yes                         yes                            yes
 Observations                            255                          255                            255
 Regions                                 85                           85                             85

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the region level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, *, and † denote
significance at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%, resp. sdt is a time-varying volatility measure based on firm growth of
operating revenue as in Eq. (1). The Financial Harmonization Index is the sum of indicator variables which take
the value of one for each law when the law is adopted. Each column uses a different trust variable to measure social
capital. Population data are from Eurostat. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                        53
               Table 10: Regional Volatility and Financial Integration: IV Regressions

                                         (1)                       (2)                        (3)


                                                        Panel A: Second Stage Regression
                                       Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of the Regional GDP per capita
 Volatility Measure                                Time-varying std. dev. of outcome growth, sdt

 Log Financial Integration             2.44*                     2.39*                      1.97†
                                       (1.34)                    (1.28)                     (1.33)
 Log Population                       –19.9**                   –19.8**                    –19.4**
                                       (8.77)                    (8.72)                     (8.39)


                                                         Panel B: First Stage Regression
                                                Dependent variable: Log Financial Integration (Total)

 Trust in Other People ×              .692***
 Financial Harmonization               (.212)
 General Level of Trust ×                                       .871***
 Financial Harmonization                                         (.256)
 Trust in Institutions ×                                                                   .954***
 Financial Harmonization                                                                    (.305)
 Log Population                        –1.45                     –2.06                      –2.01
                                       (2.12)                    (2.17)                     (2.20)

 F stats for excluded inst.            10.68                     11.58                       9.81
 p value                               0.001                     0.001                       0.002
 Region Fixed Eff.                       yes                       yes                        yes
 Year Fixed Eff.                         yes                       yes                        yes
 Country×Year Fixed Eff.                 yes                       yes                        yes
 Observations                           255                       255                         255
 Regions                                85                        85                          85

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the region level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, *, and † denote
significance at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%, resp. sdt is a time-varying volatility measure based on firm outcome growth
as in Eq. (1). Log Financial Integration (Total) is the logarithm of 1+the weighted average of firm-level foreign
ownership percentages within a given region using firm assets as weights. The Financial Harmonization Index is
the sum of indicator variables that takes the value of one for each law when the law is adopted. We use laws from
the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) of the EU. Each column uses a different trust variable to measure social
capital. Population data are from Eurostat. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.
              Table 11: Firm-Level Volatility and Foreign Ownership: 25 EU Countries
                                          Sample: All firms, 2002–2006

                                                       (1)                        (2)                   (3)


                                                   Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of firm outcome
     Volatility Measure                                      Std. dev. of firm outcome growth, sd
     Firm Outcome                                     Sales                  Operating            Employment
                                                                             Revenue
     Largest Owner is Foreign                       .194***                    .169***                 .009
                                                     (.009)                     (.008)                (.007)
     Log Foreign Minority Ownership                 .024***                    .034***                –.001
                                                     (.006)                     (.006)                (.006)
     Log Domestic Minority Ownership               –.013***                   –.019***               –.020***
                                                    (.001)                     (.001)                 (.001)
     Log Total Assets                              –.051***                   –.053***               –.176***
                                                    (.001)                     (.001)                 (.001)
     Firm Age                                      –.018***                   –.017***               –.012***
                                                    (.000)                     (.000)                 (.000)
     Country Fixed Eff.                                yes                       yes                    yes
     Industry Fixed Eff.                               yes                       yes                    yes
     Firms                                         1,116,248                  1,443,445              767,304


Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, * and † denote significance
at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, resp. Firms in Slovenia are excluded due to missing age data while employment
data are missing for Cyprus. sd is the standard deviation of growth of firm outcome 2002–2006. The explanatory
variables are for 2002. Largest Owner is Foreign is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the largest owner is a
foreigner. Log Foreign Minority Ownership is the logarithm of 1+the percent ownership share belonging to foreigners
after the share of the largest owner is excluded; Domestic Minority Ownership is calculated similarly. Firm Age is the
difference between the end year in our sample and the date of incorporation. Sales, Operating Revenue, and Assets
are all in 2005 constant euros. Employment is the number of full-time employees of the firm. Industry-fixed effects
at the 2-digit NACE level. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                             55
Table 12: Correlations of Financial Integration Measures: AMADEUS versus Country (LM) Data


                                                             Financial Integration (Total), AMADEUS
                                                           Panel A: Correlations over all Countries in 2006
       Financial Integration, LM
       FDI Liability                                                                  0.28
       FDI and Portfolio Equity Liability                                             0.80
       Total Assets and Liabilities                                                   0.80

                                                                    Panel B: Correlations Over Time
                                                                    for Selected Countries, 2000–2006
       Countries                                         BE       DE      DK       NL        FR     GB       PT       AT
       Financial Integration (LM)
       FDI Liability                                    0.90     0.72    0.70     0.41     0.39    0.76     0.76     0.65
       FDI and Portfolio Equity Liability               0.90     0.45    0.19     0.64     0.02    0.30     0.84     0.62
       Total Assets and Liabilities                     0.91     0.80    0.55     0.96     0.54    0.86     0.86     0.76


Notes: The table reports the correlations between Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (LM) and AMADEUS financial integration measures.
We calculate the country-level integration measures from AMADEUS data as the asset weighted average of firm-level foreign
ownership in a similar fashion to the regional measures. Country total assets is the sum of total assets of firms within a given
country. Financial integration from calculated from the LM data is based on different type of capital flows: FDI Liability
represents the stock of FDI external liabilities relative to GDP; FDI and Equity Liability is the sum of foreign direct and
portfolio equity investment liabilities relative to GDP; Gross Assets and Liabilities is the sum of the absolute value of external
assets and liabilities of FDI, portfolio equity, debt, and financial derivative investments to GDP.




                                                               56
A      Robustness

                Table A-1: Firm-Level Volatility and Foreign Ownership: Robustness I

                                                    Sample: All firms

                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)


                                                     Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of Firm Outcome
 Volatility Measure                                             Std. dev. of firm outcome growth, sd
 Firm Outcome                                  Operating        Operating         Sales       Operating       Employment
                                               Revenue          Revenue                       Revenue
 Time Period                                   2000–2006        2004–2006     2002–2006       2002–2006        2002–2006
 Largest Owner is Foreign                        .229***         .169***        .199***         .178***          .042***
                                                  (.009)          (.008)         (.010)          (.008)           (.008)
 Log Foreign Minority Ownership                  .043***         .029***        .029***         .029***           –.009
                                                  (.006)          (.008)         (.008)          (.007)           (.008)
 Log Domestic Minority Ownership                –.017***        –.016***       –.008***        –.016***          –.013***
                                                 (.001)          (.001)         (.001)          (.001)            (.001)
 Log Total Assets                               –.048***        –.076***       –.072***        –.068***          –.188***
                                                 (.001)          (.001)         (.001)          (.001)            (.001)
 Firm Age                                       –.015***        –.013***       –.009***        –.008***          –.006***
                                                 (.000)          (.000)         (.000)          (.000)            (.000)
 Average Outcome Growth Rate                                                   1.203***        1.075***          1.574***
                                                                                (.010)          (.006)            (.009)
 Country Fixed Eff.                                yes             yes             yes             yes              yes
 Industry Fixed Eff.                               yes             yes             yes             yes              yes
 Firms                                          1,089,699       1,313,726       760,260        1,047,463         577,196


Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, * and † denote significance
at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, resp. sd is the standard deviation of growth of firm outcome, estimated over the
stated period. The explanatory variables are for the first year of the stated period. Largest Owner is Foreign is
a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the largest owner of a given firm is a foreigner. Foreign Minority
Ownership denotes the remaining percent ownership share that belongs to foreigners after the share that belongs
to the largest owner is excluded; Domestic Minority Ownership is calculated similarly. Firm Age is the difference
between the end year in our sample and the date of incorporation. Sales, Operating Revenue, and Assets are all in
2005 constant euros. Industry-fixed effects are at 2-digit NACE level. See the Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                           57
                                       Table A-2: Firm-Level Volatility and Foreign Ownership: Robustness II
                                                                              Sample: All firms, 2002–2006

                                            (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)        (5)              (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)


                                                                             Dependent Variable: Log Volatility of Firm Sales
      Volatility Measure                                                                  Std. dev. of sales growth, sd
      Firm Sub-sample                    Exporters   Excluding   Limited      Excluding    Foreign    Independent       Majority     Excluding    Good         Poor       9 CEE
                                                     Exporters   Liability     Listed      Owned       Companies      stake >50%      Public     Coverage    Coverage    Countries
                                                                                                                                      Sectors    Countries   Countries

      Firm Outcome                         Sales       Sales      Sales          Sales      Sales            Sales         Sales       Sales       Sales       Sales       Sales

      Largest Owner is Foreign            .176***     .187***    .199***       .212***     .054***       .133***          .184***     .213***    .226***     .134***     .166***
                                           (.017)      (.013)     (.012)        (.010)      (.017)        (.042)           (.012)      (.010)     (.011)      (.025)      (.021)
      Log Foreign Minority Ownership       .035**     .035***    .033***       .033***       .008        .038***           .021**     .034***    .037***     .039***      .023**
                                           (.015)      (.010)     (.009)        (.009)      (.008)        (.015)           (.010)      (.009)     (.010)      (.015)      (.011)
      Log Domestic Minority Ownership     –.016***   –.015***    –.013***      –.015***    –.028***     –.028***          –.018***   –.015***    –.012***    –.026***     –.005
                                           (.003)     (.001)      (.001)        (.001)      (.006)       (.002)            (.002)     (.001)      (.001)      (.003)      (.004)
      Log Total Assets                    –.115***   –.082***    –.082***      –.079***    –.104***     –.076***          –.083***   –.081***    –.078***    –.081***    –.109***




58
                                           (.003)     (.001)      (.001)        (.001)      (.004)       (.003)            (.002)     (.001)      (.001)      (.003)      (.0013
      Firm Age                            –.009***   –.012***    –.012***      –.011***    –.008***     –.012***          –.007***   –.011***    –.012***    –.006***    –.011***
                                           (.000)     (.000)      (.000)        (.000)      (.000)       (.000)            (.000)     (.000)      (.000)      (.000)      (.001)
      Country Fixed Eff.                    yes         yes        yes           yes         yes             yes            yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
      Industry Fixed Eff.                   yes         yes        yes           yes         yes             yes            yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
      Firms                                59,985     700,275    673,107       759,836      22,825       89,793           116,034     730,699    689,118      71,142      46,648


     Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. *** , **, * and † denote significance at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%
     levels, resp. The Exporters sample consists of firms reporting non-zero export revenue in 2002. The Limited Liability sample are public or private
     limited liability companies; the excluded companies correspond to partnerships, sole proprietorships, and cooperatives. The Excluding Listed sample
     excludes companies listed in stock exchanges. The Foreign Owned sample is composed of firms with non-zero foreign ownership. The Independent
     Companies sample consists of firms classified by BvD as “independent.” These companies have no shareholder owning more than 50 percent. For the
     Majority stake >50% sample, we drop firms where the ownership percentage of largest owner is less than 50 percent. The Excluding Public
     Sectors sample drops firms in government and public-regulated sectors, which are: Electricity, gas and water (NACE1=E), Public administration and
     defence, compulsory social security (NACE1=L), Other community, social and personal service activities (NACE1=O), Extra-territorial organizations
     and bodies (NACE1=Q). The columns Good/Poor Coverage Countries split the sample into companies from countries with relatively good AMADEUS
     firm coverage (Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and the UK.) and from countries with relatively poor coverage (Austria,
     Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, and Switzerland). Central and Eastern European (CEE) countries are Cyprus, the Czech
     Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, and Slovakia.
           B      Data and Descriptive Statistics

                                 Table B-1: Number of Firms by Country: Raw and Merged Data

Country     Firm-Level Var.    1996     1997     1998     1999     2000        2001      2002     2003       2004     2005       2006   Per 10,000 of
                                                                                                                                          population
                                                                                                                                                2006


AT          Total Assets                 26       53       76       106        222       508      1298     34528     69273     77388              93
(raw)       Operating Rev.                                                       1         6       119       983      2527      2762               3
            Ownership                                             5715                 84314              104780              122988             148
AT          Total Assets                 12       28       37        50        116       299       785     24754     50454     56763              68
(merged)    Operating Rev.                                                                 3        50       504      1402      1590               2
            Ownership                                                1                 12274               27995               50031              60

BE          Total Assets      19561    80329   188445   210523   226870   243274      262668    281696    301652    282802    324790             308
(raw)       Operating Rev.     8934    34200    76884    88393    90675    93291       96269     97313     99029     82637     85207              81
            Ownership                                              9457               299840              320843              341000             324
BE          Total Assets      17329   74152    175254   195704   211199   226730      245092    262641    279990    288193    295435             280
(merged)    Operating Rev.     7668   30439     68146    78533    80311    82587       85169     85678     86551     78370     71117              67
            Ownership                                              3943               223938              260080              278761             265

CH          Total Assets        12       76       191      287     352          398      443       545       581       626       629               1
(raw)       Operating Rev.      17       88       209      304     373          417      457       558       593       650       638               1
            Ownership                                             2390                 29346               32609               31886              42
CH          Total Assets        10       49       136      196      234         267      301       355       370       380       373              <1
(merged)    Operating Rev.      14       59       151      211      251         283      314       368       380       397       380               1
            Ownership                                                12                  244                 334                 372              <1

DE          Total Assets        57      137       386     1872    4407     10874       21695     50517     93960    215026    280720              34
(raw)       Operating Rev.      54      133       373     1746    3838      9293       18335     35084     53184     62894     46436               6
            Ownership                                            48371                494703              797281              833243             101
DE          Total Assets        20       52       159      827     2187        5970     12624    32646     63710    151406    197879              24
(merged)    Operating Rev.      19       48       148      735     1775        4693      9797    19394     29565     34099     25866               3
            Ownership                                               751                  9173              59436              193244              23

DK*         Total Assets          1       6        16      100    3343         7517    26353    114694    131993    144309    160818             296
(raw)       Operating Rev.                3         8       40     908         1935     7621     32562     35580     35721     33781              62
            Ownership                                             3167                112711              141766              167228             308
DK*         Total Assets                  3        14      89      3124        6996    24776    108337    123638    135398    147138             271
(merged)    Operating Rev.                2         7      34       832        1759     7035     30161     32509     32512     30027              55
            Ownership                                                71                21700              110046              131839             242

ES          Total Assets      72733   198713   245443   289772   333638   434360      533227    620388    709507    732724    623275             141
(raw)       Operating Rev.    67636   191224   233847   274789   315232   409187      493715    564530    637882    661790    570485             129
            Ownership                                             16545               407895              683643              858303             195
ES          Total Assets      52628   156820   193230   228461   263744   347457      411669    450400    474353    467671    405212              92
(merged)    Operating Rev.    49423   152119   185461   218045   250442   328336      384087    416854    438706    436338    381171              86
            Ownership                                              9086               217017              391136              401910              91

FI          Total Assets       1962    12305    33095    39572    43213    46984       51788     58813     63819     70704     76001             144
(raw)       Operating Rev.     1900    12009    32354    38697    42214    45714       50079     56445     61015     67210     72167             137
            Ownership                                              3071                63913               71412               84355             160
FI          Total Assets       1256     8198    22727    27345    29960    32813       36374     41339     44732     48103     51400              98
(merged)    Operating Rev.     1219     8009    22255    26789    29318    31973       35150     39641     42722     45835     48816              93
            Ownership                                              1041                27080               33200               44424              84

FR          Total Assets                       337874   472885   513170   564313      624135    685484    775205    840977    872235             138
(raw)       Operating Rev.                     325277   456359   494303   542249      598333    655912    739707    799939    828422             131
            Ownership                                             28988               848405              910559              974227             154
FR          Total Assets                       222695   313825   342374   379132      422486    464933    521232    555990    566987              90
(merged)    Operating Rev.                     213141   301094   327627   361597      401913    441408    493838    526195    537146              85
            Ownership                                             10929               362572              453597              521021              82

GB*         Total Assets      22494    88888   336280   625526   743161   849593       968352   1151118   1448453   1559654   1659400            274
(raw)       Operating Rev.     8874    35975   115921   188954   211336   227614       245922    273265    332544    329056    333728             55
            Ownership                                             26240               1211150             1631909             1994926            329
GB*         Total Assets      18710    75250   268558   452543   518870   576725      642494     751083   895441    953103    1004915            166
(merged)    Operating Rev.     7128    29418    94863   150048   164422   174355      185530     203572   226461    225659     221189             37
            Ownership                                             16770               548718              782685               931759            154

GR          Total Assets       875     3558     13459    14856    16525    18176       19965     22197     24249     25911     26311              24
(raw)       Operating Rev.     851     3490     13156    14559    16191    17814       19476     21677     23766     25295     25702              23
            Ownership                                              2345                23850               26965               28073              25
GR          Total Assets       677     2860     11255    12383    13639    14905       16174     17719     18897     19819     20174              18
(merged)    Operating Rev.     665     2816     11066    12192    13430    14671       15860     17398     18629     19497     19880              18
            Ownership                                              1293                13048               16328               18038              16

IE*         Total Assets       6808    12850    16346    38180    63029    75918       85583     94871    105584    108743    108440             255
(raw)       Operating Rev.      369      639      791     2104     4317     6007        6799      7621      9006     10728     10775              25
            Ownership                                               775                24362              117072              141005             332
IE*         Total Assets       6235    11882    14860    32100    51181    60245       66334     71808     77933      78206    75186             177
(merged)    Operating Rev.      313      540      670     1747     3484     4901        5438      5951      6982       8117     7955              19
            Ownership                                               348                16548               69032               73188             172



           (Continued on next page)


                                                                          59
                        Table B-1: (Continued) Number of Firms by Country: Raw and Merged Data

Country     Firm-Level Var.    1996      1997      1998      1999      2000      2001      2002     2003       2004      2005      2006    Per 10,000 of
                                                                                                                                             population
                                                                                                                                                   2006


IT          Total Assets       22160   54489      93967    110900    125013    143883   231230     226458   520281     543467    554622              94
(raw)       Operating Rev.     21909   54152      93340    110055    123685    141370   227546     221807   509651     533243    544656              92
            Ownership                                                 21275             175263              273522               612954             104
IT          Total Assets       7533    19359     35801     43054     49366     59277     105778   102160    242833    272205    279504               47
(merged)    Operating Rev.     7444    19270     35597     42747     48915     58042     104110    99957    238598    268453    274126               47
            Ownership                                                 4984                44604             103676              267034               45

NL          Total Assets       50801    85201     97370    104501    113204    132875   202376     240828   279993     274051   258171              158
(raw)       Operating Rev.      1186     1994      2561      2849      3040      4180     6227       7144     8247       8267     7022                4
            Ownership                                                  6237             208977              305552              353143              216
NL          Total Assets       46117    79882     92032     99394   107286    125336    189749    215482    234955     223100   207289              127
(merged)    Operating Rev.       817     1343      1717      1897     2031      2884      4316      4597      4879       4641     3906                2
            Ownership                                                 1504              107893              202576              200893              123

NO*         Total Assets       5995     47706     85587     93949    104125    113251   122785    132336    144430     158112   182457              392
(raw)       Operating Rev.     5248     42351     76037     82720     90761     98055   105845    114061    123430     128826   138531              298
            Ownership                                                  3776             129933              165992              189868              408
NO*         Total Assets       4775    40739     74339      81429    90037     98022     106345   114808    124337    137486    143781              309
(merged)    Operating Rev.     4278    36940     67232      72989    79925     86264      93218   100585    107996    113314    115448              248
            Ownership                                                 2334                96648             113299              130846              281

PT          Total Assets       13148   17748      20054     31368     35424     33564     47322     69054     77966    271040    287698             272
(raw)       Operating Rev.     12444   16799      19067     29620     33348     31853     44940     65467     73127    245844    258535             244
            Ownership                                                  2043               43292               69333               90155              85
PT          Total Assets        4056     5696      7805    12809      16612     18452     26952     36373    34996      47458    46440               44
(clean)     Operating Rev.      3882     5440      7425    12077      15469     17260     25311     34239    32766      44316    43305               41
            Ownership                                                   529                9587              18028               45361               43

SE          Total Assets        487    35243    145459    156686    167357    179121    190538    201805    216114    231682    249319              275
(raw)       Operating Rev.             24734    136694    147072    156429    165855    174998    184657    195918    207929    221725              245
            Ownership                                                 8571              240415              231389              242834              268
SE          Total Assets        347    23616    106586    115048    123294    132960    142018    151122    162610    175507    187688              207
(merged)    Operating Rev.             16784     99916    107588    114811    122598    130062    138059    147525    158019    167873              185
            Ownership                                                 4343              133308              143506              167198              184




TOTAL       Total Assets      217094   637275   1614025   2191053   2492937   2854323   3388968   3952102   4928315   5556291   5742274             143
(raw)       Operating Rev.    129422   417791   1126519   1438261   1586650   1794835   2096568   2338222   2903662   3210373   3180572              79
            Ownership                                                188966             4398369             5884627             7066188             176
TOTAL       Total Assets      159693   498570   1225479   1615244   1823157   2085403   2449465   2821991   3324781   3604479   3686164              92
(merged)    Operating Rev.     82870   303227    807795   1026726   1133043   1292203   1487313   1637912   1908611   1997164   1949795              48
            Ownership                                                 57939             1844352             2784954             3455919              86



           Notes: “Raw,” data are the number of firms with non-missing data as available in the original data source. “Merged,” data
           show the number of firms with non-missing data after we merge ownership data with financial data and apply our sample
           selection criteria as discussed in detail in Appendix B. The column marked “Per 10,000 of population 2006” reports the number
           of firms in 2006 reporting year in AMADEUS per 10 thousand of the country population in 2006.
           *Firms in countries marked with asterisk do not have sales data in AMADEUS. The country name abbreviations denote
           Austria (AT), Belgium (BE), Denmark (DK), Finland (FI), France (FR), Germany (DE), Greece (GR), Ireland (IE), Italy (IT),
           Netherlands (NL), Norway(NO), Portugal (PT), Spain (ES), Sweden (SE), Switzerland (CH), and the United Kingdom (GB).




                                                                         60
Figure 1: Macroeconomic Volatility and Financial Integration in Europe


                                                       Lithuania

                                                          .03
                                               GDP Growth
                                                   Growth


                                                                                                           Malta
                                                                            Estonia
                                                                                                                              Ireland
                                                .025
                                            capita




                                                                          Latvia
                                                                                                       Cyprus
                          over 1995-2005
                                        Capita
                                    per per

                                     .02




                                                                                            Finland
                                GDP
                            of Real




                                                                Poland                     Portugal
                                                                                                         Netherlands
                      of Real

                         .015




                                                                     CzechHungary
                                                                           Republic
                                                                                                  Sweden
                 Volatility




                                                                                       France
                                                                                      Denmark
            Volatiliy




                                                                          Greece Spain
                                                                                     Austria                 Belgium
              .01




                                                                   Slovak RepublicGermany
                                                                   Slovenia    Italy

                                                                                                       United Kingdom
       .005




                                                                    0              1                2            3
                                                                  Log AverageLog Average Openness
                                                                              Openness   from LM  1995-2005
                                                                                                    over 1995-2005
                                                                 Samples Legend:
                                                                 Black solid: EU-25 w/o Luxembourg
                                                                 Red short dash: EU-15 w/o Luxembourg
                                                                 Black long dash: EU-25 w/o Luxembourg, Ireland, Malta, and Cyprus
                                                    Figure 2: Financial Integration in Europe, 1990–2006
                                                    Panel A: Sum of foreign labilities of 16 European countries
                                                                    as percent of total GDP


                                              250                                                                                                                                                      100

                                                                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                                                                              Portfolio Equity and FDI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Portfolio and FDI Liabilities /
                                              200                                                                                                                                                      80

                                                                                                                                                                                                       70
                   um of Debt Liabilities /




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Total GDP (%)
                                              150                                                                                                                                                      60
                      Total GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       50

                                              100                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                           Debt




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sum of P
                  Su




                                                                                                                                                                                                       30

                                              50                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                                                       10

                                               0                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                           1990
                                                                    1991
                                                                             1992
                                                                                    1993
                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                   1995
                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                                                1998
                                                                                                                                       1999
                                                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                                                                     2001
                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                       2003
                                                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                         2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                2006
                                                           Panel B: Foreign liability components
                                               as percent of total foreign liabilities for 16 European countries


                                    100%

                                          90%                              Portfolio equity and FDI

                                          80%

                                          70%

                                          60%

                                          50%

                                          40%
                                                                               Debt
                                          30%

                                          20%

                                          10%

                                              0%
                                                    1990

                                                                  1991

                                                                            1992

                                                                                    1993

                                                                                            1994

                                                                                                      1995

                                                                                                                    1996

                                                                                                                              1997

                                                                                                                                       1998

                                                                                                                                              1999

                                                                                                                                                      2000

                                                                                                                                                                2001

                                                                                                                                                                              2002

                                                                                                                                                                                        2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006




Notes: Based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007). The total foreign liability stocks is the sum of FDI, portfolio equity,
and debt liabilites. The 16 countries included are Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Denmark, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.


                                                                                                                              62
                                           Figure 3: Distribution of Firm-Level Log Operating Revenue (euros), 2000–2006


                                                   2000                                                                              2002
                                                                     Skewness 0.045                            150000
                                                                                                                                                         Skewness 0.039
                          100000                                     Kurtosis 3.878
                                                                                                                                                         Kurtosis 4.004



                           80000

                                                                                                               100000

                           60000




                           40000




        Number of Firms
                                                                                             Number of Firms
                                                                                                                50000



                           20000




                               0                                                                                    0

                                   0   5            10           15          20         25                              0   5         10           15          20          25
                                              Log Operating Revenue (Euro)                                                      Log Operating Revenue (Euro)




63
                                                   2004                                                                              2006

                          200000                                                                               200000
                                                                       Skewness 0.047                                                                    Skewness -0.027
                                                                       Kurtosis 4.116                                                                    Kurtosis 4.160



                          150000                                                                               150000




                          100000                                                                               100000




     Number of Firms
                                                                                             Number of Firms




                           50000                                                                                50000




                               0                                                                                    0

                                   0   5            10           15          20         25                              0   5         10           15          20          25
                                              Log Operating Revenue (Euro)                                                      Log Operating Revenue (Euro)
                                             Figure 4: Distribution of Firm Size (Total Assets) and Other Outcomes, 2006


                                    Firm-Level Log Total Assets (euros)                                                             Winsorized Firm-Level Log Total Assets (euros)

                       250000                                               Skewness 0.137                                     150000
                                                                            Kurtosis 3.623
                                                                                                                                                                           skewness -0.023
                                                                                                                                                                           kurtosis 3.072
                       200000


                                                                                                                               100000
                       150000




                       100000




     Number of Firms
                                                                                                             Number of Firms
                                                                                                                                50000


                        50000




                            0                                                                                                       0

                                5           10                15              20             25                                         5             10                     15              20
                                                      Log Total Assets (Euro)                                                                          Log Total Assets (Euro)




64
                                        Firm-Level Log Sales (euros)                                   Distribution of the Firm-Level Log Number of Employees (Persons)

                       150000
                                                                            Skewness 0.172                                     300000                                      Skewness 0.823
                                                                            Kurtosis 4.101                                                                                 Kurtosis 3.826




                       100000                                                                                                  200000




     Number of Firms
                                                                                                          Number of Firms




                        50000                                                                                                  100000




                            0                                                                                                       0

                                    5            10               15               20             25                                    0              5                    10               15
                                                         Log Sales (Euro)                                                                         Log Number of Employees (Persons)
                                               Figure 5: Distribution of Firm-Level Volatility

                                                        Panel A: Operating Revenue

                                                                                           skewness 0.410
                                       40000
                                                                                           kurtosis 3.572




                                       30000
                     Number of Firms




                                       20000




                                       10000




                                           0

                                                 −4               −2                          0               2
                                                                    Log Volatility, SD




                                                               Panel B: Sales


                                       30000                                                 skewness 0.430
                                                                                             kurtosis 3.620
                     Number of Firms




                                       20000




                                       10000




                                           0

                                                −4               −2                          0                2
                                                                      Log Volatility, SD


Notes: Volatility is the standard deviation of growth of firm outcome 2002–2006, winsorized at 1 and 99 percent.



                                                                       65
                                                                Figure 6: Distribution of Firm-Level Foreign Ownership


                                                           2000                                                                                         2002
                                        100000                                                                                       1844352

                                         57939




                                                                                                                                     100000


                                          5000



                                                                                                                                        5000




           Number of Firms, Log Scale
                                                                                                        Number of Firms, Log Scale
                                           100                                                                                           100

                                                  0    20      40      60     80     100                                                       0    20      40      60     80     100
                                                      Foreign Ownership Percentage                                                                 Foreign Ownership Percentage




66
                                                           2004                                                                                         2006

                                        2784954                                                                                      3455919




                                        100000                                                                                       100000




                                           5000                                                                                         5000




     Number of Firms, Log Scale
                                                                                                        Number of Firms, Log Scale




                                            100                                                                                          100

                                                  0    20      40      60     80     100                                                       0    20      40      60     80     100
                                                      Foreign Ownership Percentage                                                                 Foreign Ownership Percentage
                                                        Figure 7: Distribution of Firm-Level Foreign Ownership for Firms with Non-Zero Foreign Ownership

                                                                               2000                                                                                                2002


                                           45                                                                                                             50

                                           40                                                                                                             45

                                                                                                                                                          40
                                           35




                                 ms
                                nership
                                                                                                                                                          35
                                           30
                                                                                                                                                          30
                                           25




                      hare of Firm
                                                                                                                                                          25
                                           20
                                                                                                                                                          20




             n‐Zero Forreign Own
                                                                                                                               ntage Share of Firms
                                           15
                                                                                                                                                          15




         Percentage Sh
                                                                                                                          Percen
                                           10




     with Non
                                                                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                      with Non‐ZZero Foreign Ownership
                                                5                                                                                                          5

                                                0                                                                                                          0
                                                         up to 20    21‐40    41‐60      61 ‐ 80    81‐99.99   '100                                            up to 20   21‐40     41‐60     61 ‐ 80    81‐99.99   '100
                                                                             Ownership Percentage                                                                                 Ownership Percentage




67
                                                                               2004                                                                                                2006


                                                60                                                                                                        60


                                                50                                                                                                        50


                                                40                                                                                                        40


                                                30                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                               n‐Zero Foreign Ownership




                     n‐Zero Foreign Ownership
                                                20                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                          Perccentage Share of Firms




                 Perceentage Share of Firms
                                                                                                                      with Non




             with Non
                                                10                                                                                                        10


                                                    0                                                                                                     0
                                                          up to 20   21‐40     41‐60      61 ‐ 80   81‐99.99   '100                                            up to 20   21‐40    41‐60      61 ‐ 80    81‐99.99   '100
                                                                             Ownership Percentage                                                                                 Ownership Percentage
Figure 8: Distribution of Firm-Level Foreign Ownership for Firms with Largest Owner Foreign,
2006




                                 47830                                                                  39229
      mber of Firms, Log Scale




                                 17715



                                                                    6389
                                 6561
                                                                                           4513
    Num




                                          2359
                                 2430                                           2022


                                                        1009
                                  900
                                         up to 20       21‐40       41‐60      61 ‐ 80   81‐99.99       100
                                                    Ownership Percentage of the Largest Foreign Owner




                                                                        68
                                                                 Figure 9: Distribution of Firm-Level Minority Ownership, 2006

                                                                     Distribution of Firm-Level Foreign Minority Ownership (FMO)
                                                       Number of Firms                                                                                         Number of Firms


                                                                                                                                        20250    20408
                                            3427096
                                  3660250


                                                                                                                                        6750
                                  332750                                                                                                                                     4749
                                                                                                                                                                3284

                                                                                                                                        2250
                                   30250              20408

                                                                            4749




       mber of Firms, Log Scale
                                                                                                             mber of Firms, Log Scale
                                                                  3284




     Num
                                                                                                           Num
                                    2750                                                                                                 750


                                                                                       265                                                                                                 265
                                     250                                                                                                 250
                                              0       up to 20    21‐40     41‐60     61 ‐ 80   81‐99.99                                         up to 20      21‐40         41‐60       61 ‐ 80     81‐99.99
                                                           Foreign Ownership Percentage                                                                          Foreign Ownership Percentage
                                                        when Company Largest Owner Excluded                                                                   when Company Largest Owner Excluded




69
                                                                    Distribution of Firm-Level Domestic Minority Ownership (DMO)
                                                       Number of Firms                                                                                        Percent of All Firms


                                                                                                                                                                             478884
                                  3660250   2444671                                                                                     512096
                                                                                                                                                   255420
                                                                                                                                                                129839                    121958
                                                                           478884
                                   332750             255420
                                                                 129839               121958                                             40322
                                                                                                                                                                                                      17184
                                    30250                                                        17184


                                                                                                                                          3175
                                                                                                             mber of Firms, Log Scale




     Number of Firms, Log Scale
                                     2750
                                                                                                           Num




                                      250
                                                                                                                                           250
                                               0      up to 20    21‐40     41‐60     61 ‐ 80   81‐99.99
                                                                                                                                                   up to 20      21‐40        41‐60       61 ‐ 80    81‐99.99
                                                           Domestic Ownership Percentage
                                                                                                                                                                  Domestic Ownership Percentage
                                                        when Company Largest Owner Excluded
                                                                                                                                                               when Company Largest Owner Excluded
                                       Figure 10: Distribution of Ownership in 2006 for Two Regions

                                                                                              Foreign Ownership
                                           Bavaria 2006                                                                                                                       Scotland 2006
                  30000                                                                                                                   60000
Number of Firms




                                                                                                                        Number of Firms
                  20000                                                                                                                   40000




                  10000                                                                                                                   20000




                      0                                                                                                                       0

                          0      20               40          60                       80                 100                                       0              20                40          60           80     100
                                           Foreign Ownership Percentage                                                                                                       Foreign Ownership Percentage

                                           All Firms                           Small Firms                                                                                    All Firms                Small Firms
                                           Medium Firms                        Large Firms                                                                                    Medium Firms             Large Firms




                                       Majority Ownership, Firms with Largest Owner Foreign, Bavaria 2006


                                                                             800
                                                                                                                                                                        734
                                                                             700

                                                                             600
                                                           Number of Firms




                                                                             500

                                                                             400

                                                                             300

                                                                             200
                                                                                                                103                         85            94
                                                                             100
                                                                                     14            29
                                                                               0
                                                                                   up to 20       21‐40         41‐60                     61 ‐ 80       81‐99.99        100
                                                                                              Ownership Percentage of the Largest Foreign Owner




                                                                               Minority Ownership, Bavaria 2006
                              Foreign Minority Ownership                                                                                                   Domestic Minority Ownership
                  30000                                                                                                                   20000




                                                                                                                                          15000
Number of Firms




                                                                                                                        Number of Firms




                  20000


                                                                                                                                          10000


                  10000
                                                                                                                                          5000




                      0                                                                                                                       0

                          0           20        40             60                                   80                                              0              20         40           60          80            100
                                     Foreign Ownership Percentage                                                                                                      Domestic Ownership Percentage
                                  When Company Largest Owner Excluded                                                                                               When Company Largest Owner Excluded

                                           All Firms                           Small Firms                                                                                    All Firms                Small Firms
                                           Medium Firms                        Large Firms                                                                                    Medium Firms             Large Firms



                                                                                                        70
              Figure 11: Distribution of the Propensity Scores for Matched and Unmatched Firms

                                                                 A: Firms in the Matched Sample
              Firms with Non-Zero Foreign Ownership                                                           Firms with Zero Foreign Ownership
         15




                                                                                                     15
         10




                                                                                                     10
   Percent




                                                                                           Percent
         5




                                                                                                     5
         0




                                                                                                     0


               0              .2                .4                .6             .8                       0                .2               .4                 .6          .8
                   Propensity
                   Propensity Scores,
                               Scores, Foregn−owned
                                       Foreign−ownedFirms
                                                     FirmsininMatched
                                                              MatchedSample
                                                                      Sample                                     Propensity Scores, Domestic Firms in the Matched Sample




                                                                       B: Unmatched Firms
                                                        60
                                                        40
                                              Percent
                                                        20
                                                        0




                                                             0       .1           .2           .3          .4                    .5
                                                                     Propensity Scores, Unmatched Domestic Firms




Notes: In Panel A the distribution of the propensity scores is for 24,697 firms with non-zero foreign ownership (left
graph) and 24,697 firms with zero foreign ownership (right graph) making up the matched sample. In Panel B, the
distribution of the propensity scores is for 998,069 unmatched domestic firms. Matching is performed on firm age, total
assets, country- and industry-dummies at the 2-digit NACE level. The propensity scores are the estimated (logistic)
probabilities of being foreign-owned conditional on these variables. See Appendix B for detailed explanations.




                                                                               71
                                                     Figure 12: Dynamics of Aggregate Volatility


                                    .05

                                            Volatility of Aggregated
                                             Firm Revenue Growth

                                    .04
Average Regional Volatility, SD_t




                                    .03



                                            Volatility of per Capita
                                                GDP Growth
                                    .02




                                    .01
                                          2001         2002            2003         2004           2005   2006

Notes: Cross-sectional average of the time-varying volatility measure, see Equation (1), calculated for aggregated
operating revenue from AMADUES (upper line) or regional per capita GDP from Eurostat. The vertical lines show
+/– one standard deviation.




                                                                          72
                   Figure 13: Conditional Correlation Plot of First-Stage Regression
                                1




                                                                                                                                        be3402
                                .5




                                                                                                                                   uke206
                                                                                                                         fr2206es6102
                                                                     ukc202                    fr2506  fr2304 uki204   ukj306
                     Financial Integration




                                                                                                  fr2204
                                                                   es1206 fr2602                ukj104   fr4102itc102           se2202
                                                                                                  itd204           pt1602
                                                                            be1006ukn002 fr5206    ukf102
                                                                                                      es1302ite306  ite206      pt1106 ukd402 be2306
                                                                                                  be2504
                                                                                             ukh306be3304
                                                                                                  se2304
                                                                                                 fr2604          ukl104
                                                                                                             se2102                             uki102
                                                                                         pt1706  ite402
                                                                                              fr8206       ukf202  fr6102
                                                                                                                      es3006 ite102 es1106    uke406
                                                                                     fr8106
                                                                                      ukk202     nl3102
                                                                                                 es5204
                                                                                                  nl3304    fr2402
                                                                                                           pt1604                se3206        uke106
                                                       ukm302                               itf402
                                                                                         fr4306      ukh304
                                                                                                    es2404
                                                                                                    es4204
                                                                                                   itf204
                                                                                                 fr6302
                                                                                                  itd304
                                                                                                fr8104
                                                                                                 be1004
                                                                                                    es2104 nl4106
                                                                                                       fr4104                      itd506
                                                                                                                                fr3002        itf602 be2506
                                                    fr1002         itf206                   pt1104
                                                                                 ukg306itc106     fr6104
                                                                                                    es4104
                                                                                                es3004nl3106   fr4302
                                                                                                            ite404
                                                                                                               fr8302 se1106
                                                                                                                 itc402
                                                                                                                ukl204              itg102                ukm306
                                                                      fr3006itc302        es5106
                                                                                           fr8306  nl3204
                                                                                                 se3204
                                                                                                 ite304
                                                                                             se2306
                                                                                              ukn004be2304
                                                                                                   es1104
                                                                                                    nl4104
                                                                                                   itc404
                                                                                                  ite204
                                                                                                 fr5106     ukg304
                                                                                                          itc304
                                                                                                     ukh204
                                                                                                       fr5202
                                                                                                      fr4204
                                                                                                       fr5102  pt1702
                                                                                                          fi1a02
                                                                                                         fi1806        fr4202
                                                                                                                    nl3302
                                                                                                                  ukh102
                                                                                                                      itf502                           es5202
                                                                        itd502        itf506
                                                                                        ukh106       ukh202
                                                                                                   fr6304
                                                                                                   itg104            ukg102          itd306 es2406
                               0




                                                 uki106      itf606                ukg106es4106
                                                                                      uke104        fi1804
                                                                                                     ukg104
                                                                                                 se1104
                                                                                                  deg002
                                                                                                  deg004
                                                                                                  deg006
                                                                                                   ie0202
                                                                                                   ie0204
                                                                                                   ie0206
                                                                                                   fi1a04
                                                                                                  es5104   nl3206
                                                                                                        fr2502                                          fr1006
                                                             ukl206 es4202
                                                             ukl106          es2102          nl3202 ukf204
                                                                                               fi1a06
                                                                                               fi1802
                                                                                                  ite104
                                                                                              fr1004ukf106
                                                                                                  fr5104
                                                                                                   itf504
                                                                                                ukh206        itf406
                                                                                                                es5102       es2106
                                                                                                                         ukk206       ukl202
                                                                                                                                 es4206
                                                                be3306 itg106 fr4206            es1306
                                                                                                  fr8204
                                                                                                 ukh104
                                                                                             ukk204
                                                                                        uke404
                                                                                            fr2406    fr2404
                                                                                                     itf404
                                                                                                    itf604         ukd404
                                                                                                               es4102                  es1202
                                                            es2402uke402  ite106 se1102
                                                                       itd302
                                                                     uke102
                                                                                           se2106
                                                                                          itc406
                                                                                         ukc204
                                                                                       uke204
                                                                                                 fr8304
                                                                                                     es6104
                                                                                                    se2104 fr8202
                                                                                                      fr6306
                                                                                                    itd504        ukg302itc306                              itd206
                                                  es5206                se2206      ukm304   nl4102
                                                                                        ukj102
                                                                                             ukf206
                                                                                               fr2306
                                                                                               ukj304  se2204
                                                                                                           fr3004                        be3302
                                                              es1102       se3202     nl3306          fr4304
                                                                                                     pt1704 ukj106
                                                                                                    es1304            uki104             itf202
                                                                                                                                     ukl102
                                             itd202 ukd406                            es3002       nl3104               fr8102            uki202
                                                      uki206                           fr6106
                                                                                       ukj302     ukf104   se2302
                                                      be2302                            ite202ite406
                                                                                                  es1204
                                                                                                 fr5204fr2302
                                                   be2502                      pt1102          ite302   ukh302            ukn006              ukc206
                                                                 es6106                           itc104                       be1002
                                                                      uke202      pt1606     fr4106   fr2504
                                −.5




                                                           be3406                                                                 fr2606
                                                                                                  be3404



                                                                             fr2202
                                −1




                                               −.2                       −.1                      0                            .1                         .2
                                                                                             Instrument


Notes: Plot of conditional correlation of Financial Integration and the instrument (Trust × Financial Harmonization
Laws) form the first-stage regression in column (1) of Table 10. The regression line (solid) has a coefficient of 0.69
(significant at the 1% level) while the shaded area represents the 95% confidence interval. The dashed regression line
drops the outliers Luxembourg/Belgium (BE34) and Picardie (FR22) and has a coefficient of 0.43 (significant at the
2% level).




                                                                                          73
Figure 14: Distribution of Firm Assets in AMADEUS by Availability of Ownership Data, 2006

                                                            Panel A: All Firms
                                                                                            skewness   -0.057
                                    300000                                                  kurtosis   4.749




                  Number of Firms   200000




                                    100000




                                            0

                                                0       5          10            15              20                  25
                                                                 Log Total Assets (Euro)




                                                      Panel B: Reporting Firms
                                                                                                 skewness   -0.172
                                    250000                                                       kurtosis   4.975




                                    200000
                  Number of Firms




                                    150000




                                    100000




                                     50000




                                            0

                                                0       5          10            15              20                  25
                                                                 Log Total Assets (Euro)




                                                    Panel C: Non-Reporting Firms
                                    80000

                                                                                      skewness 0.440
                                                                                      kurtosis 5.047



                                    60000
                  Number of Firms




                                    40000




                                    20000




                                        0

                                                0      5           10            15             20                   25
                                                                 Log Total Assets (Euro)
