NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUTTING PER-CAPITA INCOME BACK INTO TRADE THEORY
James R. Markusen
Working Paper 15903
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15903

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

The authors would like to thank Marcos Chamon, Avi Ebenstein, Lena Edlund, Roger Gordon, Ed
Hopkins, Tatiana Kornienko, Justin Lin, Olivier Jeanne, Simon Johnson, Nancy Qian, Junsen Zhang,
and seminar participants at the NBER and various universities for helpful discussions, Joy Glazener,
John Klopfer, and Jin Yang for able research assistance, and the National Science Foundation for financial
support through an award for the project “competitive savings, competitive growth, and global implications.”
The remaining errors are the authors’ responsibilities. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by James R. Markusen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Putting Per-Capita Income Back into Trade Theory
James R. Markusen
NBER Working Paper No. 15903
April 2010, revised May 2010
JEL No. F1,F10
ABSTRACT
A major role for per-capita income in international trade, as opposed to simply country size, was persuasively
advanced by Linder (1961). Yet this crucial element of Linder’s story was abandon by most later
trade economists in favor of the analytically-tractable but counter-empirical assumption that all countries
share identical and homothetic preferences. This paper collects and unifies a number of disjoint points
in the existing literature and builds further on them using simple and tractable alternative preferences.
Adding non-homothetic preferences to a traditional models helps explain such diverse phenomenon
as growing wage gaps, the mystery of the missing trade, home bias in consumption, and the role of
intra-country income distribution, solely from the demand side of general equilibrium. With imperfect
competition, we can explain higher markups and higher price levels in higher per-capita income countries,
and the puzzle that gravity equations show a positive dependence of trade on per-capita incomes, aggregate
income held constant. In all cases, the effects of growth are quite different depending on whether
it is growth in productivity or through factor accumulation. The paper concludes with some suggestions
for calibration, estimation, and gravity equations.
James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu

1.

Introduction

All international trade economists understand that many things can cause trade.
However, our models and empirical analyses typically and appropriately tend to focus on one
cause of trade at a time in order to understand how a particular basis for trade contributes to
explaining trade patterns, determines gains from trade, and impacts on income distribution.
That having been said, it seems that most trade theory focuses on production-side
determinants of trade. It is typically assumed that consumers have identical and homothetic
preferences within and across countries. Aggregate demand depends only on commodity
prices and aggregate income, and it is independent of the distribution of income. I also
believe that it is appropriate to suggest that no one thinks that this is a good empirical
assumption and that it is made for analytical convenience and tractability.1
If we control for differences in prices across countries, the observation of different
budget shares can indicate either that preferences differ and/or that they are non-homothetic.
Two pure cases can be distinguished: one in which countries have homothetic but nonidentical preferences and one in which countries have identical but non-homothetic
preferences. I feel much more comfortable with the second alternative. Then demand
differences are not only systematic but the hypothesis is testable and falsifiable.
The purpose of this paper is collect, synthesize, and build on fragmented results from
existing research in order to offer a generic model of identical but non-homothetic
preferences in order to present a unified and testable set of results. In section two, the
preferences are presented and analyzed and then placed on top of a standard two-good, twofactor, two-country Heckscher-Ohlin model. The resulting model offers alternative
explanations for such diverse phenomenon as growing wage gaps, the mystery of the missing
trade, home bias in consumption, and a role for intra-country income distribution solely from
the demand side of general equilibrium. In section 3, I add scale economies and imperfect
competition and show that the model can offer alternative explanations for higher price levels
and higher markups in high-productivity economies, and a higher trade volume between
identical high per-capita income countries, aggregate income held constant. In both
competitive and imperfect-competition cases the effects of growth are quite different
depending on whether it is growth in productivity or in factor accumulation.
Before proceeding, a short literature review is in order and I should first point out that
many of the ideas here are found in earlier papers focusing on specific issues. Several
papers, obviously beginning with Linder, focused on monopolistic competition and the
impact of non-homothetic preferences on intra versus inter-industry trade. Papers by
Markusen (1986), Bergstrand (1990), and Francois and Kaplan (1996) draw out implications
for intra-industry and total trade volumes. Matsuyama (2000) uses a competitive Ricardian
model in which the South’s comparative-advantage goods are low-income-elasticity-ofdemand goods to derive results similar to some here. Fieler (2010) uses a Ricardian approach
1

A more egregious assumption is made in much of the strategic trade-policy literature: quasilinear preferences in which the income elasticity of demand for increasing-returns good(s) is zero.
Yet the industries offered as examples, such as aircraft and electronics are surely goods with income
elasticities greater than one! The present author has of course been guilty himself of this atrocity.

1

2
ala Eaton and Kortum (2002), which yields outcomes related to those from monopolistic
competition. There is a dispersion of technologies across goods and a variability of labor
efficiency across countries. High income elasticity goods have a higher dispersion and are
produced in high-income countries. This higher dispersion leads to more trade among the
high-income countries relative to low-income countries.
Markusen (1986) is a three-region model with “east-west” trade among identical
high-income (north) countries and “north-south” trade between the high and low per-capitaincome countries. High income-elasticity goods are both capital-intensive and differentiated,
while the homogeneous low -income elasticity good is labor intensive. The volume of eastwest (north-north) trade is then higher than north-south trade relative to identical and
homothetic preferences. Fieler (2010) makes substantial theoretical progress on this sort of
multi-country prediction in her Ricardian model and deals with south-south trade as well..
Table 1 gives some income-elasticity estimates from broad categories of consumption
goods from Markusen and Hunter (1989). Non-homotheticity similarly means that the shares
of a country’s national expenditure for goods vary with levels of per-capita income. Table 1
shows shares from Hunter (1991) and Cassing and Nishioka (2009). Simply “eyeballing”
shares in these two papers suggests that preferences are not just differing randomly across
countries but observed shares are related to per-capita income.
Hunter (1991) shows that the influence of non-homotheticity is in the direction of
reducing the volume of trade. A counter-factual analysis neutralizes the estimated nonhomotheticity and finds that the effect of imposing homotheticity is to raise trade flows by 29
percent. Cassing and Nishioka (2009) use a neutralization exercise similar to Hunter’s and
find that developing countries consume relatively more labor-intensive goods than under
preference homogeneity. Second, they find that preference biases between rich and poor
countries explain a larger proportion of missing factor trade than do differences in
technology, though preference differences are not distinguished from non-homotheticity.
Fieler’s (2010) emprical results are strong and convincing. Her model correctly predicts both
the large volume of trade among high-income countries and the low volume of trade among
poor countries, whereas previous gravity-type work has done a poor job on the latter.
These results contrast with Bowen, Leamer and Sveikauskas (1987) and Trefler
(1995) who do introduce non-homothetic preferences into their analyses and get weak value
added from doing so. Neither paper addresses non-homotheticity as a cause of missing trade
or home bias (Trefler does find it helps solve the “endowment paradox”). Reimer and Hertel
(2010) find that non-homothetic preferences play only a small role in missing trade over
broad categories of goods. Rather, they find that, as income grows, it is directed toward the
relatively capital-intensive version of a given good.
Results in the section introducing imperfect competition are similar to those found in
Wong (2003), Hummels and Lugovskyy (2009) and Simonovska,(2009) which is that
markups and hence the price level will be higher in the high per-capita-income country.
Simonovska gets strong empirical support for this relationship, also found in earlier papers
including Hsieh and Klendow (2007). I should also note that Simonovska carefully considers
identical products, which eliminates quality issues which could be an alternative explanation
for systematic price differences by per-capita income. Essentially the same result was found

3
by Wong for pricing of identical pharmaceutical products.
An area where per-capita income does play an important role is in the analysis of
product quality. If a consumer is going to buy only one unit of a good or zero, then the
quality demanded is likely to depend on per-capita income. This makes the average level of
per-capita income important for trade but also the intra-country distribution of income
matters for inter-country trade. Because the issues connected with product quality are
somewhat better understood and because they require a quite different analytical approach,
they will not feature in this paper despite their importance.2

2.

A Generic Model

The preferences we will use are variation on a standard Stone-Geary utility function,
to be introduced shortly. The production side of the model is deliberately Heckscher-Ohlin
to permit an easy comparison with traditional results. There are two good (X and Y), two
factors of production (K and L) and two countries home and foreign (h and f).
Throughout the paper, the following assumptions are made.
(1) good
X is relatively capital intensive, and Y is relatively labor intensive
(2) good
X has an income elasticity of demand greater than one
(3)
good X is the increasing-returns good if there is one (section 3)
(4)
the labor supply to production is identical to the number of households
(5)
country h is relatively capital abundant when relative endowments differ
(6)
country h has higher productivity when productivities differ across countries
Most of these assumptions are without loss of generality, but the intersection of (1) (4) matters; in particular, that the capital-intensive good has the high income elasticity of
demand. Empirical support for this assumption is found in Bergstrand (1990) and indirectly
in Hunter (1991) and Cassing and Nishioka (2009). Matsuyama (2000) uses an equivalent
assumption in his Ricardian model: the South’s comparative advantage goods are lowincome-elasticity goods. Fieler’s (2010) theory is also Ricardian, and the theory and
empirical evidence deliver a related result: the south has a comparative advantage in lowincome elasticity standardized goods while the north has an advantage in high-incomeelasticity goods whose production technologies are more variable across countries.
Since we will focus on a limited number of experiments, some short-hand
terminology is used throughout. Productivity advantage or growth, or higher productivity
refers to an equal proportional Hicks-neutral productivity advantage or growth in both sectors

2

For analyses of product quality and/or the importance of intra-country income distribution
(which I will treat briefly) see Choi, Hummels and Xiang (2009), Dalgin, Trindade and Mitra
(2008),Fajgelbaum, Grossman and Helpman (2009), Flam and Helpman (1987), Francois and Kaplan
(1996), Hallak (2006), Manova and Zhang (2009), Mitra and Trindade (2005), Schott (2004), Shaked
and Sutton (1983, 1984), and Stokey (1991).

4
in one country (always country h). Factor accumulation refers to a equal proportional
growth in both factor endowment of one or both countries: factor accumulation increases the
number of households in the same proportion.
Lower-case letters denote per-household quantities. In addition to x and y, there is a
parameter z > 0 at the household level. Preferences or utility (u) are given as follows.
(1)
We could interpret z as an endowment good and assume that households cannot buy or sell z.
x could be televisions and z could be watching a sunset (non-rivaled and non-excludable:
sitting on a dock on the bay as Otis Redding might say). The assumption that x and z are
additive has little to with the results of this paper, but has the advantages that (a) there is a
simple analytical solution for demand and (b) aggregate demand does not depend on the
distribution of income (with a qualification noted below).3
It is more common to see Stone-Geary written with (y - z) instead of (x + z), with z >
0 then referred to as a “minimum consumption requirement”. But this leads to a problem if
income is insufficient to purchase the minimum consumption requirement and no household
will ever be observed to purchase only good Y. In addition, our formulation in (1) will mean
that the price elasticity of demand for X will be falling in per-capita income, a property
exploited in Wong and in Simonovska.
Let mi denote the income of household i and let px and py denote the prices of X and Y.
The households budget constraint is given by:
(2)
Maximization of (1) subject to (2) gives the following Marshallian demand functions.
.
(3)

(4)
At low levels of income, the household buys only good Y, and above the threshold income
indicated in (4) by m0, begins to buy X. This is an interesting and surely realistic point, and
it makes aggregate demand depend on the distribution of income. I will assume for much of

3

Virtually all the results go through with the CES-Cobb-Douglas version
except perfect aggregation: aggregate demand always depends on the
distribution of income. This function is hard to work with analytically (though easy for the
computer).

5
the paper that (4) holds with strict inequality for all households.
Properties of the preferences are illustrated in Figure 1, left panel. The Engels curve
(prices constant) is given by 0y0A: up to income m0, given by (4) with equality, the household
consumes only good Y and then has a constant marginal propensity to consumer X and Y as
income rises. The share of X in consumption as household income rises is shown in the righthand panel (calibration is $ = 0.667) of Figure 1.
Let L denote both the country’s labor supply and household measure so that Z = zL
denotes the economy-wide “endowment” of Z: z is a parameter, while Z is strictly
proportional to the number of households. Given that (4) holds for all households, aggregate
demand for X is independent of the distribution of income and given by4
(5)
Now consider the income elasticity of demand for X and assume that income grows
through a productivity increase, holding the number of households L and therefore Z
constant.
(6)
(growth through productivity improvement)
If growth instead occurs through neutral factor accumulation, Z is strictly proportional to M,
then
(growth through neutral factor accumulation)

Using

(7)

, the Marshallian price elasticity, defined as positive, is

(8)
Thus the per-capita income and the price elasticities of demand for X are (locally) the same,
and illustrated in the right-hand panel of Figure 1.
4

The general n-good name for this type of demand function is “linear expenditure system”
and is also used in Bowen, Leamer, and Sveikauskas, (1987) who refer to the Zs as “autonomous”
expenditure. See Deaton and Muellbauer (1980) for an excellent general analysis.

6
The properties of aggregate demand for the economy, holding prices constant are
shown in Figure 2. Let Z0 denotes the initial value of Z. Hold Z constant but allowing
aggregate income to vary either through productivity or through capital accumulation,
holding L constant. This leads to an Engels income-consumption curve that starts at the
origin and moves up the Y axis (consuming only Y) to point Y0 after which higher income will
result in positive X demand. At incomes above that which allows point Y0 to be reached, the
Engels curve is linear through A at income level M0 and reaching B at income level M1.
Consider point A and income level M0 in Figure 2. Now suppose instead we let the
economy grow through proportional factor accumulation, adding households in strict
proportion to the increase in income, so Z and M grow to Z1 and M1 respectively. Now the
Engels curve will be given by a ray through the origin and points A and C and aggregate
demand is homothetic with respect to aggregate income. Figure 2 gives the first important
result of the paper: a growing economy will look very different depending on whether growth
is through productivity or capital accumulation on the one hand, or neutral factor
accumulation on the other (aggregate income and households grow in strict proportion).
From this point on, I will some results in terms of simulations. All of the results are
intuitive, some are found formally in earlier papers and I am quite sure that all of the
qualitative properties of all results have no dependence on the specific parameters or other
assumptions used in these specific examples. The initial “calibration” point is the one used in
the right-hand panel of Figure 1: at productivity one, the income and price elasticity are 1.333
and the share of X in consumption is 0.5; the value of $ = 2/3 is used in this example and
throughout the paper. As productivity grows without bound the income and price elasticity
approaches one and the consumption share approaches its marginal value of 2/3 in Figure 1.
With the neutral and equal productivity growth in both sectors, the production frontier
of the economy is growing radially, but demand is shifting toward good X. This generates a
movement around the frontier toward X, so the relative price of X rises as shown in Figure 3.
But this generates the usual Stolper-Samuelson effect on relative factor prices, so the rental
(r) - wage (w) ratio r/w is rising as shown in Figure 3. Suppose we interpret capital as skilled
labor or human capital and L as unskilled labor. A neutral productivity growth generates an
increase in the wage gap between skilled and unskilled labor. Thus we can get a wage gap
phenomenon driven entirely by the demand side of the general-equilibrium model without
appealing to trade or to skill-biased technical change.5
Now consider differences in relative endowments, beginning with the two countries
identical, under the assumption of costless trade. Move capital from f to h and labor from h
to f, implying the Z rises in f and falls in h by an equal and opposite amount. Their Engels
curves will move apart in Figure 2 but they remain parallel. Figure 4 shows the effect of
widening the endowment differences. It graphs the share of world consumption and
production in each country. The consumption shares in this exercise would be constant at 0.5

5

An extension of this argument leads to the Prebisch (1950) -Singer (1950) hypothesis. If the
countries differ in relative endowments (standard Heckscher-Ohlin), then neutral productivity growth
in both countries will lead to a terms-of-trade deterioration for the labor-abundant country: the
“south”.

7
under homothetic demand. But under our assumption that the capital intensive good is the
high-income-elasticity good, the consumption shares are positively correlated with their
respective good’s production share.
Figure 4 gives a demand-side explanation for two phenomenon that have previously
been identified and attributed to production-side causes. The positive correlation between
production and consumption shares has been one (of several) definition of “home bias”.
Secondly, the volume of trade is less under our assumptions than is predicted under a
standard Heckscher-Ohlin model and thus offers a demand-side explanation for the empirical
puzzle of “missing trade” in Trefler’s (1995) terminology. The amount of missing trade is
identified in Figure 4 and note that it continues to grow in importance once countries are
specialized: production specialization cannot continue to increase but consumption
specialization can. As noted earlier, non-homotheticity as a cause of missing trade was noted
theoretically by Markusen (1986) is empirically verified in Hunter (1991) and is consistent
with Cassing and Nishioka (2009). Closely related points in the Ricardian context are found
in Matsuyama’s (2000) theory and in Fieler’s (2010) theoretical and empirical paper.6
As a final exercise with the competitive case, consider the role of intra-country
income distribution which has been noted before.7 If each consumer in a country has enough
income as given in (4) to want positive amounts of X, then the linear property of the Engels
curve means that redistribution of income within the country (subject to (4) continuing to
hold for all households) does not affect aggregate demand. But if redistribution puts some
households on the vertical section of the curve in Figure 1or 2 where they only buy Y (points
below Y0), then it does matter.
Let there be two sets of households, denoted with superscript p (poor) and r (rich).
There are Lp poor households and Lr rich households, L = Lp + Lr with per-capital incomes mp
and mr respectively. ma will denote the average income. Assume that a household with
average income would purchase positive amounts of X but poor households do not. With
reference back to the minimum income condition in (4), we assume that
(9)
When there are just these two household types, only the rich ones will purchase X. Suppose
on the other hand, that all household types have the average per capita income. Aggregate
demand Xr and Xa in these two scenarios are given as follows.

6

Markusen (1986) and Fieler (2010) explicitly explain large “north-north” versus small
“north-south” (and south-south in Fieler) trade volumes. An entirely different explanation is advance
in Markusen and Wigle (1990): north-south and south-south trade is small because the south is poor
and because the pattern of wold protection discriminates heavily against north-south and south-south
trade.
7

For example, Choi et. al. (2009), Daglin et. al. (2008), Francois and Kaplan (1996), Hallak
(2006), and Mitra and Trindade (2005).

8
(10)
Subtract the second equation of (10) from the first, and substitute for ma from the first
equation of (9). The difference in aggregate demand is

(11)
where the inequalities holds by assumption (the income of poor households is too low to
purchase X). Perfect aggregation does not hold with a wide distribution of household income
and, for two countries with the same average income, aggregate demand for the luxury will
be higher in the country with the more unequal distribution (those Mercedes in Africa).8

3.

Imperfect competition, prices and markups

In this section, we add scale economies, imperfect competition, and free entry and
exit of firms in the X industry in a standard model of Cournot competition, continuing with
the assumption that X is a homogeneous good. Y is produced with constant returns under
perfect competition. We assume segmented markets simply because the results are more
interesting and in line with Simonovska for example, so the model is similar to Venables
(1985) or Markusen and Venables (1988), the latter contrasting segmented and integrated
markets cases.
To keep matter manageable, we will concentrate on the case of per-capita income
differences arising from productivity difference, but the qualitative results are identical to the
case where countries differ in endowment ratios. Suppose that there is just a single factor of
production, L, and distinguish between the household count and the “effective” or
productivity-adjusted supply of labor in each of the two countries. One unit of Y uses on unit
of effective labor supply and X uses c units of effective labor for marginal costs and F units
for fixed costs. For the most part, we will assume that the total effective labor supply and
hence total income measured in units of Y are the same across countries, but the number of
households differs in inverse proportion to productivity: one country can have higher
productivity but proportionately lower household count.
Revenue (R) for a Cournot firm in country i and selling in country j is given by the
price in j times quantity of the firm’s sales. Price is a function of all firms’ sales.

8

With the CES-CD version described in footnote 2, the Engels curve and the ratio Y/X is a
smooth concave curve rather than the kinked version in Figure 1. Perfect aggregation never holds in
the CES-CD case, and the aggregate demand for X will always be higher with a wider income
distribution.

9
.

Xj is total sales in market j:

Assume zero trade costs and segmented markets, with c and F having the same value across
countries. Then any firm that operates will sell in both markets and will sell the same in each
market as any other firm regardless of that particular firm’s home country:
.
n will then denote the total number of firms from both countries activity in equilibrium,
where n is determined by the usual free-entry zero-profit conditions. This zero–profit
condition for a firm from i is as follows, with a corresponding condition for a firm from j.
zero profits

(12)

The result that gives the Cournot markup of a firm is fairly well known and I will not rederive it here: the markup in j (defined on price pj) is given by the firm’s market share
divided by the price elasticity of demand. With zero trade costs and equal marginal costs,
each firm in selling in a market has the same market share as any other firm regardless of
home country. So the market share is always just 1/n and the markup is
.
or

Cournot pricing (13)

Market clearing in country j is given from earlier results, similarly for i.
market clears

(14)

The elasticity of demand , is given from (8) above. Also use (13) to replace p in m0.
(15)
Using the second equation of (15), the first becomes
(16)

which in turn reduces to
is decreasing in

, n constant

(17)

Recall that the number of firms n is common between i and j. We then get a “crosssection” result from (17): comparing two countries, the higher per-capita income country will

10
have a lower price elasticity, higher markup and higher price level.
Add the zero-profit conditions for the representative firms in i and j in (12) together.
There are four Cournot pricing equations (13) for the two market supplies for the
representative firm from each country. Multiply both sides of the four pricing equations (13)
by the relevant outputs and set to zero (move c terms to the left-hand side). Add these four
together and subtract them from (12). This will yield the condition that:
(18)
Use the market-clearing equations in (14) to substitute for the revenue terms in (18).
(19)
and replace ,i and ,j with the expressions in (15). (19) becomes
(20)
Solving for n, we have

and (21)

(22)
Consider two identical countries with equal aggregate incomes M = Mi = Mj

which (when inverted) gives a simple formula for the common markup.
= markup
The markup falls with a growth in aggregate income due to the pro-competitive

(24)

(25)

11
effects of entry (Venables 1985, Markusen and Venables 1988). But the interesting thing
about (25) is that non-homotheticity washes out. Holding aggregate income constant,
increase per-capita income (increase productivity offset by fewer households). This lowers
the price elasticity of demand but this is exactly offset in this special case by more entry.
Recognizing that this last result is derived for identical economies only, we can thus suggest
that non-homotheticity does not have a “time-series” effect on markups as per-capita income
grows over time, but does show up in the “cross-section” comparison between countries with
different per-capita incomes.
Results for this section are illustrated in Figure 5. The “cross-section” result is
shown in the left-hand panel. The two-countries are identical at a value of 0.5 on the
horizontal axis. Then capital is transferred to h and labor to f, maintaining aggregate-income
equality moving to the right, resulting in a rising markup in country h. With the price of Y
equalized between countries, this means that the price index is greater in country h as shown
in Figure 5. The results on prices and markups is consistent with those in Wong (2003),
Hsieh and Klendow (2007), Hummels and Lugovskyy (2009), and Simonovska (2009).
Qualitatively, the same result occurs if we maintain relative endowments identical, but raise
the productivity and lower the absolute endowment of country h and vice versa for country f.
The “time-series” result is shown in the right-hand panel of Figure 5 where the two
countries are identical. Productivity is rising along the horizontal axis and absolute
endowment lowered to maintain identical and constant aggregate incomes. The higher percapita income moving to the right leads to a shift in consumption to X and to an increase in
intra-industry trade, inter-industry trade being zero. Thus trade volume increases relative to
aggregate income. The same result will of course hold under monopolistic competition
(Markusen 1986, Bergstrand 1989). A consequence is that gravity equations should show
trade rising with per-capita income, aggregate income held constant, a topic discussed in the
final section of the paper.

4.

Thoughts on calibration, estimation and gravity

I want to conclude by offering some thought on the implications of the analysis for
calibrated modeling (applied general-equilibrium analysis) and econometric estimation. A
common procedure in AGE modeling is to assume a homothetic functional form such as
Cobb-Douglas for example, and then used observed expenditure shares in the data to
calibrate the share parameters of the Cobb Douglas.
Refer back to Figure 2 and think of expenditure shares at point A as being 0.5. The
common AGE calibration method then assumes that any expansions of the economy will be
on the Engels curve through A and C. However, the marginal expenditure share per
household used in these experiments is 0.667 ($ = 2/3). Thus if some counterfactual leads to
an increase in per-capita income, the actual Engels curve is that through A and B in Figure 2.
Furthermore, if two countries are observed to have different initial budget shares, such as one
country at A and one at B in Figure 2, then they will be calibrated as having different but
homothetic preferences when in fact they might have identical but non-homothetic

12
preferences.9
There is a rather simple procedure that GE modelers can use to recalibrate their
models to identical but non-homothetic preferences of the type used here. First, their data
can be used as a cross-section data set to estimate the type of Stone-Geary utility function
used here: the Stone-Geary yields the familiar linear expenditure system, which is the
approach used in Bowen, Leamer and Sveikauskas (1987) and Hunter and Markusen (1989).
This could, for example, generate a common value of $ in our two-good case, or more
generally a set of $s across consumption goods. Then in each country the z or Zs could be
calibrated by using the observed consumption shares in the data with the estimated $s. In our
two-good case, a rearrangement of (5) gives us
(17)
where sx is the observed share of X in expenditure and sz is the calibrated share of
(unobserved) Z in income using an econometric estimate of $ common across countries. In
counterfactual experiments not involving a change in the number of households Z is held
constant while it is allowed to vary with the number of households when that occurs. This
procedure then distinguishes between movements along Engels curves AC and AB in Figure
1. Failing to do so as in standard models will lead to a mis-prediction about the effects of
world productivity growth or capital deepening.
There is a long history of fitting Heckscher-Ohlin theory (Leamer 1980, Maskus
1985, Bowen, Leamer and Sveikauskas 1987, Davis and Weinstein 1991, Hakura 2001,
Trefler 1995). A much simplified description of this literature is that it starts with the
relationship E = X - C, where E is the net export vector, X is the production vector and C is
the consumption vector. E is then converted into the “factor-content of trade”. A simple
procedure, for example, is to estimate a common technology matrix [A] where aij is good j’s
use of factor i. Then the measured factor content of trade for a country is [A]E. The
predicted factor content of the production vector is just the country’s endowment vector, V.
A considerable amount of effort has gone into trying to improve the fit through
modifications of the basic model but I think that it is reasonable to say that almost all of that
effort has gone the production side; e.g., allowing for technique differences, price
differences, and differences in factor quality. In most all cases I am aware of, C is in fact not
really fitted at all nor is it given by data: C is assumed to be given by sXw, where s is the
country’s share of world income and Xw is the observed world production vector, equal to the
world consumption vector. So the estimators impose the assumption of identical and
homothetic preferences across countries and of course equal relative prices. The factor
content of consumption is then s[A]Xw = sVw . This gives the relationship [A]E = (V - sVw),
where the left-hand side is the measured factor content of trade and the right-hand side is the
predicted value. The typical result in the simplest formulations is that there is substantial

9

It is my understanding that the GTAP and GEMPAC models do allow the modeler to select
non-homothetic preferences, but I am not familiar with their underlying structures.

13
“missing trade”: measured value is much less than the predicted value.
The findings of Hunter (1991), Cassing - Nishioka (2009) and Fieler (2010) should
encourage researchers to devote some effort to improving the estimation of the consumption
vector. Let C continue to denote the consumption vector and assume identical but nonhomothetic preferences across countries and assume that commodity prices are the same
everywhere (this is not a new assumption here, it is used in virtually all of the literature
referred to). Let $i denote the marginal share of good i in consumption and
be
the fixed “endowment” of good zi. in country k: $i and zi are identical across countries. The
hypothesized demand for good Ci in country k when condition (4) holds is given by10
(18)
These demand values can be converted into shares of consumption

by multiplying through

by the price of good i and dividing by income

where

(19)

and

(20)

where superscript w denote world aggregate values. Note that this demand system satisfies
adding up: summing (19) over i (goods), the final terms on the right-hand side sum to zero
and the sum of the shares equals the sum over $ which is one as noted in (20). The second
equation of (20), which will be used shortly, is an implication that our demand system in (18)
also satisfies global adding up ((18) applies to global consumption and income as well),
implying that the share of i in world consumption
is the income-share weighted sum of
the consumption shares across countries (

).

Now introduce our assumption we have used throughout that

is strictly

proportional to the labor supply Lk and that Mk = mkLk, where m is average per-capita
income.11 The Lk can be factored out of both the numerator and denominator of (19) and
cancelled out. (19) can be written as:

10

Equation (18) here is virtually identical to equation (7) in Bowen, Leamer, and Sveikauskas
(1987). But they turn to questions quite different from the points made in the present paper.
11

Again, assume that all households have sufficient income to satisfy (4) and buy positive
amounts of X. Total income is just the average per-capita income times L: suming over i households
we get
where is average per-capita income, an observable.

14
(21)
In our hypothesized preferences and demand system, the zi’s are common parameters across
countries and hence the country superscript can be dropped. The numerator of the right-hand
term in (21) is identical across countries, and so (21) can be written as
(22)
where the right-hand equation follow from (19).12 Since our demand system imposes
identical preferences across countries, the ‘s only differ from world average values by
differences across countries in per-capita income, which is easily observed and calculated.
These " and $ parameters can be estimated across countries. Then let (22) give the fitted or
predicted value of F = and let denote the observed share of good i in world
consumption, which in turn is equal to its share in world production Xw. Let Mk denote the
country’s income and Mw denote world income (both scalars). Then the predicted demand
for good i in our country is given by
(23)
where
(24)

Substituting (24) into (23), we have the predicted value of consumption.
(25)

12

Not the similarity here to Deaton and Muellbauer’s (1980) “almost ideal demand system”

(AIDS). Suppressing prices, this is

for household k where " > 0 is an

income-elastic good instead of " < 0 in my formulation. Without disputing that it is almost ideal for
many applications, it does not allow aggregation and is not globally “regular”: it can lead to predicted
shares greater than one and less than zero at extremes of income. Note that a negative predicted value
of F will occur in (22) if condition (4) does not hold. Thus both approaches need a lower bound on m
and AIDS needs an upper bound as well. Subject to (4), aggregation will hold in my approach, which
allows mk to be given by average income in (22).

15
where G is a diagonal matrix with its ith diagonal element equal to

and I is the identity

matrix. The equations in (25) satisfy adding up over countries, which follows from applying
the right-hand equation of (20) to the second equation in (25). Let the predicted factor
content of world consumption be given by
so

(26)

Adding the right-hand equation of (26) to (X - C), the predicted factor-content of trade is then
(27)
where the last term on the right-hand side is the “correction” for non-homotheticity (I is the
identity matrix). Once again, adding up is satisfied when summing over countries k: the first
bracketed term in (27) is zero by construction of Vw; the second term is zero as noted in the
second and third equations of (25).
The equations in (27) give the intuition about how per-capita income differences due
to different relative endowments combined with the assumption that labor intensity and low
income elasticity are correlated tends to lower the predicted factor content of trade. Under
these assumptions, there should be a systematic correlation such that export goods in which
the country is relatively specialized in production
are goods in which the
country is relatively specialized in consumption
is

(or the ith element of

). Exports of good Xi are then smaller under our assumptions. Import

goods for which

are goods which have small shares in consumption,

(or the ith element of

is

). So net imports Ei are

smaller (less negative) under our assumptions.
Our assumptions then tend to reduce the predicted factor content of trade for any
vector of world outputs. The difference between actual and fitted values of trade would then
be reduced, reducing missing trade, given that trade volumes are over-predicted in the
standard analysis where
by assumption. However, I emphasize that such an
outcome is by no means trivial or guaranteed. If differences in per-capita incomes reflect
differences in productivity rather than differences in capital / labor endowments, then
predicted trade could be even larger than under homothetic preferences.
A final point has to do with standard gravity equations. A common practice is to put
in separate terms for both aggregate income (or population) and per-capita incomes, yet there
is rarely if ever justification for this. With homothetic preferences, aggregate income should
soak up all the explanatory power. Yet estimates of this type invariably show an important,
positive and independent role for per-capita income.
There are a great many formulations of the gravity equation in the literature. Let me

16
give a quick and simple example provided by Frankel et. al. (1998). Let Mi denote aggregate
income, Pi denote population for countries 1 and 2, and T12 the trade between countries i and
j. The Frankel et. al. formulations is
(28)
In levels, this is equivalent to
(29)
If the world is characterized by homothetic preferences, then aggregate income is all
that matters, so the hypothesis is $ = 0. If preferences are non-homothetic, then we should
find $ to be non-zero, although in what direction is not obvious. If traded goods are income
elastic (we should really include traded services here), then we should find $ > 0.13
Alternatively, if differentiated goods are high income-elasticity goods then higher per-capita
income countries will have a higher volume of intra-industry trade as discussed in section 3
and Figure 5. Frankel et. al.’s results are that " = 0.72 and $ = 0.23 with both coefficients
significant at the one-percent level. The result that $ > 0 supports the view that per-capita
income is important and suggest that traded goods or especially differentiated goods are
income elastic.
Parenthetically, the common result from gravity models that trade is per-capitaincome elastic seems in contradiction with Trefler (1995), whose analysis points in the
direction of high per-capita income countries trading less as a share of income (e.g., if
income-elastic services are non-traded). Trefler (pp. 1038-1040) derives this in connection
with his “endowment paradox”, which is that poor countries seem abundant in most factors
and rich countries are scarce in most factors.

5.

Summary

As suggested in the introduction, there are bits-and-pieces of theoretical and empirical
analysis about the role or roles for per-capita income in determining trade flows. But there is
little unity and by and large per-capita income is not given much of a place as an important
determinant of trade. This paper tries to unify and connect the bits, and to offer some further
ideas about how per-capita income might matter. I offer a “generic” model that I am hoping
might prove to be useful for graduate teaching, a sort of all-in-one model that nests a number
of other contributions.
13

Giving one coefficient to the product of the two incomes is a somewhat unusual
formulation. A more typical formulation is to give separate coefficients for both countries (e.g.,
) with homogeneity implying that the "’s sum to one. Feenstra,
Markusen and Rose (2001) use the relationship between "1 and "2 to discriminate between alternative
theories of trade.

17
The model imposes a variant of Stone-Geary preferences (used before by a number of
authors) on top of a traditional 2x2x2 Heckscher-Ohlin model. Maintained hypotheses are
that labor endowments in the HO model are proportional to the number of households and
that the capital-intensive good in the HO model is the high income-elasticity-of-demand
good. The latter assumption is testable and fasifiable. Results from the model offer a strictly
demand-side explanation for a range of phenomena including (a) home bias in consumption,
(b) the mystery of the missing trade, (c) a growing wage gap in an environment of growing
productivity and (d) a role for the intra-country distribution of income similar to that found in
the product-quality literature (higher inequality - more demand for luxury goods).
I then add an assumption of increasing returns to scale in the capital-intensive, highincome-elasticity industry with free entry and exit of firms, Cournot pricing and segmented
markets: a common framework in the so-called new trade theory and strategic trade-policy
literatures. This generates some interesting and testable results, in particular higher markups
and higher price levels in higher per-capita-income countries, and more trade between higher
per-capita-income countries, aggregate income held constant. As in the case of the
competitive examples, some of the implications have already received good empirical
support.
In both competitive and imperfect-competition cases, the effects of growth are quite
different depending on whether it is growth in productivity or in neutral factor accumulation.
This is potentially quite important in forecasting forward using econometric or CGE models:
who would have predicted ten years ago that China would now be the world’s largest car
market?
The paper concludes with a couple of suggestions about how the model might be
useful in further calibration and estimation research and for including and interpreting percapita income coefficients in gravity models. Models and econometric estimates based on
homothetic demand and used for forecasting can significantly mis-predict the effects of
growth through productivity and technical change.

18
REFERENCES
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. (1990), “The Heckscher-Ohlin Samuelson Model, the Linder
Hypothesis and the Determinants of Bilateral Intra-Industry Trade”, The Economic
Journal 100, 1216-1229.
Bowen, Harry P., Edward E. Leamer, and Leo Sveikauskas (1987), “Multicountry,
Multifactor Tests of the Factor Abundance Theory”, American Economic Review 77,
791-809.
Cassing, James and Shuichiro Nishioka (2009), “Nonhomothetic Tastes and Missing Trade in
Factor Services”, working paper.
Choi, Yo Chul, David Hummels and Chong Xiang (2009), “Explaining Import Quality: The
Role of Income Distribution”, Journal of International Economics 77, 265-275.
Dalgin, M., Vitor Trindade and Devashish Mitra (2008), “Inequality, Non-homothetic
Preferences and Trade: A Gravity Approach”, Southern Economic Journal 74, 747774.
Davis, Donald R. And David E. Weinstein (2001), “An Account of Global Factor Trade”,
American Economic Review 91, 1423-1453.
Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behavior,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002), “Technology, Geography, and Trade,
Econometrica 70, 1741-1779.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman (2009), “Income Distribution,
Product Quality, and International Trade”, working paper.
Feenstra, Robert E., James R. Markusen and Andrew K. Rose (2001), "Using the Gravity
Equation to Differentiate among Alternative Theories of Trade", Canadian Journal of
Economics 34, 430-447.
Fieler, Ana Cecília (2010), “Non-Homotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a
Quantitative Explanation”, University of Pennsylvania working paper.
Flam, Harry and Elhanan Helpman (1987), “Vertical Product Differentiation and NorthSouth Trade ”, American Economic Review 77, 244-822.
Francois, Joseph F. and S. Kaplan (1996), “Aggregate Demand Shifts, Income Distribution,
and the Linder Hypothesis”, Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 244-250.
Frankel, Jeffrey, Ernesto Stein, and Shang-Jin Wei, (1998), “Continental Trading Blocs: Are
They Natural or Super-Natural?” in Jeffrey Frankel, editor, The Regionalization of the
World Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 91-113.

19
Hakura, Dalia S. (2001), “Why Does HOV Fail? The Role of Technological Differences
within the EC”, Journal of International Economics 54, 361-382.
Hallak, Juan-Carlos (2006), “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade”, Journal of
International Economics 68, 238-265.
Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow (2007), “Relative prices and relative prosperity,” American
Economic Review, 97, 562–585.
Hummels, David and Volodymyr Lugovskyy (2009), “International Pricing in a Generalized
Model of Ideal Varieties”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41, 3-33.
Hunter, Linda (1991), “The Contribution of Non-homothetic Preferences to Trade”, Journal
of International Economics 30, 345-358.
Hunter, Linda and James R. Markusen (1988), "Per-Capita Income as a Determinant of
Trade," in Robert Feenstra (editor), Empirical Methods for International Economics,
Cambridge: MIT Press 89-109.
Justman, Moshe (1994), “The Effect of Local Demand on Industry Location”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 76, 742-753 .
Leamer, Edward E. (1980), “The Leontief Paradox Reconsidered”, Journal of Political
Economy 88, 495-503.
Linder, Staffan B. (1961). An Essay on Trade and Transformation. Stockholm: Almqvist &
Wiksell.
Manova, Kalina and Zhiwei Zhang (2009), “Export Prices and Heterogeneous Firm Models”,
Stanford University working paper.
Markusen, James R. (1986). "Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach."
American Economic Review 76, 1002-1011.
Markusen, James R. and Anthony Venables (1988), "Trade Policy with Increasing Returns
and Imperfect Competition: Contradictory Results from Competing Assumptions,"
Journal of International Economics 24, 299-316.
Markusen, James R. and Randall Wigle (1990), "Explaining the Volume of North-South
Trade," Economic Journal 100, 1206-1215.
Maskus, Keith E. (1985), “A test of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Theorem: the Leontief
Commonplace”, Journal of International Economics 19, 201-212.
Matsuyama, Kiminori (2000), “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under NonHomothetic Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and
North-South Trade”, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1093-2000.

20
Mitra, Devashish and Vitor Trindade (2005), “ Inequality and Trade”, Canadian Journal of
Economics 38, 1253-1271.
Prebisch, Raul (1950), The Economic Development of Latin American and its Principal
Problem, New York: United Nations.
Reimer, Jeffery J. And Thomas W. Hertel (2010), “Nonhomothetic Preferences and
International Trade”, Review of International Economics 18, 408-425.
Schott, Peter K. (2004), “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in
International Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 647-678.
Shaked, A. and John Sutton (1983), “Natural Oligopolies”, Econometrica 51, 1469-1483.
Shaked, A. and John Sutton (1984), “Natural Oligopolies and International Trade”, in Henryk
Kierzkowski (editor), Monopolistic-Competition and International Trade, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Singer, Hans (1950), “The Distribution of Gains between Investing and Borrowing
Countries”, American Economic Review 40.
Simonovska, Ina (2009), “Income Differences and Prices of Tradeables”, working paper.
Stokey, Nancy L. (1991), “The Volume and Composition of Trade between Rich and Poor
Countries”, Review of Economic Studies 58, 63-80.
Trefler, Daniel (1995), “The Case of Missing Trade and Other Mysteries”, American
Economic Review 85, 1029-1046.
Venables, Anthony J. (1985), “Trade and trade-policy with imperfect competition - the case
of indentical products and free entry”, Journal of International Economics 19, 1-19.
Wong, Eina (2003), “Pharmaceutical Drug Prices in the International Market”, unpublished
PhD thesis, University of Colorado, Boulder.

Table 1: Income elasticities of demand, budget shares
for various consumption goods and services
Food

0.45

Hunter (1991) budget shares
low income
high income

Household furniture

0.76

food

0.50

>

0.17

Fuel and power

0.81

furnishing

0.05

<

0.09

Education

0.87

medical

0.04

<

0.09

Clothing and footwear

1.00

Beverages and tobacco

1.23

Cassing-Nishioka (2009) budget shares
low income
high income

Other

1.25

agricultural

0.09

>

0.02

Recreation

1.42

food prod

0.15

>

0.07

Transport, communication

1.72

bus serv

0.14

<

0.23

Gross rent

1.74

Medical

1.91
Hunter and Markusen (1989)

Low income elas <=> labor intensive
Hunter's (1991) counter-factual
homogenize demand (shares same everywhere)
trade flows increase by 29%

Figure 1: Preferences and their properties
Engel's curve: Oy0A

2.5

m0: minimum income for consuming X

2.0

y

1.67

income and price
elasticity
of demand for X (left)

1.33

1.5

1.00

1.0

0.67

Engels curve

share of X in
consumption (right)

0.5

0.0

A

0.00
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Household income (β = 0.667)

y0
m1
m0
z

0

0.33

x

3.0

Figure 2: Growth through productivity versus factor accumulation
Y
Engels curve: neutral
factor accummulation

C
B

Engels curve:
productivity
growth

A
Y0
Z1

Z0

M0

M1

X

Figure 3: Wage gap from the demand side (identical countries)
1.3

r/w ratio

Relative price of X, r/w ratio

1.2

1.1

1.0

relative price
of X

0.9

Both lines flat with
homothetic demand

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Productivity level: countries identical

2.5

3.0

Figure 4: Home bias and the mystery of the missing trade

Production and consumption shares of world totals

1.1

1

Share of X production,
country h

0.9

0.8

Correlation between production /
consumption shares =
home bias?

0.7

Share of X consumption,
country h

0.6

Missing
0.5

trade
0.4

Share of X \consumption,
country f

0.3

0.2

Share of X
production, country f

0.1

0
0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Country h's share of world capital (h's labor share = 1 - capital share)

1

Figure 5: Per-capita income, markups, price levels, trade volume
Countries have identical and constant aggregate income
Volume of trade related to per-capita income
(aggregate income held constant)

Markups and price level: relative endowment
differences (or productivity differences)

1.30

0.50

1.25

0.40

0.30

Volume of trade
relative to aggregate
income

1.20

Proportional
markup difference:
country h to f

1.15

0.20

Proportional price
index difference:
country h to f

0.10

1.10
1.05

0.00
1.00
-0.10

-0.20
0.45

All values = 0 with
homothetic demand

All values = 1 with
homothetic demand

0.95
0.90

0.55

0.65

0.75

0.85

Country h capital endowment, country f labor endowment
(countries identical at 0.5)

0

1

2

3

4

Per-capita income level, countries identical

5

6

