                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    TRUST AND WELL-BEING

                                          John F. Helliwell
                                            Shun Wang

                                        Working Paper 15911
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15911


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




We are grateful for invaluable access to the Gallup World Poll, and for access to the Canadian GSS17
data through the UBC Research Data Centre supported by Statistics Canada. This paper is part of the
‘Social Interactions, Identity and Well-Being’ research program of the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research, and is supported also by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada. We are grateful for this support, for the research collaboration of Chris Barrington-Leigh,
Haifang Huang, Mélina Longpré, Shannon Milroy, and Jason Dowlatabadi, for advice from Gyun
Hwa Jung and Shlomo Yitzhaki, and for comments received on earlier versions presented at a meeting
of CIFAR’s SIIWB program, and at the 3rd OECD World Forum on Statistics, Knowledge and Policy,
Busan, Korea, October 27-30, 2009. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by John F. Helliwell and Shun Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Trust and Well-being
John F. Helliwell and Shun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 15911
April 2010, Revised September 2010
JEL No. D60,I30,N30,O57,R13

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents new evidence linking trust and subjective well-being, based primarily on data
from the Gallup World Poll and cycle 17 of the Canadian General Social Survey (GSS17). Because
several of the general explanations for subjective well-being examined here show large and significant
linkages to both household income and various measures of trust, it is possible to estimate income-equivalent
compensating differentials for different types of trust. Measures of trust studied include general social
trust, trust in co-workers, trust in neighbours, and trust in police. In addition, some Canadian surveys
and the Gallup World Poll ask respondents to estimate the chances that a lost wallet would be returned
to them if found by different individuals, including neighbours, police and strangers.

Our results reveal sufficiently strong linkages between trust and well-being to support much more
study of how trust can be built and maintained, or repaired where it has been damaged. We therefore
use data from the Canadian GSS17 to analyze personal and neighbourhood characteristics, including
education, migration history, and mobility, that help explain differences in trust levels among individuals.
New experimental data from Canada show that wallets are far more likely to be returned, even by
strangers in large cities, than people expect.


John F. Helliwell
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca

Shun Wang
Department of Economics,
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
swangubc@hotmail.com
1. Introduction

     Humans are social beings, and trust is widely seen as an essential element in any
social setting. Without trust, people are loath to reach out, and to make the social
connections that underpin any collaborative action. For sustainable success, trust needs to
be matched by trustworthiness. Many recent studies of the causes and consequences of
trust have been linked to the parallel study of social capital, since trust has been seen
sometimes as a proxy measure of social capital, or alternatively as a consequence or
correlate of high levels of social capital. Like social capital, trust can be narrow or
encompassing, identified by type and purpose, be affected by geographic, social and
cultural distance, and to take more time to build than to destroy.

     Most studies of the possible benefits of trust have focussed on the economic effects
(Algan and Cahuc 2009, Knack and Keefer 1997, Knack 2001, Zak and Knack 2001),
with some attention paid also to health (Kawachi et al. 1997, Kawachi et al. 2007, Yip et
al. 2007). In this paper we take a broader focus by looking at the effect of trust on
subjective well-being. We use various measures of subjective well-being as though they
were measures of utility, and then search for the consequences of trust as they might flow
indirectly through economic success and physical health, as well as more directly to
individual evaluations of the quality of life. The empirical determinants of well-being,
such as income, age, and social factors, have received much attention in recent studies
(Alesina et al. 2004, Blanchflower 2009, Deaton 2008, Easterlin 2001, Ferrer-i-Carbonell
2005, Helliwell and Putnam 2004). This paper continues that avenue of research by
focusing on the relatively unexplored links between trust and well-being (Helliwell 2003,
Helliwell and Putnam 2004, Chang 2009, Yip et al. 2007).

     In this paper we describe a variety of results, based on individual-level survey data
from many countries, showing that several different dimensions and types of trust provide
strong supports for well-being above and beyond their more frequently noted
contributions to economic efficiency. Our main measures of well-being relate to overall




                                              1
life satisfaction or other similarly broad life evaluations 1 . We also consider some
evidence about the influence of trust on other well-being outcomes, including suicide and
traffic fatalities.

        We also analyze the factors supporting different types of trust. We find, using the
rich social context detail of the Canadian GSS17, that the quality of social connections
matter a lot to the maintenance of trust. In ways that validate the trust measures and
theories of trust formation, general factors matter most for the determination of social
trust, while neighbourhood characteristics matter most for neighbourhood trust. For
example, the effects of individual-level and census-tract-level measures of education are
strongly supportive of social trust, as are the respondent’s memberships in social
organizations, and the level of social trust in the country where the respondent was born.


2. Measuring Trust

        The measures of trust we consider include individual assessments about whether
other people can generally be trusted (the ‘social trust’ question), individual assessments
of the trustworthiness of their neighbours, co-workers and managers, and responses to
very specific questions about whether a lost wallet is judged likely to be returned if found
by a variety of different individuals, including neighbours, police and strangers. We shall
start by presenting our new results for the well-being consequences of dropped-wallet
responses from the Gallup World Poll, followed by life satisfaction equations based on
the Canadian GSS17, which has a number of different trust measures. These new results
will then be compared, in summary form, with some previous estimates of the linkages
between trust and well-being.

        Morrone et al. (2009) provide a helpful survey of alternative ways of measuring
trust, and of various debates about the meaning of such measures. They argue that there


1
    The major alternative we consider is in the case of the Gallup World Poll, where we use data for
Cantril’s self-anchoring striving scale, usually referred to as the Cantril ladder. This is necessary
because the Gallup World Poll does not yet have a sample of country surveys asking both about life
satisfaction and some measure of interpersonal trust.

                                                   2
might be some preference for the wallet questions, since their meaning is very clear,
thereby reducing the possibilities for disagreement about what the respondents are
evaluating. The introduction of wallet questions into surveys was spurred by experiments
conducted by Reader’s Digest Europe, and reported in that magazine in April 1996 (and
subsequently discussed in the Economist, June 22, 1996). These experiments involved
dropping 10 cash-bearing wallets in each of 20 cities in 14 western European countries,
and in each of a dozen US cities. The data on the frequency of wallet returns were later
used by Knack (2001) to provide some behavioural validation for the use of answers to
the frequently-asked question of inter-personal trust: “In general, do you think that most
people can be trusted, or, alternatively, that you can’t be too careful in dealing with
people”. Knack (2001) found that at the national level the actual frequency of return of
the experimentally dropped wallet was correlated at the 0.65 (p<0.01) level with national
average responses to the general social or interpersonal trust question, as measured in the
World Values Survey2. While this provides strong validation for the meaningfulness of
international differences in survey responses to general trust questions, it also suggests a
way of adding more specific trust questions to surveys.

        Hence when the Canadian Equality, Security and Community (ESC) survey was
being designed in 2000, we included not just the standard questions on interpersonal and
institutional trust, but also some specific hypothetical questions about the likelihood of
the respondent’s lost wallet (containing identification and $200) being returned if found
by, alternatively, a neighbour, a clerk in a nearby store, a police officer, or a stranger.
Some of the same wallet return questions were subsequently also included in the larger
Statistics Canada GSS17 in 2003 and in more than 80 country surveys of the Gallup
World Poll in 2006. Soroka et al. (2006) compare the wallet and general trust data from
the ESC survey, and we shall report later in this paper some similar comparisons based
on the GSS17 data. We shall also combine the GSS17 wallet answers with some recent


2
    Knack notes that this high correlation “cannot be explained away by attributing high-trust attitudes
and wallet-returning behaviour to higher per-capita incomes: the partial correlation between trust and
returned wallets, controlling for per capita income, is even higher than the simple correlation (Knack
2001, p. 184).

                                                    3
dropped-wallet experiments in Toronto to provide a first-ever level comparison between
trust and trust-worthiness. For the Gallup World Poll, it is not possible to compare the
wallet and general trust answers from the same respondents, as the wallet questions were
asked only in 2006, and the general trust questions were first asked in the 2009 wave.

        Where direct comparisons are possible, they generally serve to validate the use of
both specific and general trust measures. The measures that relate to specific geographic
areas tend to respond to the characteristics of that neighbourhood. The high correlation
between actual wallet returns and the answers to the social trust questions when averaged
on a national basis (Knack 2001) suggests that answers to general interpersonal trust
questions are based on experience within the respondent’s own nation. We shall show
later that when people migrate from one country to another there is a carry-over of social
trust answers from country of emigration to country of immigration, with even some
evidence of carry-forward into the next generation. But this footprint is much less where
the questions are more closely related to specific events in the country of immigration,
such as whether wallets would be returned if found by neighbours or police.


3. Trust Makes Lives Better

        In this section we present some new evidence about the apparent effects of trust on
well-being3. We start with results based on data from the Gallup World Poll, explaining
the links between subjective well-being and the expected frequency of wallet returns if
found, alternatively, by neighbours, by police, and by strangers. We then consider
evidence from the GSS17, which asked the general interpersonal and neighbourhood trust
questions, a question about the level of trust among workplace colleagues, and also about
the likelihood of wallets being returned if found by police, neighbours, strangers, and by
a clerk in a nearby store. This range of trust assessments will help us to see more clearly
how the specific and general questions are related to each other. Finally, we shall relate




3
    The range of relevant measures of subjective well-being, their validity, and their policy relevance are
discussed in detail in Diener et al. (2009).

                                                      4
this new evidence to earlier results about the well-being effects of different sorts of
specific and general trust.

      The 2006 wave of the Gallup World Poll included wallet trust questions in 86
national surveys. For 79 countries we have wallet data and full slates of the other data
used in estimating the general life evaluation model used in Helliwell et al. (2010). There
are interesting international differences in the patterns of answers to the wallet return
data. In the OECD countries, the expectation of wallet return if found by police is even
higher than if found by neighbours, 91% vs. 89%. In the rest of the global sample, the
situation is reversed, with 51% expecting wallets to be returned by police, compared to
61% by neighbours. As already suggested by these figures, trust or distrust in police is
more shared among citizens of the same country than is trust in neighbours or trust in
strangers. Thus, as we show in Figure 1, the international share of the variance of the
global sample of individual answers to the police question is almost twice as high as for
the likelihood of lost wallets being returned by neighbours, and is more than twice as
high as for strangers.

      It should be noted at the outset that return of a lost wallet requires more than just
honesty or absence of corruption, and much more than simply the assurance that people
will do what they say they will do. It requires the wallet finder to reach out and perform a
deliberate act of other-regarding kindness, one that can be foreseen to take time and
trouble in order to reduce the loss of another. There is little chance of any personal gain
for the finder, beyond the possible gratitude of the wallet owner and the pleasure received
from being kind to others. Yet in both Copenhagen and Olso, all ten of the Reader’s
Digest dropped wallets were returned to their owners, and the average across all the
western European cities was about two-thirds. In the Gallup data, which are based on
nationally representative rather than purely urban samples in mainly non-OECD
countries, the numbers of respondents expecting return of their wallets if found by police,
neighbours and strangers are 56%, 64% and 17%, respectively4.


4
    In the whole sample of more than 79,000 responses to the Gallup wallet question, the expected
average rate of return was about 0.08 lower for respondents living in cities rather than rural areas, with
town dwellers in between. The Gallup sample of countries asked the wallet question unfortunately has

                                                    5
       Each of the four panels of Table 1 contains six alternative equations explaining the
individual responses to a specific wallet question. The first panel refers to neighbours, the
second to police, the third to strangers, and the fourth to each individual’s average answer
to the three different wallet questions. Moving across the columns in each part of the
Table, equation (1) is the basic equation, including the individual-level determinants also
used in Helliwell et al. (2010) with the addition of answers to the question relating to
whether or not a wallet was thought likely to be returned if found by a neighbour. The
coefficient on the wallet-neighbour variables is 0.179, implying a 0.179 higher individual
life evaluation, on a 0 to 10 scale, if a lost wallet is thought likely to be returned if found
by a neighbour. Equation (2) includes the same wallet question, but adds the individual’s
assessment of the generality of corruption in business and government in his or her
country. Since there is interdependence between these two assessments5, the addition of
the more general corruption evaluation slightly lowers the coefficient on the wallet
variable, to 0.157. Adding regional fixed effects in equation (3) tightens the fit of the
equation slightly, and makes another small reduction in the wallet coefficient, reflecting
the fact that there are systematic regional differences in the assessed likelihood of wallet
return. Equation (4) to (6) repeat equations (1) to (3), but in each case adds a measure of
net affect, to provide some idea of how robust the wallet responses are to the inclusion of
a variable likely to capture both personality differences among individuals and short-term
factors that might affect both mood and life evaluations. As found earlier in Helliwell
(2008, Table 4), adding separate measures of individual-level positive and negative affect
significantly increases the explanatory power of the equation (with positive affect having



only 9 OECD countries, with only four countries appearing in the Gallup data and the Reader’s Digest
experiments. The simple correlation between the two measures of wallet return (Gallup expected and
Reader’s Digest actual) is as high as that found by Knack for the WVS trust data, but the sample is too
small for the correlation to be statistically significant.
5
    For the global sample of individual-level responses, the simple correlation between the overall
measure of wallet return (the average of the neighbour, police and stranger responses) and the
assessment of corruption (the average of each individual’s zero or one answers as to the prevalence of
corruption of business and of government in their country is -0.25).

                                                       6
a larger impact than does the absence of negative affect6), but has fairly small effects on
the size and significance of other variables. This is because life circumstances, including
such variables as family income and the climate of trust in which people live, have much
greater impacts on life evaluations than on moods, making life evaluations a preferred
vehicle for assessing the relative importance of various life circumstances.

        The other panels of Table 1 repeat the same equations, but use different wallet
variables. The second panel uses wallet-police, the third uses wallet-stranger, and the
fourth uses the average of the other three assessments. There is a fairly uniform pattern
apparent when moving from panel to panel, and this pattern applies to each of the six
alternative equations. The well-being effects of expected wallet return are slightly larger
and more significant for police than for neighbours, and for either than for strangers.
However, the most striking change happens when we move to the fourth panel, where the
three measures are averaged. The coefficient on the average is much larger and more
securely estimated than on any of the three component measures. The coefficients on the
three component variables range from 0.159 for stranger to 0.218 for police (from
equation (1) in each of the first three panels of Table 1). By contrast, the coefficient is
0.359 for the average variable. That the coefficient should be larger for the combined
variable is eminently reasonable, since there is no telling who might be the finder of a lost
wallet, and one’s sense of security is surely higher when the likelihood of return is high
regardless of who the finder might be. The individual measures no doubt have other links
to subjective well-being. For example, whether a wallet would be returned by a neighbour
has implications about the likely helpfulness of neighbours in other circumstances, with
the same being true for police and strangers. Thus when we turn, as we now do, to
consider the income-equivalence of belief in the likelihood of wallet return, we should be
thinking not just of how much a wallet is worth to us, in either material or psychological
terms, but of a whole range of occasions when neighbours, police and strangers might be
able and willing to be of assistance.


6
    This is consistent with the experimental results of Cohen and Pressman (2006) showing that the links
between moods and resistance to the common cold are larger and more significant for positive than for
negative affect.

                                                    7
     To get an idea of the income-equivalent value of living in a society where wallets
are expected to be returned, we can simply divide the wallet-trust coefficient by that on
household income. Using the combined wallet measure from equation (1) in the fourth
panel of Table 1, the compensating differential is 0.628 (=0.359/0.571). This is a large
effect, especially if we compare countries with very different climates of trust. For
example, to live in a country like Norway (mean expected wallet return is 0.80, actual
Reader’s Digest experimental return in Oslo 100%) rather than one like Tanzania (mean
expected wallet return is 0.27) implies a life evaluation higher by 0.19 points on the ten-
point scale, equivalent to an increase of 0.33 in the log of household income, in turn
equivalent to an increase of almost 40% in the level of household income.

     In Table 2 we present our estimates of the life satisfaction effects of several different
measures of trust using the GSS17 data. The first equation includes three separate
measures of trust, each of which takes a large and highly significant coefficient. This is so
despite the inclusion of a large number of other individual and contextual effects,
including several measures of social capital that might be expected to positively affect
both trust and well-being. The GSS17 data contain a number of measures of the size and
quality of each respondent’s own social connections, as well as a number of census-based
contextual variables.

     Table 2 shows that French-speaking respondents have a significantly higher life
satisfaction for given trust level, but not if the trust variables are removed. This reflects
much lower measured trust among francophones, with the implied negative effects of this
lower average being offset by the coefficient shown in the table. Relative to unmarried
respondents living alone, those who are married or living as married are significantly
happier, by about one-third of a point, while those who are separated, divorced or
widowed are significantly less happy, by about one-quarter of a point. Age effects are, as
often found in well-being studies (Blanchflower & Oswald 2008), represented by very
significant negative effects on age and positive effects on age-squared, with an implied
low point of the U-shape in life satisfaction at about age 50. The gender effect, for given
levels of the economic and social variables, favours females by about 0.13 of a point,
although this effect becomes smaller when the model is expanded, as shown in the right-


                                              8
hand side of Table 2, to include measures of belonging in one’s community, province and
nation.

     The GSS17 asks about each respondent’s typical labour force status over the
previous 12 months. Those who answer ‘unemployed’ have systematically lower life
satisfaction above and beyond those flowing through the implied changes in household
income. Being unemployed is associated with life satisfaction being lower by two-thirds
of a point on a ten-point scale, far more than the effects of moving from the bottom to
the top decile of the income distribution, although not as large as the combined effects of
the various trust measures.

     The education variables have scant direct linkages to subjective well-being, except
for a negative effect of the highest level in the base equation. As we shall see later, this is
because there is a strong positive linkage from tertiary education to trust measures, and
especially for the social trust variable. The equations also control for income, which is
positively related to the level of education. These results suggest that the well-being
effects of education are largely mediated by income and trust.

     All equations in the table include two variables that tap into basic elements of
personality, as captured by the respondent’s feeling of control and capacity to implement
change. These variables are both strongly and positively related to life satisfaction, and
should serve to reduce the likelihood of a positive bias on trust effects flowing from
individual-level personality traits influencing both trust assessments and life satisfaction.

     Respondents are asked to estimate the number of close friends and relatives they
have, and each of the response categories is shown separately for friends and family.
There is a strong dose-response relation in both cases. Moving from each friends category
to the next higher one adds about 0.1 to life satisfaction, with the size of the family effect
being about 50% larger. There is some evidence of diminishing returns as circles of
family and friends grow in size, since the number of additional friends or relatives
involved grows with each move from one category to the next. Other tests not shown in
the table show that the extra life satisfaction, measured in points, from having more
friends and relatives is constant for an equal proportionate increase in the number of
friends and family, with some evidence of diminishing and even negative marginal

                                               9
effects for very large families. The significant positive coefficients on the see-friends and
see-relatives variables show that the frequency of visits with family and friends,
especially the latter, adds significantly to life satisfaction, above and beyond the benefits
of having these support networks in place.

        Membership measures of social capital have no direct effects on life satisfaction,
beyond a positive effect of religious memberships in the basic equation. This is in an
equation that already controls for the respondent’s friendships and trust assessments. We
shall show later that both religious and non-religious memberships have strong positive
effects on trust, suggesting that the well-being benefits of social networks, insofar as they
are represented by memberships, are mediated by trust.

        There follow seven census-tract measures of the social context. None have
significant effects on life satisfaction, so they will be described when we present our trust
equations, as several of the census contextual variables come strongly into play at that
time.

        The second and third equations add an increasing number of measures of identity, as
represented by each respondent’s feelings of belonging to their local community, their
province, and to Canada as a whole. Each of these identities matters significantly, with no
evidence that having one identity detracts from the life satisfaction benefits of the others7.

        The fourth equation adds two additional trust measures: trust in co-workers and
confidence in police. Both are highly significant, with trust in co-workers being the single
most significant of all of the trust measures8. The fifth and final equation in Table 2 adds
a second GSS measure of trust in neighbours. Because this final equation now includes

7
    To check for interactions, we prepared a variable that takes the value of 1.0 for respondents who are
very attached to their community, their province, and to Canada as a whole. The variable takes an
insignificant positive coefficient, implying that one can add additional nested or encompassing
identities without reducing the life satisfaction benefits of other identities. Thus there is no sense in
which local, provincial and national attachments compete with one another in terms of what they
contribute to life satisfaction.
8
    A variety of workplace trust results, from both Canada and the United States, are analyzed in more
detail in Helliwell and Huang (2008, 2010) and Helliwell et al. (2009).

                                                    10
two measures of neighbourhood trust, we can see that the more general of the two
neighbourhood trust questions appears to subsume the answers to the wallet-found-by-
neighbour measure, since the latter variable is no longer significant. Finally, we note that
when we include all of our directional trust measures (for co-workers, neighbours and
police) the general social trust variable drops out. We think that this validates both types
of measure. The social trust measure, which is very important on its own, is an umbrella
supported by equally significant and collectively more informative evaluations about trust
in different domains of life.

     To summarize our key results on the value of trust, and to facilitate their comparison
with results from earlier studies, Table 3 shows estimates of income-equivalent values
(often referred to as compensating differentials, as in Helliwell and Huang 2010) for a
number of trust measures. These include the results from the wallet-return measures of
the Gallup World Poll, several measures of trust used in the fifth equation of Table 2, and
from other samples of Canadian and United States data. In all cases the values of trust are
seen to be very large, as we discuss further in the concluding section.


4. Trust Saves Lives

     Although life evaluations provide a critically important way to assess the importance
of trust, they cannot provide the whole story. Beyond life evaluations lies life itself, and a
range of studies have shown several channels through which trust improves health and
saves lives. The mortality studies dovetail with and reinforce the evidence based of life
evaluations. The dovetailing is obvious, since the life evaluations measure only the well-
being of survivors, picking up mortality effects indirectly, via the loss of loved ones and
expectations about what the future may hold in store. The direct mortality estimates thus
fill in an important gap.

     The reinforcement comes about because many who may initially be doubtful about
the value and meaning of subjective life evaluations may be convinced if the same
variables that explain subjective life evaluations have consistent consequences for
fatalities. For example, those who are willing to make inferences about utility only from
what people do (the ‘revealed preference’ methodology), and not from what they say,

                                              11
cannot fail to accept suicide as evidence of individual choices with real consequences,
even though of the most final and unfortunate sort. Indeed, our studies of the links
between social capital and suicide were undertaken to help answer the inevitable sceptical
question from almost any audience, especially one of economists, asking how the high
measures of subjective well-being in, e.g., Sweden, could be reconciled with what were
presumed to be very high suicide rates there. The answer, as reported in Helliwell (2007),
was obtained by using cross-national data to fit exactly comparable models for national
averages for life satisfaction and for suicide rates. These models fit the cross-national
data for global samples very well, with the same small set of variables explaining 60%
and 81% of the cross-national variance of suicide and life satisfaction, respectively
(Helliwell 2007, p. 485). Although the same variables appear in both equations, the
coefficients differ, in just the way that theory and previous studies would suggest, with
religion, social connections and divorce all having larger coefficients in the suicide
equation, and the quality of government being more important for subjective well-being.
Interpersonal trust, as measured by the national average response to the social trust
question, had equally large effects in both equations. Sweden, which is explained very
well by both equations, is nearer to top of the well-being ranking than near the bottom of
the suicide rankings because of its relatively high divorce rates, relatively low importance
of religion, and relatively high quality of government.

     These parallel results for suicide and subjective well-being are buttressed by large
prospective studies in Finland showing that males near the bottom of the life satisfaction
scale were 25 times more likely to commit suicide over the following ten years than were
other males of the same age (Koivumaa-Honkanen et al. 2001).

     The suicide results can be used to assess the life-saving potential for social trust,
since international differences in the average answers to the social trust question play an
important role in explaining international differences in suicide rates. Among the
countries covered by the three World Values Survey waves used for the suicide study, the
average suicide rate is about 16.4 per 100,000 of population. The basic suicide equation
in Helliwell (2007, Table 1) explains 58% of the variance of 117 average suicide rates
drawn from different years in 50 countries around the world using only four key
variables: social trust, membership in community organizations, strength of religious
                                             12
belief, and the divorce rate. The first three variables act to reduce suicide, while higher
divorce rates are associated with higher suicide rates. The effects of social trust are large
and statistically significant. Moving 10% of the population from generally untrusting to
generally trusting, a shift of 0.1 on the 0 to 1.0 scale for the social trust variable, or less
than one standard deviation for the sample data, would be predicted to lead to a 2.3
(=0.1*23) drop in the suicide rate, more than 10% of its average value. In Russia, with a
population of roughly 150 million, this would translate into 3,600 lives saved each year.

        The idea that traffic fatalities, which are about as frequent as suicides, could be
linked to social capital, and to trust in particular, occurred to Helliwell when reading an
article in Le Monde by A. Grebjine. The article appeared during the course of an OECD
meeting of social capital experts, and attributed the much greater traffic fatality rates in
France than in Norway (about twice as high) to a greater Norwegian adherence to a
broader social contract. Since the proportion of Norwegians who think that others can be
trusted is two to three times higher than in France, this raises the possibility that there
might be a broader systematic relation between social trust and traffic fatalities. The test
was done using the same equation and sample as was used for suicide, and both trust and
memberships had highly significant roles in explaining international differences in traffic
fatality rates (Helliwell 2007, Table VI). When the traffic fatality equation was extended
to include some traditional determinants, including incomes and vehicle use, and the time
trend toward safer cars and safer roads, the trust effect rose slightly, to almost exactly the
same value as in the suicide equation. This was not simply due to the special
circumstances of Norway and France, as the model was essentially the same if these
countries were removed.

        Since traffic fatality and suicide rates are roughly equal, as are the trust effects in the
two equations, then changes in social trust have the same potential for saving lives in
both cases. In particular, if social trust in France were as high as in Norway, the French
traffic fatality rate, according to the equation, would be reduced by more than half, taking
it down to the Norwegian level 9 . These are big effects, whether seen nationally or

9
    Nagler (2009) also finds that a parallel result applies when he explains interstate differences in traffic
fatalities within the United States.

                                                       13
globally, where suicide and traffic fatalities are roughly tied as the tenth leading cause of
death.


5. Building and Maintaining Trust

     Since trust has been shown to be closely linked to well-being, it is a natural next step
to investigate how trust might be built and maintained. Although we do not have data
sufficient to support study of the dynamics of trust, the cross-sectional surveys can at
least give some idea of the circumstances that accompany high and low levels of trust,
even if the direction and strength of the causal linkages remain to be unpacked. The
Canadian GSS17 data are more useful for this purpose than the Gallup World Poll, since
the GSS17 includes many more individual-level measures of social capital and social
connections, and its geo-coding permits us to include many census-based measures of the
social context in which the respondents live.

     Table 4 shows equations for the individual-level responses to six different trust
questions asked in the GSS17. The first column is for the general interpersonal social
trust question, column 2 models trust in co-workers. Columns 3 and 4 model the answers
to the GSS general questions about trust in neighbours and strangers, respectively.
Columns 5 and 6 show equations examining answers about the likelihood of a lost wallet
containing $200 to be returned if found by a neighbour or a stranger, respectively.

     We use the same independent variables in all equations, but we have strong
expectations about their likely relative importance in different equations. For example,
we would expect variables measuring the strength and length of an individual’s
attachment to his or her neighbourhood to have much stronger effects in the equations
explaining trust in neighbours. This is indeed the case, as the variables measuring
number of years in the neighbourhood, census-tract average mobility, and census tract
population density all have much greater effects in columns 3 and 5, which refer
specifically to trust in neighbours.

     The first variable in each equation (imported trust) tests for an effect found earlier
by Rice and Feldman (1997) using US GSS data, and by Soroka et al. (2006) using
Canadian ESC data. The variable measures the average level of social trust in the
                                             14
respondent’s country of birth (using data from the World Values Survey) less the average
Canadian value for the same World Values Survey trust measure. The coefficient on the
variable thus measures the footprint of the trust level in the respondent’s country of birth.
If the coefficient were 1.0, then immigrants would implicitly be answering the GSS trust
question based on their experiences in their country of birth. The GSS results show a
first-generation footprint of almost two-thirds in the social trust equation, with much
smaller values for the more directional trust measures, and no effect at all for the wallet
questions. Milroy (2009) finds some evidence of this footprint decaying with years since
immigration. She also tested the corresponding second-generation variable for those who
were born in Canada with one or more immigrant parents. This effect was smaller and
less significant in all cases, thus supporting the presumption that the social trust question
is taken to refer to the surroundings one knows, with the imprinted effects from one’s
earlier environment fading with the number of years one lives in Canada10. Similarly, the
effect is less where the question is very specific, and closely related to everyday life in
Canada, such as when the respondent is asked about what would happen if they lost their
wallet in their Canadian neighbourhood.

        The level of social trust among French-speakers is significantly lower than for other
respondents, by almost one-quarter. The effect is very much smaller for all of the more
specific trust measures than for general trust. Longpré (2009) finds that the lower social
trust is concentrated among those francophones living in census tracts with a high
proportion of Catholics, and among Quebec-resident francophones who identify strongly
with Canada. She suggests that the former result might be a footprint of the long church
domination of Quebec society. The latter effect could reflect a situation where the
emergence of secessionist views in Quebec poses especial identity risks, and diminished
social trust, among those Quebec francophones who feel the greatest sense of belonging
to Canada, since the possibility of secession poses for them the greatest problems. But, as
Longpré argues, these results need more unpacking.


10
     In her GSS17 equation for social trust, she finds a coefficient of 0.736 (p<0.001) on imported trust,
compared to 0.320 (p<0.05) for parental trust. This confirms the declining-effects pattern first
documented in Soroka et al. (2006).

                                                     15
     Turning to demography, the married are significantly more trusting than the rest of
the population, with no significant differences among the remaining groups. All trust
measures appear to increase with age, while the wallet returned by a neighbour is not
statistically significant. Workplace trust and trust in strangers appear to decrease with
age-squared, which implies an inverted U-shape for these two trust measures. Women are
significantly less trusting of co-workers, strangers, and wallet return by a neighbour.
They are also less likely to give positive answers to the compound social trust question.
The lower female answers to the compound social trust question have been shown in
Helliwell and Putnam (2007) to be especially due to the compound nature of the question.
An earlier US GSS split the two part of the question, and it was found that women were
more trusting than men when asked merely if other people can be trusted, but were also
more likely to be cautious, and agreeing that ‘you can’t be too careful when dealing with
people’.

     The differences among different types of trust become even more apparent when
mobility is assessed. The individual-level mobility variable measures the number of years
that the individual has lived in the same neighbourhood, measured as a fraction of five
years, since ‘five or more’ is at the top of the response scale. Staying rooted in the same
neighbourhood for a longer period, at least up to five years, is associated with higher
assessed values of all types of trust. As expected, the effects are three times larger for
neighbourhood trust than they are for trust in other domains.

     The links between social trust and education, especially tertiary education, are
positive and large at both the individual and census tract levels. This appears to be an
almost universal finding in trust equations (Helliwell and Putnam 2007), providing one of
the strongest pieces of evidence for positive external effects of increasing education
levels.

     The next two variables measure each respondent’s memberships in religious and
non-religious groups. Religious memberships have significant positive effects (p<0.001)
for all sorts of trust, and other memberships have equally significant effects for all but
trust in neighbours and co-workers. The effects of both types of memberships are largest



                                            16
in the social trust equation11, where they are significantly greater for other memberships.
We found in the GSS life satisfaction equations that there were strong effects from
several different sorts of trust, but no direct effects of memberships. The combination of
the life satisfaction and trust equations suggest a strong effect from memberships to life
satisfaction, apparently entirely mediated by several types of trust.

        The final two individual-level variables are intended to control for aspects of each
individual’s personality and circumstances. They are strongly significant, and are
intended to limit the risks that other variables should be picking up individual-level
personality differences that might otherwise bias the effects being measured elsewhere in
the equation. Household income does not appear in the trust equations, since it was found
to have no significant effects.

        We turn now to consider community-level effects. The level of trust, and especially
of neighbourhood trust, depends not only on the characteristics and life circumstances of
each individual, but also on those of people living around them. To separate these two
sorts of effect requires the sort of two-level modelling that we show in Table 3, with
separate accounting of individual-level and community-level variables, and with errors
clustered at the level of the census tract, which is our primary measure of the local
community context. Putnam (2007) uses precisely the same analytical structure to show
that several community-level variables12 have important effects on neighbourhood trust.
We have a number of the same variables, and find strong contextual effects especially for


11
     Stolle (1998), using German and Swedish data, finds a similar positive relation between association
memberships and social trust, plus evidence that there is a positive feedback loop, with those who are
initially more trusting being more likely to join groups, while those who have been in a group for a
few years have significantly higher trust than new members, with some fall-off indicated also for long-
time members.
12
     Ranked in order of their importance, in terms of standardized Beta coefficients, the top community
contextual variables he found, in the explanation of trust in neighbours, were: census tract poverty
rate, county level non-violent crimes rate, census tract Herfindahl index of ethnic homogeneity, census
tract level of population density, census tract population mobility, census tract percent renters and
census tract percent with a bachelor’s degree or more. (Putnam 2007, p. 152)

                                                    17
neighbourhood trust. For general social trust, we find strong contextual effects only for
education (echoing the earlier results of Helliwell and Putnam 2007, and others13), and
for the census tract’s population share of visible minorities. For neighbourhood trust, as
would be expected, the range of significant contextual variables is larger. The results
confirm theoretical expectations that trust takes time to build and maintain, with this
process being more difficult in communities with fast rates of turnover. For example,
both census-tract population density and population mobility strongly reduce the level of
neighbourhood trust. The census tract share of visible minorities has a negative effect for
all the trust measures14.




13
     The implied community-level linkage running from education to trust (obtained by summing the
individual-level and contextual effects) may be less securely established across nations, as argued by
Bjørnskov (2006). Our two-level results using data from a single country are less open to the risks of
reverse causation than are studies based on national average data, although it is still natural to expect
that societies or communities marked by high mutual trust are more likely to be inclined to provide
public goods and services, including especially health and education.
14
     There were no effects found for the immigrant share in the census tract, beyond whatever effect that
migration would have on census tract levels of mobility and diversity. Our results for income diversity
match those of Putnam, while those for ethnic diversity match those of Kazemipur (2006) rather than
those of Putnam. However, it is likely that the percent of the population who are visible minorities
(many of whom are recent migrants, and come from many different cultures) is representing the same
effect that Putnam found with his ethnic diversity measure. Milroy’s analysis of social trust in GSS17
shows no negative effect from visible minority share, but does not include the Herfindahl diversity
index, and thus what we find as offsetting effects from diversity and visible minority share are shown
implicitly by her equation as an insignificant net effect. More detailed analysis of these effects is
perhaps better done with the Canadian Ethnic Diversity Survey, which has a larger sample and more
details about each respondent’s own migration and ethnic background.

                                                    18
6. Trust and Trustworthiness

     The Toronto Star (Zlomislic 2009) recently replicated the Readers’ Digest dropped-
wallet experiments that inspired the subsequent Canadian GSS and Gallup World Poll
survey questions. This makes possible a direct comparison between trustworthiness, as
measured by the actual frequency of wallet return, with trust, as measured by survey
responses about the likelihood of a lost wallet being returned. Respondents are thus being
asked about the expected trustworthiness of different hypothetical wallet-finders. As we
have shown earlier in the paper, there are large differences among countries, and among
cities, in survey responses about the likelihood of a lost wallet being returned. The
forecasts also depend on who is stipulated to find the wallet. More likely wallet return
was shown to be tightly linked with subjective well-being. We argued at the beginning of
the paper that these SWB-supporting feelings of trust will be sustainable in the longer
term only if they are in turn based on credible evidence of trustworthy behaviour (see also
Putnam 2000, 135-6). Trust eventually crumbles in the face of untrustworthy behaviour,
and has been shown to be hard to rebuild. On the other hand, a climate of unsubstantiated
distrust is needlessly destructive of well-being, leading people to draw back and ‘hunker
down’ (as emphasized by Putnam 2007), thereby losing opportunities for well-being-
enhancing social interactions.

     Thus it is valuable to be able to see if experience supports trust judgments. Such
evidence is hard to come by, since it is almost impossible to find matching data on trust
and trustworthiness. Fortunately, the recent wallet experiments in Toronto enabled an
accurate matching, and hence permit a direct comparison of the actual frequency of
returned wallets to the estimates made by GSS respondents living in the same
community. All of the returned wallets were found by strangers (since the identical
dropped wallets, containing money, bank cards, a personal letter and an emergency
telephone number, all belonged to the same fictitious individual), so their frequency of
return can be compared directly with the GSS survey responses of the likelihood of a lost
wallet being returned if found by a stranger. As shown in Figure 2, Torontonians are far
more altruistic than they think they are. The forecast frequency for return of a lost wallet


                                             19
found by a stranger in Toronto was 25%, while in fact 16 of the 20 wallets were returned,
for an 80% return rate. There were many survey respondents, and a small number of
wallets dropped, so the 95% confidence region shown by the vertical bar is much tighter
for the survey than for the actual number of wallets returned15. Nonetheless, a t-test of the
difference in means has a value of 8.0, suggesting that there is less than one chance in a
hundred billion that the two means are the same. The difference is large as well as
significant- more than three times as many wallets were returned than was forecast by the
survey respondents 16 . This significant underestimation of the likelihood of pro-social
behaviour by others has some parallels in crime statistics. For example, comparable
criminal victimization surveys take place in many countries, wherein, among many other
questions, respondents are asked whether they have been victims of attempted or actual
burglary in the previous year, and also how likely they think themselves to be burglarized
in the next year. The average among 30 countries for attempted or completed actual
burglaries was 3.5% (about half of which were attempts; van Dijk et al. 2007, p. 69). By
contrast, the average fraction of respondents who thought they were likely or very likely
to be burglarized over the following year was 29% (van Dijk et al. 2007, p. 128).

        What are the likely causes and consequences of these large and widespread
divergences between trustworthiness and trust? It is plausible that media and other reports
of bad events lead to over-estimation of their likely frequency. We are not studying here
the widely noted distinction between risk of crime and fear of crime (e.g. Rountree and


15
     The asymmetry of the error bar for the experimental data is a consequence of the underlying
binomial distribution.
16
     There are some practical complications with the experiments that might qualify these conclusions
slightly. On the one hand, wallets were apparently returned by second finders in two cases. One
previous finder tried unsuccessfully to use the bank card, but left the cash intact before dropping the
wallet again beside the unco-operating bank machine. The other first finder apparently took the cash
and returned the wallet to the ground. The four unreturned wallets may have never been found by
anyone. If we adjust the data to treat the two first finders as untrustworthy, and assume that all four of
the never-returned wallets were found but not returned, then we have the most conservative way of
treating the data, as 16 returned wallets out of 22. But the difference of means still is still very
significant (t=7.27), with less than one chance in a billion of the two means being the same.

                                                   20
Land 1996), but between perceived and actual incidence of crime, or, in our lost-wallet
case, between the perceived and actual likelihood of altruistic behaviour. What are the
likely well-being consequences of such a gap? First, it is important to know whether it is
the perceived or actual likelihood of behaviour that influences well-being. We have
already shown that the perceived likelihood of wallet return is strongly linked to
subjective well-being. But we do not know whether trustworthiness affects subjective
well-being only through trust perceptions, or by some other channels. We do not have
enough wallet data to assess this possibility, but we can ask, using the international
victimization survey data, whether actual or perceived rates of incidence for burglaries
are correlated with international differences in subjective well-being. We find, for the 28
countries that have World Values Survey life satisfaction data and both estimates of
burglary frequency, that the simple cross-country correlation between life satisfaction and
burglaries is zero for the sum of actual and attempted burglaries and -0.37 (p=0.05)
between life satisfaction and the average perception of future burglary risk17 . Thus it
would appear that it is trust rather than trustworthiness that is directly linked to subjective
well-being. If this is confirmed more broadly, it suggests that substantial, and essentially
costless, increases in subjective well-being could be obtained if people were better
informed, and hence more optimistic, about the trustworthiness of others. There may also
be a virtuous circle, whereby greater confidence in the norms of wallet return and other
altruistic acts would encourage people to engage more freely with others, and to raise the
standards for their own behaviour, because such norms are heavily dependent on the
expected behaviour of others.


7. Conclusions

        We have confirmed that trust and well-being are tightly linked. Our new results
show that those who feel themselves to be living in a trustworthy environment have much
higher levels of subjective well-being. Worldwide, using the data from the Gallup World


17
     We also find that the link between perceived risk of burglaries and SWL is entirely mediated by
social trust, as the partial correlation between burglary risk and SWL is zero once social trust is taken
into account.

                                                   21
Poll, those who think their lost wallet would be returned if found by a neighbour or the
police values their lives are more than 7% higher than those do not think their wallets
would be returned.18 This is about the same increase in subjective well-being that would
be associated with an increase of household income of about two-thirds.

       In the Canadian data, which include a larger number of trust questions, the well-
being effects of living in a high-trust environment are even greater. Having high trust in
co-workers, which we find to be the largest of all the specific directional trust measures,
is associated with 7.6% higher life satisfaction. This is followed trust in neighbours (5%),
confidence in police (3%), and a belief that a stranger would return your lost wallet
(2.5%). Since these effects are all estimated at the same time (as shown in equation 5 of
Table 2, and converted to percentage form in relation to sample-average satisfaction with
life), we can calculate how much higher life satisfaction is for those who have high levels
of trust in all these life domains. The answer is more than 18%. Even these large
combined effects may not be the whole story, since the equations used for these
calculations also include several key measures of belonging, some of which are clearly
based on, and are contributing to, levels of trust within the community. For example,
someone who feels a strong sense of belonging to their community is estimated to be
11% more satisfied with his or her life. As shown in the various panels of Table 3, these
effects are all very large when measured in terms of the income changes that would
produce the same consequences for life satisfaction.

       Since trust is so directly and strongly linked to subjective well-being, in addition to
supporting many other economic and social activities that also affect well-being directly,
it is important to consider what contributes to building and maintaining trust. Survey data
and experiments alike suggest that trust is built on a base of shared positive experience,
and is nurtured by continued connections. We find, using the rich social context detail of
the Canadian GSS17, that the quality of social connections matters a lot to the
maintenance of trust. In ways that validate the trust measures and theories of trust


18
     The percentage is based on the coefficient on the combined wallet response in equation (1) of Table
3-d, divided by the global average value of the responses to the Cantril ladder, then converted to
percentage form.

                                                    22
formation, general factors matter most for the determination of social trust, while
neighbourhood characteristics matter most for neighbourhood trust. For example, the
effects of individual-level and census-tract-level measures of education are strongly
supportive of social trust, as are the respondent’s memberships in social organizations,
and the level of social trust in the country where the respondent was born.

     For neighbourhood trust, by contrast, what matters most is how long the respondent
has lived in his or her neighbourhood, and how easy it is to meet and interact with
neighbours in friendly ways. Thus respondents who live in census tracts where the
population is dense and highly mobile are less likely to trust their neighbours, or to judge
that neighbours would be likely to return each other’s lost wallets. Similarly, a feeling of
belonging to one’s community is more strongly associated with neighbourhood trust,
while a sense of belonging to Canada is more strongly associated with general social
trust. Community-level and national belonging are significantly related to all types of
trust, with the effect sizes varying in the theoretically expected ways.

     Overall, our results reveal sufficiently strong linkages between trust and well-being
to support much more study of how trust can be built and maintained, or repaired where it
has been damaged. Our more tentative analysis of the factors supporting different types
of trust suggests that more attention be paid to creating the time and spaces for social
connections to flower. Since more and more people are living in large urban areas with
mobile and sometimes rootless populations, it is ever more important to design and
manage urban areas in ways that foster levels of engagement that support mutual trust
and hence well-being. Finally, our comparison of the actual and expected frequencies of
wallet return suggests that people are unrealistically pessimistic about the trustworthiness
of others. This presumably remediable pessimism is likely to lead to lower subjective
well-being, and to stand in the way of the expanded social interactions that are so
important in building and maintaining a trustworthy social fabric.




                                              23
References

Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2009) ‘Inherited Trust and Growth’, mimeo Sciences Po Paris,
    forthcoming American Economic Review, 2010.

Alesina, A., R. Di Tella and R. McCulloch (2004), ‘Inequality and Happiness: Are
    Americans and Europeans Different?’ Journal of Public Economics 88: 2009-42.

Bjørnskov, C. (2006) ‘Determinants of Generalized Trust: A Cross-Country Comparison’
    Public Choice 130: 1-21.

Blanchflower, D. G. (2009) ‘International Evidence on Well-Being’, In A.B. Krueger, ed.
    Measuring the Subjective Well-Being of Nations: National Accounts of Time Use
    and Well-Being Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Blanchflower, D. G. and A. J. Oswald (2008) ‘Is well-being U-shaped over the life
    cycle?’ Social Science and Medicine 66: 1733-49.

Chang, W. (2009) ‘Social Capital and Subjective Happiness in Taiwan’, International
    Journal of Social Economics, 36: 844-68.

Cohen, S. and S. D. Pressman (2006) ‘Positive Affect and Health’ Current Directions in
    Psychological Science 15 (2): 122-25.

Deaton, A. (2008) ‘Income, Aging, Health and Wellbeing Around the World: Evidence
    from the Gallup World Poll’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(2): 53-72.

Diener, E., R. Lucas, U. Schimmack & J. F. Helliwell (2009) Well-Being for Public
    Policy. (New York: Oxford University Press).

Diener, E., J. F. Helliwell, and D. Kahneman, eds. (2010) International Differences in
    Well-Being. (New York: Oxford University Press).

Easterlin, R. A. (2001) ‘Income and Happiness: Towards a Unified Theory’ Economic
    Journal 111: 465-84.

Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A. (2005) ‘Income and Wellbeing:An Empirical Analysis of the
    Comparison Income Effect’ Journal of Public Economics 89: 997-1019.




                                            24
Helliwell, J. F. (2003) ‘How’s Life? Combining Individual and National Variables to
    Explain Subjective Well-Being’ Economic Modelling 20: 331-60.

—— (2007) ‘Well-Being and Social Capital: Does Suicide Pose a Puzzle?’ Social
    Indicators Research 81: 455-96.

—— (2008) ‘Life Satisfaction and Quality of Development’ NBER Working Paper
    14507 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Helliwell, J. F., C. Barrington-Leigh, A. Harris and H. Huang (2010) ‘International
    Differences in the Social Context of Well-Being’ In E. Diener, D. Kahneman and J.
    F. Helliwell, eds. International Differences in Well-Being. (London: Oxford
    University Press, 2010, 291-324).

Helliwell, J. F. and H. Huang (2008) ‘Well-Being and Trust in the Workplace’ NBER
    Working Paper 14589 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Helliwell, J. F. and H. Huang (2010) ‘How’s the Job? Well-Being and Social Capital in
    the Workplace’ Industrial and Labor Relations Review 63: 205-27.

Helliwell, J. F., H. Huang and R. D. Putnam (2009) ‘How’s the Job? Are Trust and Social
    Capital Neglected Workplace Investments?’ In V. Bartkus and J. Davis, eds. Social
    Capital: Reaching Out, Reaching In. (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 87-144).

Helliwell, J. F. and R. D. Putnam (2004) ‘The Social Context of Well-Being’ Phil Trans
    R. Soc Lon. B 359: 1435-46. Reprinted in F. A. Huppert, B. Keverne and N. Baylis,
    eds., The Science of Well-Being. (London: Oxford University Press, 2005, 435-59).

—— (2007) ‘Education and Social Capital’ Eastern Economic Journal 63(1): 1-19.

Kawachi, I., B. P. Kennedy, K. Lochner and D. Prothrow-Stith (1997) ‘Social Capital,
    Income Inequality and Mortality’ American Journal of Public Health 87(9): 1491-8.

Kawachi, I., S. V. Subramanian and D. Kim, eds. (2007) Social Capital and Health.
    (New York: Springer).

Kazemipur, A. (2006) ‘Social Trust, Ethnic Diversity and Immigrants: The Case of
    Canada’ http://pcerii.metropolis.net/WorkingPapers/WP06-05.pdf



                                          25
Knack, S. (2001) ‘Trust, Associational Life and Economic Performance’ In J. F.
    Helliwell and A. Bonikowska, eds. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital
    to Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being (Ottawa and Paris: Human
    Resources Development Canada and OECD, 172-202).

Knack, S. and P. Keefer (1997) ‘Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A
    Cross-Country Investigation’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 1251-88.

Koivumaa-Honkanen, H., R. Hokanen, H. H. Viinamäki, K. Heikkilä, J. Caprio and N.
    Koskenvuo (2001) ‘Life Satisfaction and Suicide: A 20-year Follow-Up Study’
    American Journal of Psychiatry 158: 433-39.

Longpré, M. (2009) ‘Determinants of Trust among French-Canadians: Endeavouring to
    Disentangle the Cultural and Contextual Effects’ (UBC Department of Economics
    MA Essay).

Milroy, R. S. (2009) ‘How Deep are Your Roots? Imported Trust and Its Consequences
    for Canadian Social Trust’ (UBC Department of Economics MA Essay).

Morrone, A., G. Ranuzzi and N. Tontoranelli (2009) ‘How Good is Trust? Measuring
    Trust and Its Role for the Progress of Societies’, OECD Working Papers (Paris:
    OECD).

Nagler, M. G. (2009) ‘Traffic Fatalities and Social Capital’ (City College of New York
    Working Paper).

Putnam, R. D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community
    (New York: Simon & Schuster).

Putnam, R. D. (2007) ‘E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and Community in the Twenty-First
    Century the Johan Skytte Prize Lecture’ Scandinavian Political Studies 30: 137-74.

Rice, T. & J. Feldman (1997) ‘Civic Culture and Democracy from Europe to America’,
    Journal of Politics, 59, 1143-72.

Rountree, P. W. and K. C. Land (1996) ‘Perceived Risk Versus Fear of Crime: Empirical
    Evidence of Conceptually Distinct Reactions in Survey Data’ Social Forces 74:
    1353-76.

                                          26
Soroka, S., J. F. Helliwell and R. Johnston (2006) ‘Measuring and Modeling
    Interpersonal Trust’, in F. Kay and R. Johnston, eds. Diversity, Social Capital, and
    the Welfare State (Vancouver: UBC Press, 95-132).

Stolle, D. (1998) ‘Bowling Together, Bowling Alone: The Development of Generalized
    Trust in Voluntary Associations’ Political Psychology 19 (3): 497-525.

Yip, W., S. V. Subramanian, A. D. Mitchell, D. T. Lee, J. Wang and I. Kawachi (2007)
    ‘Does social Capital Enhance Health and Well-Being? Evidence from Rural China’
    Social Science & Medicine 64: 35-49.

Van Dijk, D., J. V. Kesteren and P. Smit (2007) Criminal Victimization in International
    Perspective:   Key   Findings    from        the   2004-2005   ICVS   and   EU   ICS.
    (www.nicis.nl/kenniscentrum/binaries/nicis/bulk/onderzoek/2008/2/3/icvs2004_05re
    port.pdf)

Zak, P. J. and S. Knack (2001) ‘Trust and Growth’ Economic Journal 111: 295-321.

Zlomislic, D. (2009) ‘We Dropped 20 Wallets around the GTA. Good News. Most Came
    Back’ Toronto Star April 25: A1.




                                            27
                    Table 1-a: Well-Being Equations, Gallup World Poll 2006

                                           Dependent Variables: Cantril Ladder
                             (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
 lnincomeh                  0.578***    0.575***          0.469***     0.559***    0.557***     0.442***
                           (0.0360)     (0.0363)          (0.0362)     (0.0353)    (0.0358)     (0.0351)
 wallet_neighbour           0.179**      0.157**           0.150**      0.152**      0.127*       0.117*
                           (0.0575)     (0.0533)          (0.0479)     (0.0538)    (0.0498)     (0.0448)
 male                      -0.0890**    -0.104**         -0.0999**    -0.110***    -0.121***    -0.116***
                           (0.0278)     (0.0307)          (0.0297)     (0.0289)    (0.0319)     (0.0315)
 marrasmarr                  0.0545       0.0427           0.107**      0.0317       0.0276      0.0810*
                           (0.0407)     (0.0410)          (0.0377)     (0.0403)    (0.0407)     (0.0366)
 Sepdivwid                  -0.0307      -0.0140           -0.0330     -0.0263      -0.0136      -0.0422
                           (0.0631)     (0.0673)          (0.0655)     (0.0651)    (0.0694)     (0.0675)
 age                      -0.0272***   -0.0275***        -0.0319***   -0.0215**   -0.0229***   -0.0269***
                          (0.00640)    (0.00678)         (0.00679)    (0.00632)   (0.00667)    (0.00668)
 agesq100                  0.0251***   0.0257***         0.0276***     0.0206**    0.0222**    0.0235***
                          (0.00654)    (0.00688)         (0.00682)    (0.00646)   (0.00673)    (0.00671)
 Freedom                    0.443***    0.418***          0.354***     0.393***    0.374***     0.310***
                           (0.0556)     (0.0523)          (0.0456)     (0.0554)    (0.0537)     (0.0472)
 countOnFriends             0.531***    0.556***          0.494***     0.447***    0.478***     0.412***
                           (0.0508)     (0.0525)          (0.0454)     (0.0487)    (0.0504)     (0.0428)
 cannotAffordFood_net      -0.705***    -0.673***         -0.642***   -0.607***    -0.586***    -0.546***
                           (0.0484)     (0.0510)          (0.0472)     (0.0464)    (0.0487)     (0.0428)
 donatedMoney               0.332***    0.307***          0.218***     0.290***    0.277***     0.188***
                           (0.0588)     (0.0539)          (0.0442)     (0.0563)    (0.0521)     (0.0428)
 donatedTime                 0.0652       0.0418           0.0519       0.0452       0.0266       0.0347
                           (0.0429)     (0.0452)          (0.0407)     (0.0407)    (0.0433)     (0.0397)
 helpedStranger             0.142**      0.148**           0.130**      0.138**     0.147**      0.137**
                           (0.0435)     (0.0440)          (0.0405)     (0.0434)    (0.0441)     (0.0418)
 godImportance              -0.0702      -0.0578           -0.0368      -0.109      -0.0960      -0.0610
                           (0.0863)     (0.0809)          (0.0645)     (0.0845)    (0.0791)     (0.0627)
 godPracticed               -0.0154      -0.0122           0.0192      -0.0373      -0.0322     0.00819
                           (0.0532)     (0.0542)          (0.0513)     (0.0490)    (0.0505)     (0.0482)
 corrupt                                -0.392***         -0.283***                -0.344**     -0.238**
                                         (0.105)          (0.0732)                  (0.105)     (0.0699)
 Affectnet                                                            0.570***     0.551***     0.552***
                                                                      (0.0447)     (0.0482)     (0.0453)
 _cons                     5.879***     6.192***          7.162***    5.672***     5.963***     6.878***
                           (0.200)      (0.236)           (0.171)      (0.198)      (0.234)      (0.170)
 Region dummies               No           No               Yes          No            No          Yes
 N                          57042        48597             48597        53563        46018        46018
 R-squared                  0.262        0.268             0.292        0.277        0.281        0.305
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

                                                    28
                  Table 1-b: Well-Being Equations, Gallup World Poll 2006

                                           Dependent Variables: Cantril Ladder
                           (1)            (2)                 (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                 ***            ***                 ***            ***            ***
 lnincomeh               0.570           0.569              0.460          0.551          0.552          0.434***
                         (0.0365)       (0.0369)            (0.0365)       (0.0358)       (0.0365)       (0.0353)
 wallet_police            0.218**        0.177**             0.163**        0.196**        0.156**        0.138**
                         (0.0649)       (0.0595)            (0.0492)       (0.0625)       (0.0579)       (0.0478)
 Male                   -0.0801**      -0.0962**           -0.0914**      -0.0986***     -0.112***       -0.106**
                         (0.0276)       (0.0305)            (0.0299)       (0.0285)       (0.0318)       (0.0315)
 Marrasmarr                0.0519         0.0445             0.108**         0.0275        0.0275         0.0817*
                         (0.0409)       (0.0414)            (0.0380)       (0.0410)       (0.0413)       (0.0366)
 Sepdivwid                -0.0165        0.00534             -0.0265        -0.0125       0.00662         -0.0350
                         (0.0632)       (0.0682)            (0.0651)       (0.0662)       (0.0711)       (0.0677)
 Age                    -0.0259***     -0.0262***          -0.0304***     -0.0200**      -0.0216**      -0.0255***
                        (0.00687)      (0.00727)           (0.00725)      (0.00682)      (0.00720)      (0.00717)
 agesq100                0.0235**       0.0239**           0.0254***       0.0186**       0.0205**       0.0214**
                        (0.00696)      (0.00732)           (0.00729)      (0.00691)      (0.00722)      (0.00722)
 Freedom                 0.426***        0.405***           0.340***       0.383***       0.366***       0.302***
                         (0.0559)       (0.0546)            (0.0486)       (0.0564)       (0.0562)       (0.0503)
 countOnFriends          0.556***        0.578***           0.514***       0.471***       0.496***       0.428***
                         (0.0536)       (0.0557)            (0.0481)       (0.0503)       (0.0525)       (0.0445)
 cannotAffordFood_net    -0.713***      -0.692***           -0.657***      -0.607***     -0.596***       -0.554***
                         (0.0518)       (0.0541)            (0.0519)       (0.0492)       (0.0512)       (0.0469)
 donatedMoney            0.323***        0.297***           0.207***       0.281***       0.268***       0.179***
                         (0.0587)       (0.0549)            (0.0464)       (0.0564)       (0.0530)       (0.0454)
 donatedTime               0.0683         0.0482             0.0584          0.0538        0.0382         0.0454
                         (0.0446)       (0.0467)            (0.0425)       (0.0415)       (0.0441)       (0.0410)
 helpedStranger           0.125**        0.138**             0.123**        0.119**        0.134**        0.125**
                         (0.0450)       (0.0454)            (0.0424)       (0.0449)       (0.0455)       (0.0438)
 godImportance            -0.0803        -0.0756             -0.0519         -0.119        -0.113         -0.0773
                         (0.0844)       (0.0805)            (0.0669)       (0.0822)       (0.0779)       (0.0640)
 godPracticed             -0.0114       -0.00527             0.0335         -0.0328       -0.0256         0.0218
                         (0.0522)       (0.0548)            (0.0516)       (0.0491)       (0.0520)       (0.0491)
 Corrupt                                -0.365***           -0.266**                      -0.315**       -0.221**
                                         (0.105)            (0.0783)                       (0.104)       (0.0753)
 Affectnet                                                                0.565***        0.547***       0.551***
                                                                          (0.0471)        (0.0505)       (0.0481)
 _cons                   5.853***       6.160***            7.116***      5.632***        5.921***       6.824***
                         (0.201)        (0.240)             (0.176)        (0.200)         (0.240)        (0.177)
 Region dummies             No             No                 Yes            No              No             Yes
 N                        53431          45806               45806          50228           43393          43393
 R-squared                0.265          0.272               0.295          0.279           0.284          0.308
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001


                                                      29
                   Table 1-c: Well-Being Equations, Gallup World Poll 2006

                                            Dependent Variables: Cantril Ladder
                            (1)            (2)                 (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                  ***            ***                 ***            ***            ***
 lnincomeh                 0.579         0.577                0.473         0.562          0.561          0.447***
                          (0.0363)       (0.0364)            (0.0368)       (0.0355)       (0.0358)       (0.0353)
 wallet_stranger            0.159*         0.110+              0.0836        0.144*         0.0944          0.0735
                          (0.0700)       (0.0650)            (0.0502)       (0.0675)       (0.0632)       (0.0502)
 male                     -0.0978**      -0.113***           -0.110***     -0.116***      -0.129***       -0.124***
                          (0.0290)       (0.0315)            (0.0310)       (0.0301)       (0.0329)       (0.0325)
 marrasmarr                0.0357          0.0266             0.0913*        0.0168         0.0151         0.0684+
                          (0.0408)       (0.0407)            (0.0385)       (0.0408)       (0.0406)       (0.0374)
 sepdivwid                -0.00670         0.0108            -0.00830       0.00206         0.0116         -0.0185
                          (0.0685)       (0.0725)            (0.0682)       (0.0709)       (0.0753)       (0.0710)
 age                     -0.0251***     -0.0259***          -0.0307***     -0.0198**      -0.0220**      -0.0263***
                         (0.00696)      (0.00719)           (0.00720)      (0.00693)      (0.00712)      (0.00713)
 agesq100                 0.0226**       0.0233**           0.0258***       0.0184*        0.0205**       0.0223**
                         (0.00707)      (0.00730)           (0.00730)      (0.00704)      (0.00722)      (0.00725)
 freedom                   0.448***      0.430***             0.362***      0.394***       0.380***       0.311***
                          (0.0544)       (0.0521)            (0.0454)       (0.0555)       (0.0543)       (0.0476)
 countOnFriends            0.557***      0.576***             0.510***      0.466***       0.485***       0.416***
                          (0.0532)       (0.0546)            (0.0464)       (0.0510)       (0.0526)       (0.0439)
 cannotAffordFood_net     -0.696***      -0.668***           -0.635***     -0.593***      -0.575***       -0.534***
                          (0.0487)       (0.0502)            (0.0465)       (0.0453)       (0.0472)       (0.0416)
 donatedMoney              0.321***      0.294***             0.206***      0.280***       0.265***       0.175***
                          (0.0582)       (0.0547)            (0.0443)       (0.0556)       (0.0527)       (0.0423)
 donatedTime               0.0484         0.0363               0.0466        0.0301         0.0242          0.0327
                          (0.0412)       (0.0444)            (0.0402)       (0.0392)       (0.0421)       (0.0386)
 helpedStranger            0.143**        0.151**             0.131**        0.135**        0.147**        0.134**
                          (0.0441)       (0.0445)            (0.0413)       (0.0440)       (0.0446)       (0.0426)
 godImportance             -0.0849        -0.0712             -0.0507        -0.119         -0.106         -0.0724
                          (0.0871)       (0.0819)            (0.0649)       (0.0857)       (0.0806)       (0.0629)
 godPracticed             -0.00619        -0.0107             0.0216        -0.0265        -0.0282          0.0133
                          (0.0514)       (0.0529)            (0.0508)       (0.0481)       (0.0500)       (0.0479)
 corrupt                                 -0.403***           -0.291***                    -0.354***       -0.245***
                                          (0.101)            (0.0686)                       (0.100)       (0.0646)
 affectnet                                                                 0.563***        0.547***       0.549***
                                                                           (0.0465)        (0.0504)       (0.0479)
 _cons                    5.934***       6.269***            7.294***      5.725***        6.046***       7.017***
                          (0.205)        (0.236)             (0.164)        (0.204)         (0.235)        (0.164)
 Region dummies              No             No                 Yes            No              No             Yes
 N                         50813          44048               44048          48002           41875          41875
 R-squared                 0.256          0.264               0.288          0.271           0.277          0.301
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001


                                                       30
                  Table 1-d: Well-Being Equations, Gallup World Poll 2006

                                          Dependent Variables: Cantril Ladder
                           (1)            (2)                 (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                 ***            ***                 ***            ***            ***
 lnincomeh               0.571          0.570               0.458          0.554          0.555          0.434***
                         (0.0375)       (0.0380)            (0.0377)       (0.0367)       (0.0375)       (0.0364)
 wallet_mean              0.359**        0.292**            0.258***        0.320**        0.251**        0.215**
                          (0.106)       (0.0923)            (0.0724)        (0.101)       (0.0890)       (0.0696)
 male                   -0.0850**       -0.102**           -0.0961**       -0.101**      -0.116***       -0.110**
                         (0.0294)       (0.0319)            (0.0311)       (0.0307)       (0.0334)       (0.0329)
 marrasmarr                0.0407        0.0340              0.0924*        0.0239         0.0230        0.0722+
                         (0.0409)       (0.0407)            (0.0384)       (0.0415)       (0.0413)       (0.0379)
 sepdivwid               0.00210         0.0312             0.00246         0.0118         0.0336       -0.00456
                         (0.0699)       (0.0740)            (0.0708)       (0.0732)       (0.0774)       (0.0742)
 age                    -0.0243**      -0.0246**           -0.0295***      -0.0187*      -0.0201**      -0.0247**
                        (0.00744)      (0.00773)           (0.00771)      (0.00736)      (0.00759)      (0.00756)
 agesq100                0.0221**       0.0221**            0.0245**       0.0174*        0.0186*        0.0205**
                        (0.00752)      (0.00785)           (0.00781)      (0.00743)      (0.00767)      (0.00765)
 freedom                 0.425***       0.407***            0.339***       0.378***       0.364***       0.296***
                         (0.0585)       (0.0574)            (0.0511)       (0.0592)       (0.0590)       (0.0529)
 countOnFriends          0.542***       0.561***            0.492***       0.466***       0.486***       0.414***
                         (0.0550)       (0.0564)            (0.0477)       (0.0529)       (0.0545)       (0.0459)
 cannotAffordFood_net    -0.696***     -0.672***            -0.634***     -0.596***      -0.582***      -0.538***
                         (0.0516)       (0.0523)            (0.0505)       (0.0486)       (0.0497)       (0.0458)
 donatedMoney            0.300***       0.281***            0.186***       0.259***       0.250***       0.155***
                         (0.0578)       (0.0551)            (0.0436)       (0.0559)       (0.0536)       (0.0421)
 donatedTime               0.0497        0.0386               0.0463        0.0384         0.0341         0.0383
                         (0.0428)       (0.0461)            (0.0421)       (0.0409)       (0.0440)       (0.0410)
 helpedStranger            0.121*        0.130**              0.114*        0.115*         0.126**        0.118*
                         (0.0460)       (0.0464)            (0.0437)       (0.0464)       (0.0469)       (0.0453)
 godImportance            -0.0797       -0.0765              -0.0463        -0.115         -0.112        -0.0693
                         (0.0853)       (0.0807)            (0.0658)       (0.0831)       (0.0782)       (0.0627)
 godPracticed             -0.0111      -0.00844              0.0311        -0.0273        -0.0236         0.0241
                         (0.0527)       (0.0548)            (0.0523)       (0.0495)       (0.0517)       (0.0495)
 corrupt                               -0.359***            -0.251***                     -0.320**       -0.215**
                                         (0.101)            (0.0695)                       (0.101)       (0.0672)
 affectnet                                                                0.539***        0.527***       0.531***
                                                                          (0.0473)        (0.0511)       (0.0488)
 _cons                   5.818***      6.133***             7.157***      5.607***        5.910***       6.892***
                         (0.220)       (0.252)              (0.185)        (0.217)         (0.250)        (0.184)
 Region dummies             No            No                  Yes            No              No             Yes
 N                        45630         39980                39980          43336           38168          38168
 R-squared                0.266         0.272                0.298          0.279           0.284          0.309
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001


                                                      31
                   Table 2: Life Satisfaction Equations, Canadian GSS17
                                      Dependent Variables: Life Satisfaction
                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
lninch                   0.174***     0.178***       0.179***      0.170***    0.166***
                          (0.021)      (0.022)        (0.021)       (0.022)      (0.022)
wallet_neighbour         0.285***     0.185***       0.172***       0.104*         0.043
                          (0.045)      (0.044)        (0.045)       (0.046)      (0.050)
wallet_stranger          0.268***     0.237***       0.237***      0.206***     0.203***
                          (0.047)      (0.049)        (0.050)       (0.051)      (0.050)
trust_gen                0.100***     0.075**         0.067*        -0.035       -0.063*
                          (0.029)      (0.028)        (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.029)
french                   0.283***     0.222***       0.301***      0.267***     0.274***
                          (0.040)      (0.040)        (0.039)       (0.038)      (0.038)
marr                     0.344***     0.305***       0.305***      0.298***     0.295***
                          (0.037)      (0.036)        (0.035)       (0.035)      (0.035)
sepdivwid               -0.246***    -0.252***      -0.259***     -0.269***    -0.276***
                          (0.056)      (0.057)        (0.056)       (0.056)      (0.058)
age                     -0.070***    -0.069***      -0.070***     -0.076***    -0.075***
                          (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)
agesq100                 0.070***     0.067***       0.068***      0.075***     0.074***
                          (0.005)      (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.006)
female                  0.125***     0.113***       0.115***      0.107***      0.110***
                          (0.026)      (0.026)        (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)
unemployed              -0.647***    -0.619***      -0.613***     -0.572***    -0.567***
                          (0.099)      (0.101)        (0.101)       (0.101)      (0.103)
educ1                      -0.025      -0.004           0.002       -0.003        -0.002
                          (0.052)      (0.050)        (0.050)       (0.049)      (0.050)
educ2                     -0.099*      -0.051          -0.045       -0.049        -0.048
                          (0.043)      (0.043)        (0.042)       (0.040)      (0.040)
educ3                   -0.189***     -0.127**       -0.124**      -0.134**     -0.134**
                          (0.046)      (0.045)        (0.045)       (0.045)      (0.045)
mem_rel                  0.091**        0.039           0.044        0.041         0.045
                          (0.034)      (0.034)        (0.034)       (0.033)      (0.033)
mem_oth                    0.010       -0.019          -0.018       -0.019        -0.018
                          (0.029)      (0.028)        (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.028)
tenureNeighbour          0.137**        0.054           0.062        0.044         0.023
                          (0.045)      (0.045)        (0.045)       (0.044)      (0.045)
control                  0.271***     0.265***       0.265***      0.255***     0.250***
                          (0.049)      (0.048)        (0.048)       (0.048)      (0.048)
change_things            0.709***     0.700***       0.687***      0.656***    0.660***
                          (0.072)      (0.075)        (0.075)       (0.074)      (0.074)
friends2                    0.110       0.110           0.117        0.109        0.110
                          (0.083)      (0.084)        (0.083)       (0.082)      (0.082)
friends3                 0.241**       0.219*         0.224**       0.199*        0.190*

                                               32
                  (0.087)    (0.087)    (0.086)    (0.081)    (0.082)
friends4         0.329***    0.269**    0.273**    0.238**    0.226**
                  (0.092)    (0.094)    (0.092)    (0.085)    (0.087)
friends5         0.382***    0.301**    0.303**    0.263**    0.254**
                  (0.103)    (0.103)    (0.100)    (0.093)    (0.094)
friends6          0.432**    0.282*      0.295*    0.235+       0.218
                  (0.148)    (0.141)    (0.138)    (0.132)    (0.133)
seeFrds          0.161***   0.108***   0.110***   0.096***   0.097***
                  (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.026)
relatives2       0.381***   0.332***   0.335***   0.316***   0.323***
                  (0.081)    (0.082)    (0.082)    (0.082)    (0.083)
relatives3       0.526***   0.460***   0.459***   0.427***   0.436***
                  (0.076)    (0.078)    (0.078)    (0.078)    (0.079)
relatives4       0.618***   0.524***   0.520***   0.481***   0.489***
                  (0.079)    (0.080)    (0.080)    (0.080)    (0.081)
relatives5       0.700***   0.603***   0.596***   0.547***   0.555***
                  (0.091)    (0.088)    (0.088)    (0.088)    (0.089)
relatives6       0.658***   0.524***   0.521***   0.495***   0.499***
                  (0.112)    (0.108)    (0.108)    (0.107)    (0.108)
seeRels          0.096***    0.066*     0.068**   0.069**    0.074**
                  (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.026)
c_density          -0.473     -0.526     -0.520     -0.514     -0.495
                  (0.345)    (0.342)    (0.341)    (0.334)    (0.333)
c_educ             -0.010      0.117      0.114      0.110      0.095
                  (0.150)    (0.162)    (0.158)    (0.158)    (0.166)
c_mob              -0.026     -0.078     -0.099     -0.142     -0.103
                  (0.128)    (0.126)    (0.126)    (0.125)    (0.126)
c_inc_med          -0.001     -0.002     -0.006     -0.010     -0.018
                  (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.018)    (0.019)
c_inc_div          -0.197     -0.214     -0.211     -0.184     -0.169
                  (0.161)    (0.163)    (0.162)    (0.161)    (0.164)
c_herf_vismin       0.068      0.034      0.046     0.040      0.034
                  (0.062)    (0.055)    (0.057)    (0.056)    (0.056)
c_vm                0.063      0.042      0.033      0.050      0.080
                  (0.098)    (0.096)    (0.096)    (0.096)    (0.096)
belong_comm                 0.872***   0.850***   0.815***   0.781***
                             (0.057)    (0.057)    (0.055)    (0.056)
belong_prov                 0.484***   0.316***   0.269***   0.274***
                             (0.054)    (0.058)    (0.058)    (0.058)
belong_can                             0.423***   0.377***   0.366***
                                        (0.065)    (0.069)    (0.070)
na_co                                             0.407***   0.329***
                                                   (0.072)    (0.075)
trust_coworker                                    0.784***   0.683***
                                                   (0.077)    (0.076)

                                 33
 confi_police                                                              0.389***        0.361***
                                                                            (0.057)         (0.058)
 trust_neighbour                                                                           0.336***
                                                                                            (0.071)
 Constant                   5.449***      4.887***          4.717***       4.412***        4.405***
                             (0.265)       (0.261)           (0.259)        (0.271)         (0.272)
 R-squared                    0.129         0.167             0.171          0.187           0.188
 N                            15505         15235             15190          15114           14896
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                 Table 3-a: Compensating Differentials of Trust in GWP 2006 a
                                  Trust in              Trust in                Trust in
                                                                                                  Average Trust
                                 Neighbours              Police                Strangers
 Coefficient of the log of        0.58***               0.57***                0.58***              0.57***
 household income                 (0.036)               (0.037)                (0.036)              (0.038)
 Coefficient of trust              0.18**               0.22***                  0.16*              0.36***
                                   (0.058)              (0.065)                 (0.070)             (0.106)
 Compensating                      0.31**                0.38**                 0.28*                0.63**
 differentials                     (0.10)                (0.12)                 (0.12)               (0.19)
 95% confidence intervals        [0.10, 0.51]          [0.15, 0.62]        [0.04, 0.51]            [0.25, 1.00]
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                   Table 3-b: Compensating Differentials of Trust in GSS17 b
                                Trust in          Trust in          Trust in       Trust in Co-       Trust in
                               Neighbours       Neighbours1        Strangers         workers           Police
 Coefficient of the log of      0.17***           0.17***          0.17***           0.17***          0.17***
 household income               (0.022)           (0.022)          (0.022)           (0.022)          (0.022)
 Coefficient of trust           0.10***           0.34***          0.20***           0.68***          0.36***
                                (0.046)           (0.071)          (0.050)           (0.076)          (0.058)
 Compensating                   0.61***           2.03***          1.22***           4.12***          2.18***
 differentials                   (0.30)            (0.47)           (0.30)            (0.47)           (0.47)
 95% confidence intervals     [0.028, 1.20]     [1.11, 2.94]    [0.63, 1.82]      [3.21, 5.03]      [1.27, 3.09]
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                                  34
     Table 3-c: Compensating Differentials of Trust in ESC2 2003 and USBS 2000/01 c
                         Trust in Neighbours             Trust in Workplace               Trust in Police
                        ESC2,          USBS,            ESC2,          USBS,           ESC2,          USBS,
                        2003          2000/01           2003          2000/01          2003          2000/01
 Coefficient of the    0.19***        0.096***         0.19***        0.096***        0.19***        0.096***
 log of household      (0.039)         (0.022)         (0.039)         (0.022)        (0.039)         (0.022)
 income
 Coefficient     of    0.23***        0.25***          0.19***        0.093***         0.16+         0.35***
 trust                 (0.063)        (0.048)          (0.025)         (0.011)        (0.098)        (0.040)
 Compensating          1.21***        2.60***          0.97***        0.97***           0.84         3.64***
 differentials          (0.34)         (0.30)           (0.24)         (0.26)          (0.64)         (0.26)
 95% confidence       [0.54, 1.88]   [2.01, 3.09]     [0.50, 1.44]   [0.46, 1.48]   [-0.41, 2.09]   [3.13, 4.14]
 intervals

Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001


Notes for Table 3:

     a. The results are generated from the data Gallup World Poll 2006 using the Cantril
self-anchoring striving scale on a 0 to 10 scale. Trust in neighbours, trust in strangers, and
trust in police are binary measures, with 1.0 reflecting confidence that the lost wallet
would be returned with valuables intact in it if it was found by neighbours, strangers, and
police respectively, with 0 as the alternative. Average trust is the simple average of the
three trust measures. Compensating differentials of trust are calculated based on model (1)
in Table 1.

     b. The results are generated from Canadian GSS17 using life satisfaction on a 0 to
10 scale. trust in co-worker which is originally on 1-5 point scale is standardized with
zero mean and a standard deviation of one; trust in neighbours and trust in strangers
which are originally on 1-3 point scale are converted to 0 to 1.0 range; trust in police
which is originally on 1-4 point scale is also converted to 0 to 1.0 range. Trust in
neighbours and trust in strangers mean the confidence that the lost wallet will be returned
with the money in it if it was found by neighbours and strangers. Trust in Neighbours1 is
the answer to the question “how much do you trust people in your neighbourhood. It is
originally on 1-5 point scale is converted to 0 to 1.0 range. Trust in police is the
confidence on police. Compensating differentials of trust in neighbours, trust in strangers,

                                                 35
trust in co-workers, and confidence in police are calculated based on model (4) in Table 2.
Compensating differentials of trust in neighbours are calculated based on model (5) in
Table 2.

     c1. Results in Table 3-c are drawn from Helliwell et al. (2010).

     c2. The regressions only use data on working population. Self-employed is excluded
in the Canadian ESC surveys. US benchmark survey does not provide information on
self-employment status. Therefore the sample may include the self-employed. The
coefficients of correlation between trust and income are assumed to be zero to simplify
the calculation.

     c3. The subjective well-being and trust variables are defined as follows:

     Canadian ESC2: Life satisfaction is on 1-10 point scale; trust in management which
is originally on 1-10 point scale is standardized with zero mean and a standard deviation
of one; trust in neighbours and trust in police have a 3 point scale, converted to lie on the
0 to 1.0 range for estimation. A value of 1.0 for the latter means that wallet return is
thought very likely.

     US Benchmark Survey: Happiness is on 1-4 point scale; trust in co-workers which is
originally on 1-4 point scale is standardized with zero mean and a standard deviation of
one. Trust in neighbours and trust in police are both on 0-1 point scale.




                                             36
                      Table 4: Trust Equations, Canadian GSS17

                    Trust       Trust       Trust       Trust      Wallet      Wallet
                   general    coworker    neighbour   stranger    neighbour   stranger
imp_trust         0.743***        0.002    0.169**     0.183***      -0.081      -0.032
                    (0.106)     (0.065)     (0.055)     (0.054)     (0.077)     (0.071)
imgrant           0.074***       -0.014      0.012       -0.007      -0.009       0.003
                    (0.015)     (0.010)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.013)     (0.010)
french            -0.192***    -0.020**   -0.043***   -0.056***   -0.036***   -0.098***
                    (0.011)     (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.007)
marr                 0.027*      -0.007    0.039***      -0.003    0.072***      0.018*
                    (0.012)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.009)     (0.007)
sepdivwid            -0.013       0.006      0.003     -0.020**       0.008      -0.001
                    (0.015)     (0.009)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.010)     (0.009)
age                  0.003*    0.017***     0.002*     0.006***       0.001   0.003***
                    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
agesq100             -0.001   -0.028***     0.001+    -0.003***     0.002+      -0.001+
                    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
female              -0.020*   -0.060***      0.003    -0.026***    -0.015**       0.008
                    (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.005)
educ1              0.038**      0.017+       0.008     0.042***     0.019+     0.028***
                    (0.014)     (0.010)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.011)     (0.008)
educ2             0.079***     0.044***     0.014*     0.072***    0.041***    0.043***
                    (0.015)     (0.009)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.008)     (0.007)
educ3             0.155***     0.081***   0.036***     0.124***    0.078***    0.078***
                    (0.015)     (0.009)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.009)
mem_rel            0.031**        0.004      0.006     0.023***    0.024***    0.025***
                    (0.012)     (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.007)
mem_oth           0.043***     0.032***      0.004     0.020***     0.018**     0.016**
                    (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.005)
tenureNeighbour      0.030*    0.051***    0.091***      0.017*    0.135***       0.003
                    (0.014)     (0.009)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.010)     (0.009)
control           0.080***     0.034***     0.017*     0.047***     0.037**    0.049***
                    (0.014)     (0.010)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.013)     (0.009)
change_things      0.112***    0.075***    0.029**     0.074***     0.030+       0.030*
                    (0.019)     (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.018)     (0.012)
friends2              0.039       0.015    0.048***       0.018       0.011       0.006
                    (0.028)     (0.019)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.017)     (0.014)
friends3           0.113***     0.060**   0.071***     0.042***     0.044**     0.021+
                    (0.026)     (0.022)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.012)
friends4           0.164***    0.070***    0.086***    0.063***     0.051**      0.029*
                    (0.025)     (0.021)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.013)
friends5           0.173***    0.088***    0.099***    0.074***   0.066***       0.037*
                    (0.028)     (0.023)     (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.020)     (0.017)
friends6           0.173***    0.118***    0.118***     0.055**     0.071**       0.021

                                          37
                     (0.035)      (0.025)     (0.018)      (0.020)     (0.024)     (0.025)
 seeFrds               0.002     0.017**        0.004        0.005      -0.006      -0.005
                     (0.008)      (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.005)
 relatives2            0.024      0.028*        0.010        0.003       0.008       0.004
                     (0.019)      (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.014)     (0.014)
 relatives3          0.061**     0.058***    0.038***      0.029**    0.039**        0.021
                     (0.019)      (0.012)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.014)     (0.015)
 relatives4         0.074***     0.054***    0.043***     0.036***     0.039*       0.030*
                     (0.020)      (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.010)     (0.017)     (0.014)
 relatives5         0.083***     0.085***    0.043***     0.040***     0.051**      0.035*
                     (0.023)      (0.015)     (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.017)     (0.017)
 relatives6           0.055*      0.047*      0.034+         0.015       0.032       0.018
                     (0.028)      (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.015)     (0.023)     (0.021)
 seeRels              -0.002    -0.018***      -0.001      -0.009*     0.013*       0.011*
                     (0.008)      (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.005)
 c_density            -0.069        0.011   -0.342***       -0.048   -0.736***     -0.150+
                     (0.130)      (0.080)     (0.082)      (0.076)     (0.130)     (0.082)
 c_educ             0.288***        0.024    0.141***     0.146***    0.231***   0.112***
                     (0.045)      (0.029)     (0.024)      (0.025)     (0.033)     (0.027)
 c_mob                -0.033       0.025    -0.128***       -0.016   -0.247***     -0.045*
                     (0.043)      (0.025)     (0.019)      (0.019)     (0.030)     (0.023)
 c_inc_med            -0.006        0.000     0.005*         0.002       0.002       0.001
                     (0.005)      (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.004)
 c_inc_div           -0.094+        0.047       0.040     -0.080**     0.096**      -0.011
                     (0.054)      (0.033)     (0.026)      (0.027)     (0.037)     (0.033)
 c_herf_vismin        -0.019       -0.002       0.004        0.003      0.011       -0.022
                     (0.015)      (0.012)     (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.016)     (0.015)
 c_vm               -0.092**    -0.078***   -0.139***    -0.086***   -0.225***   -0.080***
                     (0.032)      (0.021)     (0.016)      (0.017)     (0.024)     (0.021)
 belong_comm       0.077***       0.052*     0.133***     0.041***    0.138***    0.034***
                     (0.016)      (0.021)     (0.011)      (0.009)     (0.012)     (0.010)
 belong_prov           0.027     0.036**      0.023*         0.013       0.015      0.025*
                     (0.018)      (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.009)     (0.013)     (0.012)
 belong_can         0.076***        0.013    0.049***      0.030**    0.046**    0.042***
                     (0.019)      (0.014)     (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.015)     (0.011)
 CTuid_dummy       0.059***      0.014**     0.045***     0.038***    0.085***   0.044***
                     (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.005)
 Constant          -0.423***      0.079+     0.124***    -0.232***    0.152**      -0.092*
                     (0.064)      (0.041)     (0.034)      (0.034)     (0.047)     (0.041)
 R-squared             0.129        0.294       0.207        0.135       0.187       0.086
 N                    17174        17404       17007        16997       16987       16641
Standard errors in brackets；+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                             38
                                    Figure 1: International shares of variance
                                              Gallup World Poll 2006
 0.50
 0.45
 0.40
 0.35
 0.30
 0.25
 0.20
 0.15
 0.10
 0.05
 0.00



                                                                      ur
                     n




                                                        ed ice
                            r




                                                                        r
                                                     on dom
                                                                       n
         e




                                                                      n




                                                                       e
                                                         a s on
                                                                       )




                                                       na ger
                                                      t-n ney
                                                                     ch
                            e




                                                                     ge
                  io




                                                                    od
        m




                                                                  tim
                                                                    ea
                                    io




                                                                   bo
                         dd




                                                                  ol

                                                                  ur
                ig
       co




                                                 ds tran
                                 pt




                                                                   t

                                                                  n
                                                               t- m




                                                                (fo
                                                                  o




                                                                un
                                                               gh
                       la




                                                               ee
                                                              t- p




                                                              tra
                                                              ch
                 l




                                                              m
                             rru




                                                                d
     in

              re




                                                            te
                                                          co
                                                              r
                                                           ei
                     ril




                                                           le




                                                             s
                                                         ey
                                                            e




                                                            f
                                                          d
 hh




                                                           -
           of



                            co




                                                          l
                                                        al




                                                        et
                                                       ce
                 nt




                                                       te
                                                       al




                                                      to
                                                    nd
                                                    w




                                                      l



                                                   ed

                                                   do
          e




                                                   na
                                                   w
               Ca

                         of




                                                     i
g




                                                   le




                                                   al
                                                   o
       nc




                                                  m
lo




                                                 te




                                                lp
                                               ch
                                                al




                                                w
                                               do
                        n
     rta




                                              en
                                               h
                                              at



                                             w




                                            he
                     tio




                                           ug
                                            e




                                          fri
 po




                                         lif
                 ep




                                        no
im




                rc




                                     te
              pe




                                  no




                           Figure 2: Likelihood of lost wallet being returned
1.00

0.90

0.80

0.70

0.60
                                                                                        Greater Toronto
0.50

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00
              survey: if found by          survey: if found by   experiment: found by
                  neighbour                     stranger               stranger




                                                          39
APPENDIX


            Appendix Table 1-a: Summary Statistics, Gallup World Poll 2006
      Variable         Number of Observations            Mean           Standard Deviation
lifeToday                       136955                    5.358                 2.237
walletNeighbour                  81065                    0.644                 0.479
walletPolice                     74903                    0.566                 0.496
walletStranger                   71164                    0.166                 0.372
walletMean                       62306                    0.431                 0.347
lnincomeh                        99584                   -2.045                1.944
marr                            138666                    0.515                  0.5
sepdivwid                       138666                    0.049                 0.216
age                             138060                   38.783                17.03
agesq100                        138060                   17.941                15.288
female                          138640                   0.511                   0.5
freedom                         123789                     0.73                 0.444
countOnFriends                  132858                     0.84                 0.367
cannotAffordFood_net             97918                      0                   0.443
donatedMoney                     97198                    0.283                 0.45
donatedTime                      98116                    0.224                 0.417
helpedStranger                   97479                    0.432                 0.495
godImportance                   129087                    0.707                 0.455
godPracticed                    130658                    0.452                 0.498
corrupt                         102095                    0.761                0.383
affectnet                       114626                    0.400                 0.490




         Appendix Table 1-b: Descriptions of Variables, Gallup World Poll 2006
      Variable                                      Descriptions
                       Please imagine a ladder with steps numbered from zero at the bottom
                       to ten at the top. Suppose we say that the top of the ladder represents
                       the best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents
Cantril Ladder
                       the worst possible. If the top step is 10 and the bottom step is 0, on
                       which step of the ladder do you feel you personally stand at the
                       present time?
                       In the city or area where you live, imagine that you lost your wallet or
                       something holding your identification or address and it was found by
wallet_neighbour
                       someone else. Do you think your wallet (or your valuables) would be
                       returned to you if it were found by neighbours?
                       In the city or area where you live, imagine that you lost your wallet or
wallet_police          something holding your identification or address and it was found by
                       someone else. Do you think your wallet (or your valuables) would be

                                             40
                      returned to you if it were found by the police?
                      In the city or area where you live, imagine that you lost your wallet or
                      something holding your identification or address and it was found by
wallet_stranger
                      someone else. Do you think your wallet (or your valuables) would be
                      returned to you if it were found by strangers?
wallet_mean           Average of the three wallet trust measures
lnincomeh             Log of household income
marr                  Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is married or as married
                      Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is separated, divorced, or
sepdivwid
                      widowed
age                   Age
agesq100              Square of age/100
female                Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is female
                      In (county of interview), are you satisfied or dissatisfied with your
freedom
                      freedom to choose what you do with your life?
                      If you were in trouble, do you have relatives or friends you can count
countOnFriends
                      on to help you whenever you need them, or not?
                      Have there been times in the past twelve months when you did not
cannotAffordFood
                      have enough money to buy food that you or your family needed?
cannotAffordFood_net Residual of regressing cannotAffordFood on the log of household
                     income
donateMoney           Have you in the past month donated money to a charity?
donateTime            Have you in the past month volunteered your time to an organization?
                      Have you in the past month helped a stranger or someone you did not
helpedStranger
                      know who needed help?
godImportance         Is religion an important part of your daily life?
                      Have you attended a place of worship or religious service within the
godPracticed
                      last seven days?
                      Average of the following two responses: 1) Is corruption widespread
                      within businesses located in (county of interview), or not? 2) Is
corrupt
                      corruption widespread throughout the government in (county of
                      interview), or not?
                      Affectpos-affectneg. Affectpos is the average of Gallup wp63-67, and
                      affectneg the average of wp70, and wp72-75. Questions- Did you
                      smile or laugh a lot yesterday? (wp63) Were you proud of something
                      you did yesterday? (wp64) Did you learn or do something interesting
affectnet
                      yesterday? (wp65) Did you have good tasting food to eat yesterday?
                      (wp66) Did you experience the following feelings during a lot of the
                      day yesterday? enjoyment (wp67), worry (wp69), sadness (wp70),
                      boredom (wp72), depression (wp73), anger (wp74), shame (wp75).



                                            41
                Appendix Table 2-a: Summary Statistics, Canadian GSS17
     Variable         Number of Observations    Mean         Standard Deviation
SWL                            24452             7.903              1.642
trust_gen                      23861             0.553              0.497
wallet_neighbour               23348             0.651              0.361
wallet_stranger                22641             0.228              0.299
trust_neighbour                23387             0.682              0.266
trust_stranger                 23323             0.308              0.265
trust_coworker                 17103             0.711              0.243
confi_police                   23804             0.734             0.242
imp_trust                      22798             0.377              0.052
immigrant                      24568             0.218              0.413
french                         24931             0.216              0.412
age                            24951            43.942             17.940
agesq100                       24951            22.527             17.353
female                         24951            0.508              0.500
yr_ngh                         24547             3.915             1.625
educ1                          24517             0.142              0.349
educ2                          24517             0.416              0.493
educ3                          24517             0.212              0.409
control                        23409             0.603              0.292
change_things                  23318             0.682              0.244
friends1-2                     24721             0.235              0.424
friends3-5                     24721             0.400              0.490
friends6-10                    24721             0.214              0.410
friends11-20                   24721             0.067              0.250
friends20plus                  24721             0.022              0.145
relatives1-2                   24673             0.238              0.426
relatives3-5                   24673             0.354              0.478
relatives6-10                  24673             0.221              0.415
relatives11-20                 24673             0.087              0.282
relatives20plus                24673             0.034             0.182
seeFrds                        23415             0.590             0.492
seeRels                        24867             0.382             0.486
mem_rel                        24728             0.168              0.374
mem_oth                        24738             0.578             0.494
c_density                      24368             0.024              0.036
c_educ                         24940             0.588              0.130
c_mob                          24474            0.412              0.131
c_inc_med                      24951             0.437              1.022
c_inc_div                      24368             0.271              0.102
c_herf_vismin                  23001             0.339              0.242
c_vm                           24407             0.131             0.182
belong_comm                    24417             0.601              0.283

                                          42
belong_prov                        24313                0.695                  0.272
belong_can                         24570                0.784                  0.269


               Appendix Table 2-b: Descriptions of Variables, Canadian GSS17
       Variable                                       Descriptions
                       Please rate your feelings about certain areas of your life, using a scale of
SWL                    1 to 10 where 1 means “Very dissatisfied” and 10 means “Very
                       satisfied”. How do you feel about your life as a whole right now?
                       Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or
trust_gen
                       that you cannot be too careful in dealing with people? yes=1, no=0
                       If you lost a wallet or purse that contained two hundred dollars, how
wallet_neighbour       likely is it to be returned with the money in it if it was found by someone
                       who lives close by? Scaled max=1.0
                       If you lost a wallet or purse that contained two hundred dollars, how
wallet_stranger        likely is it to be returned with the money in it if it was found by a
                       complete stranger?
                       Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means “Cannot be trusted at all” and 5
trust_coworker         means “Can be trusted a lot”, how much do you trust people you work
                       with or go to school with? Scaled max=1.0 in regressions
                       Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondents do not answer the questions
na_co                  on trust in co-workers
                       Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means “Cannot be trusted at all” and 5
trust_neighbour        means “Can be trusted a lot”, how much do you trust people in your
                       neighbourhood? Scaled max=1.0 in regressions
                       Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means “Cannot be trusted at all” and 5
trust_stranger         means “Can be trusted a lot”, how much do you trust strangers? Scaled
                       max=1.0 in regressions.
confi_police           How much confidence do you have in the police? (max=1.0)
lnincomeh              Log of household income
                       Imported Trust (average level of trust in immigrant’s country of origin
imp_trust              minus corresponding Canadian value)
immigrant              Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is an immigrant
french                 Dummy variable equals to 1 if the first language of respondent is French
marr                   Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is married or as married
                       Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is separated, divorced, or
sepdivwid              widowed
age                    Age
agesq100               Square of age/100
female                 Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is female


                                                43
unemployed        Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent is unemployed
yr_ngh            Years living in the neighbourhood
educ1             High school education
educ2             Started college or university
educ3             University degree
control           Sense of control over things happening to respondent
change_things     Ability to change things in respondent’s life
friends1-2        Number of close friends: 1 or 2
friends3-5        Number of close friends: 3 to 5
friends6-10       Number of close friends: 6 to 10
friends11-20      Number of close friends: 11 to 20
friends20plus     Number of close friends: more than 20
relatives1-2      Number of close relatives: 1 or 2
relatives3-5      Number of close relatives: 3 to 5
relatives6-10     Number of close relatives: 6 to 10
relatives11-20    Number of close relatives: 11 to 20
relatives20plus   Number of close relatives: more than 20
seeFrds           The frequency of seeing close friends in the last month
seeRels           The frequency of seeing close relatives in the last month
mem_rel           Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent belongs to a religious group
                  Dummy variable equals to 1 if respondent belongs to a non-religious or
mem_oth
                  non-ethnic group
c_density         Population density at the census tract level
c_educ            Proportion of people with a high school degree at census tract level
c_mob             Proportion of people who moved in last five years at census tract level
c_inc_med         Median income at census tract level
c_inc_div         Income diversity at census tract level
c_herf_vismin     Herfindahl Index for ethnic diversity at census tract level
c_vm              Proportion of visible minorities at census tract level
belong_comm       Sense of belonging to the community. Scaled max=1.0 in regressions
belong_prov       Sense of belonging to the province. Scaled max=1.0 in regressions
belong_can        Sense of belonging to Canada. Scaled max=1.0 in regressions




                                           44
