                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PURCHASING POWER PARITY



                        Rudiger Dornbusch



                      Working Paper No. 1591




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, M/\ 02138
                            March 1985




The research reported here s part of the NBER' research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity and
Industrial Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1591
                                               March 1985




                          Purchasing Power Parity

                                  ABSTRACT




     The paper is a survey of PPP theory and evidence prepared for the New

Palgrave dictionary of economics. Following a statement of the absolute and

relative versions of the theory, there is a brief sketch of the history of

thought with emphasis on Cassel and the monetary approach. A theoretical part

distinguishes structural and transitory deviations from PPP. The main basis

for structural deviations is the Elcardo—Harrod—Balassa-Samuelson model of

productivity differentials that affect the real prices of home goods and hence

real price levels. Transitory deviations emerge from differential speeds of

goods and assets markets. In particular sticky wages combined with imperfect

competition or spatial discrimination in pricing give rise to sometimes

persistent movements in real exchange rates. After an overview of empirical

evidence the paper concludes with a review of implications of PPP disparities.

Applications to international real income comparisons, interest rate linkages

and exchange rate policy receive attention.




Rudiger Dornbusch
Professor of Economics
Department of Economics, E52—357
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253—3648
                                                         Revised
                                                         March 1985



                           PURCHASING POWER PARITY*




                               Rudiger   Dornbusch

                     Massachusetts Institute of Technology



     Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) is a theory of exchange rate determination.

It asserts (in the most common form) that the exchange rate change between two

currencies over any period of time is determined by the change in the two

countries' relative price levels. Because the theory singles out price level

changes as the overriding determinant of exchange rate movements it has also

been called the "inflation theory of exchange rates".

     The PPP theory of exchange rates has somewhat the same status in the

history of economic thought and in economic policy as the Quantity Theory of

Money (QT): by different authors and at different points in time it has been

considered an identity, a truism, an empirical regularity or a grossly

misleading simplification. The theory remains controversial, as does the QT,

because strict versions are demonstrably wrong while soft versions deprive it

of any useful content. In between there is room for theory and empirical

evidence to specify the circumstances under which and the extent to which PPP

provides a useful though not exact description of exchange rate behavior.

     The analogy with the QT holds particularly in the effects of monetary

disturbances. The analor with the QT holds particularly in the effects of


*kj article prepared for the New Paigrave Dictionary of Economics. I am
indebted to Susan Collins, Stanley Pischer, Jeffrey Frankel, Dale Henderson,
Irving Kravis, Paul Samuelson and John Williamson for suggestions and
comments.
                                         2




monetary disturbances. The QT fails to hold exactly when disturbances are

primarily monetary, for instance in the course of hynerinfletions, because

changes in the expected rate of inflation generate systematic movements in

velocity that break the one to one link between money and prices.    In the same

way, monetary disturbances cause exchange rate movements that at least

temporarily deviate from PPP, implying changes in the exchange rate adjusted

relative price levels or "real" exchange rates. It is true that when the

economy, following a major monetary disturbance, has settled down again the

cumulative changes in money, prices and the exchange rate will tend to be the

same or at least close.   In that sense PPP holds. The same is decidely not

true, however, in the course of the disturbance.

     And in the long run, just as changes in real income or financial

innovation bring about trend changes in velocity that destroy the one to one

relationship between the money supply and prices, there are also trend

deviations from PPP: productivity growth differentials between countries, for

example, lead to trend changes in real exchange rates.



1. Statement of the Theory

     Let    and p represent the price of the ith commodity at home and abroad,

stated in home and foreign currency respectively, and e the exchange rate. The

exchange rate is quoted in the American manner as the number of units of

domestic currency per unit of foreign money. Further let P and P* be the price

level at home and abroad quoted in the respective currencies. -

     The strong or absolute version of PPP relies on the "law of one price" in

an integrated, competitive market. Abstracting from all and any frictions the

price of a given good will be the same in all locations when quoted in the same

                          =         Consider now a domestic price index P =
currency, say dollars:        ep.
                                              3



f(p1              and a foreign price index P* =      (*1 ,..p*.,..p*).     If the

prices of each good, in dollars, are equalized across countries, and if the

same goods enter each country's market basket with the same weights (i.e. the

homogenous—of--degree-ofle g(.) arid   f(.)   functions are the same) then absolute

PPP prevails. The law of one price in this special case extends not only to

individual goods but also to aggregate price levels. Spatial arbitrage then

takes the form of the strox or absolute version of PPP:



(i)      e =       $ price of a standard market basket of foods
                   £ price of the same standard basket



where the right hand side is the common multiple of the price of each good in

one currency and in the other. Specifically if                 k for all i we then

have e    P/P*   k. Note now the implication of absolute PPP. Whatever the

monetary or real disturbances in the economy because of instantaneous, costless

arbitrage the prices of a common market basket of goods in the two countries,

measured in a common currency will be the same or P/eP* =        1   at all times.

       There can be no objection to (1) as a theoretical statement. Objections

arise, however, when it is interpreted as an empirical proposition. In fact

the (spot) prices of a given commodity will not necessarily be equal in

different locations at a given time. Transport costs and         other   obstacles to

trade, in particular tariffs and quotas, do exist and hence the location of

delivery does matter. Therefore we would not expect the price even of an ounce

of gold of a specified fineness always to be the same in New York. and in

Calcutta. The fact that prices of the perfectly homogeneous commodity are not

equalized across space at every point in time does not suggest market failure;

it may simply reflect the inability     to    shift commodities costlessly and
                                         4




instantaneously from one location to the other. Information costs and

impediments to trade stand in the way of strictest spatial equalization of

price. But these impediments to trade do not preclude that common currency

prices of any given good in different locations should be closely related and,

indeed, arbitraged.    They just will not be literally equalized. Impediments

to trade and imperfection of competition, of course, also make it possible that

spatial price differentiation can occur thus further limiting strong PPP.

      The weak or relative version of PPP therefore restates the theory in terms

of changes in relative price levels and the exchange rate: e =   OP/P,   where e

is a constant reflecting the given obstacles to trade. Given these obstacles

an increase in the home price level relative to that abroad implies an equi—

proportionate depreciation of the home currency:


      4 AA
(2)   eP_P*

where a A denotes a percentage change.

      Equation (2) is the statement of PPP as it was applied by Gustav Cassel to

an analysis of exchange rate changes during World War I.


               "The general inflation which has taken place during the war has
          lowered this purchasing power in all countries, though in a different
          degree, and the rates of exchange should accordingly be expected to
          deviate from their old parities in proportion to the inflation of.
          each country. At every moment the real parity is represented by this
          quotient between the purchasing power of the money in the one country
          and the other. I propose to call this parity "purchasing power
          parity". As long as anything like free movement of merchandise and a
          somewhat comprehensive trade between the two countries takes place,
          the actual rate of exchange cannot deviate very much from this
          purchasing power parity." (Cassel, 1918, p.413).


      Absolute PPP in (1) was stated in terms of the relative prices in

different currencies and locations of a given and common basket of identical
                                       5




goods. Going from there to relative PFP as in (2) may merely be a way of

circumventing the qualifications arising from transport costs or obstacles to

trade. But often more is involved because the shift, in practice, leads to a

use of PPP in terms of particular price indices such as CPIs, WPIs, or GDP

deflators. Once that is done we go beyond the law of one price because the

shares of various goods in the different national indices 'nay not be the same

and the goods that enter the respective indices may not be strictly identical

as is clearly the case for non—traded goods.

     Once shares in the indexes are no longer equal and commodities are not

strictly identical the appeal to the law of one price can no longer serve as

support for PPP. Now PPP can only hold, even in the weak form, if the

conditions of the homogeneity postulate of monetary theory are justified. The

homogeneity postulate asserts that a purely monetary disturbance, leaving

unchanged all equilibrium relative prices, will lead to an equiproportionate

change in money and all prices, including the price of foreign exchange. In

this very special experiment PPP holds even if the law of one price does not

apply. The constancy of real variables under the assumption of a purely

monetary disturbance (i.e. an unanticipated, non-recurrent increase in money)

assures that once the economy has adjusted the exchange depreciation matches

the inflation of any individual price or the price of any market basket so that

(2) applies. To appreciate the difference of this experiment with absolute PPP

note that under these conditions (2) could even be stated in terms of indices

on nontraded goods prices.                                    -




     PPP theory as a theory of equilibrium must be supplemented by an

adjustment mechanism. In the case of identical commodities the theory is

simply that of spatial arbitrage. But when the goods are not strictly

identical more is required. A high degree of substitution in world trade is
                                       6




generally assumed to be the mechanism through which exchange rate-adjusted

prices are kept in line internationally. A further point concerns causation.

In much of the literature, especially in the writing of Cassel, exchange rates

adjust to prices. But there is an important alternative tradition that singles

out exchange rate depreciation as an independent source of inflation.

     Criticism of PPP focusses on systematic ways in which relative price

changes destroy the strict validity of PPP. Keynes (1923, p.80), although

strongly supporting the idea of PPP as a broad guide, recognized these possible

departures from purely monetary disturbances:


               "If on the other hand these assumptions are not fulfilled and
          changes are taking place in the 'equation of exchange', as economists
          call it, between the services and products of one country and those
          of another, either on account of movements of capital, or reparation
          payments, or changes in the relative efficiency of labor, or changes
          in the urgency of the world's demand for that country's special
          products, or the like, then the equilibrium point between purchasing
          power parity and the rate of exchange may be modified permanently."


     This limitation of PPP led Sainuelson (1964, p. 153) to argue:


               "Unless very sophisticated, indeed, PPP is a misleading,
          pretentious doctrine, promising what is rare in economics, detailed
          numerical prediction."


2. History
    Versions of the PPP theory have been traced to the Salamanca school in

16th century Spain and to the writings of Gerrard de Malynes appearing in 1601

in England. The Swedish, French and English bullionists in the second part of

the 18th and in the early 19th century present further statements of PPP.

Particularly noteworthy is the Bullion Report in England (1810, p. ccxxii).


               "llhether this 13 1/2 per cent, which stands against this country
          by the present exchange on Lisbon, is a real difference of exchange,
          occasioned by the course of trade and by the remittances to Portugal
          on account of government, or a nominal and apparent exchange
                                       7


          occasioned by something in the state of our currency, or is partly
          real and partly nominal, may perhaps be determined by what your
          committee have yet to state."


     During the 19th century classical economists, including in particular

Ricardo, Mill, Goschen and Marshall, endorsed and developed more or less

qualified PPP views. This history is reviewed and discussed in Viner (1937),

Schuinpeter (1954), Holmes (1967) and Officer (1984).

     Even though PPP theory was well established by the time of World War .1,

the forceful use and develoTxnent of the theory by the Swedish economist Gustav

Cassel, has made him the outstanding protagonist of the theory. He turned the

theory into a paradigm with all the necessary trappings: an alleged challenge

to gold standard orthodoxy, a catchy name, a formula, and the claim of

empirical support for the new view.

     Cassel's first contributions on the subject were published in 1916 in the

Economic Journal. He argues the inflation theory of exchange rates and

proceeds to a demonstration using price level and exchange rate data for the

belligerent countries, the U.S., and Sweden. J.M. Keynes as the editor appends

a footnote drawing attention to the contribution and noting his surprise that,

war disturbances notwithstanding, PPP should hold. A further challenge was the

implication of PPP that the pre—war par with gold might not be reestablished or

more guardedly, might require a powerful deflation in a country like Britain.

     Cassel never abandoned an uncompromising PPP view of exchange rates even

though he already in 1918 started recognizing the possibility that exchange

rates might transitorily diverge from PPP. A decade later in Cassel   (1928a,   p.

16) a clear statement of his final position is made:


              "The fact that the rate of exchange corresponding to Purchasing
              -




         Power Parity possesses such a remarkable stability is a sufficient
         reason for regarding Purchasing Power Parity as the fundamental
         factor determining the rate of exchange and for classifying all other
                                      8


          factors that may influence the rate and perhaps make it deviate from
          the Purchasing Power Parity as factors of secondary importance, most
          suitably grouped under the head of 'disturbances' ."



    He identified three groups of disturbances: actual and expected inflation

or deflation, new hindrances to international trade, and shifts in

international movements of capital. Even though these disturbances are

recognized, their quantitative effect on deviations from PPP is invariably seen

as "confined within rather narrow limits". (Cassel, 1928a, p.28—29). In

insisting on the proposition that deviations from PPP are limited and

transitory, Cassel neglected paying close attention to the determinants of

purchasing power disparities. Even though he recognized that inflation first

leads to undervaluation, and stabilization leads later to an overvaluation

(Cassel 1928b, p.26) never took these ideas further. His emphasis was on PPP.

But he points out with some merit (Cassel, 1928b) that without some

quantifiable concept of PPP, a sensible discussion of over or undervaluation

can hardly begin.

     Keynes (1923, 1971 Chapter 3) takes up PPP, crediting Elcardo with the

invention and Cassel with the name. Keynes recognized PPP as an

important empirical possibility. Giving it all the right qualifications he

still endorses it for all practical purposes:


               "This theory does not provide a simple or ready—made measure of
          the 'true' value of the exchanges. When it is restricted to foreign—
          trade goods, it is little better than a truism. When it is not so
          restricted, the conception of purchasing power parity becomes much
          more interesting, but is no longer an accurate forecaster of the
          course of the foreign exchanges. Thus defined 'purchasing power
          parityt deserves attention, even though it is not always an accurate
          forecaster of the foreign exchanges. The practical importance of
          our qualifications must not be exaggerated." (Keynes, 1923, p.77—
          78).
                                          9




     Cassel received support for PPP from the monetary disturbances of the

1913—1928 period. Extensive PPP studies were conducted for the U.S.

government (see Young (1925)) and   for   the League of Nations. PPP emerged in

the discussion of the resumption of the pre—war gold par in Britain in 1925,

and Jacques Rueff used wage—based PPP to calculate an appropiate par for

France's stabilization under Poincar in 1926—28. But while it became a

regular tool of applied macroeconomics, there was also plenty of controversy.

Viner (1933) challenged the doctrinal view that classical economists had a

concept of PPP, arguing that without the notion of a price level PPP could not

be conceived. In fact Viner had little patience with PPP. The opposition is

easily recognied today: Viner and other critics always reacted to the

overstated claim that PPP must hold as a matter of fact or of theory, pointing

out that only a purely monetary disturbance provided the theoretici or

practical experiment in which PPP would apply. For them PPP as a theory was

simply misstated and as a practical proposition overstated.

     A new wave of interest in PPP emerged at the end of World War II when once

again exchange rates had to be set following the war-time suspension of trade

and convertibility. (See Netzler et al, 1947). Renewed interest in PPP

followed in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Yeager (1958) and 1-iaberler (1961)

emphasized the practical usefulness of PPP and highlighted the role of high

price elasticities in international trade as the factor supporting PPP. High

elasticities in world trade would assure that real disturbances have only small

effects on relative prices thus establishing more nearly the conditions under

which exchange rate movements reflect dominantly differences in monetary

experiences. Hendrik Houthakker (1962) drew attention to dollar overvaluation,

using absolute PPP calculations based on consumer price comparisons. Samuelson
                                            10




in (1964) formalized much of the PPP discussion: while endorsing the Houthaker

thesis of dollar overvaluatiofl he doubted that a proper test was riven by the

fact that one could buy cheaper abroad than in the U.S. a given market basket

of goods.

      In the late 1930s Harrod had drawn attention to the fact that divergent

international productivity levels could, via their effect on wages and home

goods prices, lead to permanent deviations from Cassel's absolute version of

PPP. This idea was already developed by Ricardo and has become central to work

on international real income comparisons. Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964)

elaborated similar ideas to argue that there are systematic trend deviations

from PPP. This "productivity bias" to PPP is discussed in more detail below.

      PPP had yet another intellectual upturn with the move to flexible exchange

rates in the early 1970s. The then fashionable "monetary approach to the

balance of payments" developed by Robert Mundell (1968, 1971), Harry Johnson

and their students readily adapted to become a PPP-based monetary approach to

the exchange rate. (See Frenkel and Johnson (1975, 1978) and Mussa (1979)).

The exchange rate under strict PPP conditions was interpreted as a monetary

phenomenon. The absolute version of PPP in (1) above combined with the QT for

each country (MV    PY and M*V* =   p*y*)   yielded the key equation determining

exchange rates by relative money supplies, velocities and zeal incomes:



(3)         e =




Empirical research on the 1 920s and on the very early data of    the 1 970s


initially seemed to lend support to PPP and the monetary approach.

      But large movements in real exchange rates of the 1970s led to the

currently dominant PPP skeptcisiri. The new direction following the Mundell—
                                        11




 Fleming model of the 1960s emphasized fluctuations in real exchange rates or
 the terms of trade (import relative to export prices) arising from the

discrepancies between flexible, forward looking asset markets and asset prices,

and shortruri sticky prices and wages. Work on exchange rate dynamics

(Dornbusch (1976)) developed these ideas about transitory deviations from PPP

in a rational expectations context.

     Concern with PPP continued to be very active in the late 1970s and the

early 1980s. The real exchange rates of the main currencies underwent large,

persistent fluctuations with important effects on trade flows and resource

allocation. At the same time currency experiments in Latin America involved

dramatic real appreciations with ruinous consequences for several countries.

Sometimes in history there was bafflement as to how, all things considered, PPP

could work so closely. This time, however, the surprise was on the other side:

how can real exchange rates get that far out of line? We now review in more

detail the theory of and evidence on deviations from PPP.



3. Purchasing Power Disparities

     Qualifications to PPP take one of several forms: departures from PPP can

'be "structural" in the sense that they arise systematically in response to new

and lasting changes in equilibrium relative prices. Alternatively, they occur

in a "transitory" fashion as a result of disturbances to which the economy

adjusts with differential speeds in goods and assets markets. These

qualifications imply that even the weak or relative form of PPP cannot be

expected to hold closely.

     These disparities arise primarily for the following reasons: First, the

terms of trade may change as a consequence of changes in trade patterns.

Second, economic growth systematically affects the relative price of home and
                                       12




traded goods. Third, monetary and exchange rate changes bring about transitory

deviations in real price ratios and in PPP as a consequence of imperfectly

flexible wages and prices.



Structural Departures: The literature is replete with qualifications to PPP

singling out particular real disturbances that change equilibrium relative

prices. Thus it has been recognized since Ricardo that real prices of home

goods are high "in countries where manufactures flourish". It also has been

argued that the "price level is high in borrowing countries". The Ricardo—

Harrod—Balassa theory provides a framework for these ideas.

      Consider a Ricardian model where the law of one price applies to traded

goods and where there is also a home good. With perfect competition and

constant returns prices are given by unit labor costs. We define as R the

relative consumer price levels of two countries measured in a common currency:




(4)     R = P/eP*



With identical homothetic tastes and the law of one price the international

component of price indices is the same in both countries and hence cancels out

in (4). The relative price level is then determined by the relative prices of

home goods in the two countries, measured in a common currency. Let h and h*

be the levels of productivity in traded goods (at the competitive margin)

relative to home goods in each country. It is readily showii (See.Dornbusch,

Fischer and Sa.muelson (1977)) that the relative price level then reduces to:
                                          13




(4a)        R =   R(h/h*),   p'>




A uniform rise in traded goods productivity at home would bring about a rise in

the relative price level of the home country or a real appreciation. The

mechanism is the following: with the law of one price applying to traded goods,

increased productivity in the traded goods sector increases wages in that

industry and hence raises economy—wide wages. But without accompanying

productivity gains in the home goods sector, costs and prices there must rise

and hence the growing country's relative price level increases as shown by

(4a).

        In (4a) above the national productivity relatives h and h* are measured in

the traded goods sector at the competitive margin. Shifts in technology,

tastes, commercial policies or labor force growth will all change the

equilibrium competitive margin and hence will change the real exchange rate.

Thus real factors, as the literature since Ricardo has recognized, will

introduce systematic departures from PPP. For example a shift in world demand

toward the home country's goods would raise the relative wage and reduce the

range of goods produced by the home country. The rise in the relative wage,

given productivity, raises the relative price level of the home country.

Likewise an increase in spending relative to income (i.e. borrowing or a

current account deficit) will lead to a rise in the relative price level of the

spending country.

       A variant of the Bicardian productivity differential model as an

explanation for the relatively low price of non—tradeables in poor countries

has been advanced by Lipsey and Kravis (1983) and Bhagwati (1984). They rely

on differences in factor endowments and factor rewards rather than differences

in production functions. In the poor labor abundant country, the labor-using
                                       14




non—traded services can be produced at a relatively low cost compared to the

rich, capital abundant country. Whichever is the model, this effect, as we

will discuss below, has found ample support in empirical research on

international real income and price comparisons.



Transitory Deviations: There is no difficulty in accepting that prices of

close substitutes or even identical goods could diverge across space at any

point in time. This would be the case because, in the shortest time period,

transportation and information costs make arbitrage difficult or even

impossible. These difficulties would explain that PPP holds up to a constant

and white noise error (see Aizerunan (1984)). But in fact we have to explain

relatively persistent and often large deviations from PPP. These can arise

from divergent speeds of adjustment of the exchange rate compared with wages

and prices. Particularly when flexible exchange rates behave like asset prices

while wages are determined by longterm contracts, there is room for relative

prices to show relatively persistent deviations from PPP.

     Okun (1981) made the distinction between "auction goods" and "customer

goods". The former are in the nature of homogeneous commodities traded in spot

markets on organized exchanges, the latter are differentiated and marketed in

established customer relations. The former typically have flexible and highly

arbitraged prices, the latter are priced on the basis of normal unit costs and

tend to be sticky. This characterization is implicit in the Mundell—Fleming

model of international capital mobility under flexible exchange rates, which

has been the standard frame of reference for the discussion of open economy

macroeconomics since the 1960s. This model assumes that prices in each country

are fixed and hence exchange rate changes move the terms of trade one for one,

thus bringing about permanent changes in real exchange rates. But even when
                                          15




prices are only sticky in the shortrun there will still be relatively

persistent deviations from PPP, although in the lonrun money is fully

neutral.

        Theoretical approaches to support the relative stickiness of prices can

rely on the presence of longterm labor contracts combined with oligopolistic

pricing in goods markets. A model of imperfect competition is essential

because the less—than—perfect degree of substitution is a key ingredient in PPP

deviations. less than perfect substitution means that we are not dealing with

the law of one price and arbitrage but with firms' decisions to set relative

prices. A suggestive framework is the Dixit—Stiglitz (1977) model of product

diversification with imperfect competition. Given constant returns and labor

as the only factor each firm will set prices as a fixed and common mark—up over

wages. In the world market for the products of a particular industry the

relative price of domestic and foreign variants of the product is determined by

relative unit labor costs measured in a common currency:



(5)     p/ep*   =   w/ew


where w and w* denote unit labor costs at home and abroad in the repsective

currencies. Given sluggish wages, for contract reasons or otherwise, exchange

rate movements will be one for one reflected in changes in the real exchange

rate.

        The assumption that firms base their pricing entirely on home cost, as it

appears in this model, leaves no room for the alternative of spatial price

differentiation. There is yet no definitve or even large body literature that

develops industrial organization aspects of pricing under flexible and

volatile exchange rates.
                                           16



npirical    Evidence: There is little doubt that the prices of primary

commodities traded on major organized exchanges in different locations are

fully   arbitraged   when literally all adjustments for contracts (maturity,

delivery terms and location etc.) are made. But all available evidence

suggests that PPP in the strong or weak version does not apply in the same

fashion   to manufactured goods. The lack of a close conformity with PPP is as

much true for individual commodity prices as it is for aggregate price indices.

Moreover, this absence of a very tight PPP relation appears particularly true

during major monetary dislocations.

     Studies of high inflation episodes always appear to offer support for PPP

in that they show close cumulative movements of internal prices and the

exchange rate. But even here the evidence is deceptive as becomes clear when

one looks at relative prices which do show large variations. Indeed,

particularly during high inflation, the differing frequencies of adjustments of

wages, prices and the exchange rate introduce considerable variability in

relative prices which only disappears in the most intense stages of

hyperinflation where all pricing comes to be based on the exchange rate.

        Kravis and Lipsey (1978) and Isard (1977) have shoim tests of the law of

one price at the level of narrowly defined manufacured goods. The studies

established for the same good (or highly substitutable goods) quite definitely

persistent price discrepancies between domestic and export prices, between

domestic and import prices, and between export prices to different markets.

The evidence on the slack in the law of one price at the level of individual

commodities is sufficently strong for Isard (1977, p.941) to conclude:


                 'The denial of the law of one price in this context——at the most
            diaggregated product level for which price data can be readily
            matched——provides a strong presumption that it is impossible to
            assemble available data into aggregate price indexes which can be
                                               17



             expected to obey the law of one price (except, perhaps, when product
             coverage is restricted to primary commodities) •0


        ipirical   studies on time series PPP relationships for aggregate rrice

indices in the past twenty years also show evidence of persistent deviations.

Once relative prices are not strictly constant PPP will perform differently

depending on the particular price index chosen for comparison. Commonly the

choice is among CPIs, WPIs, and GDP deflators. WPIs are often ruled out on the

argument that conceptually they are poorly defined being neither producer nor

consumer price indices. The preference is most often given to GDP deflators

that have a clear methodological definition. Figure 1 shows relative GDP

deflators    expressed in a common currency in the 1 972-83       period for Germany and

for   Japan, each relative to the   U.S. The        Figure clearly brings out   that

relative    GDP deflators expressed in a common currency are far from constant,
thus refuting the weak version of PPP.
        As a measure of the departure   from   PPP Table 1 shows the correlation       of

annual   rates of change of various price indices for the period 1971—83. In
each case the bilateral comparison is conducted          on exchange rate adjusted price

indices so that inflation rates are measured in a common currency. The Table

reports correlation coefficients for the CPI, GDP deflator, the GDP deflator

for manufacturing, and export prices of non—electrical machinery. The latter

example is shown as a particular case of a relatively          disaggregated traded
good.    The weak form of the PPP hypothesis would predict that the correlation

coefficients are approximately unity. In fact, as is apparent, the values are

far off unity and in many cases even negative.
                                               18




         Table   1:   Correlation of Inflation Rates cpressed in U.S. Dollars
                                 Annual data, 1971-1983)

                               US-Germany           US-Japan             Germany-Japan


GDP Deflators                   -0.16                   -0.22                0.64
Consumer Prices                  0.28                   0.36                 0.60
                                                                  .
cport Prices of
Machinery                        —0.24                  —0.10                0.58

Deflator for
Manufactures                     -0.10                  —0.13                0.61




        Table 2 presents correlations of the quarterly rates of inflation of GDP

deflators    (in U.S. dollars) of a wider group of countries for the flexible rate

period 1971—1983. The Table shows once more correlations far off Cassel's

hypothetical value of one. Interestingly even for the more integrated European

countries the correlation is low, though much larger than correlations

involving the United States.


         Table 2:     Correlations of Inflation Rates Expressed in U.S. Dollars
                         (GDP Deflators, quarterly data 1971—1983)

                        U.S.         Japan       U.K.           France       Germany


Japan                   0.07            1



U.K                     0.32         0.32           1



France                  0.25         0.50        0.55             1


Germany                 0.04            0.49     0.50            0.79           1



Italy                   0.24         0.40        0.63            0.76          0.68
                                Figure          1
                1e1ative GDP Deflators in a                   CorrnDn Currency
                       Index   1980= 100)




                                                        f-f
                                                        I'
125
                                                                  JAPAN4J. S.
                                                    I         +
                                                 I
                                                +
                                             I
                                            1
                                        1"

100                                    1-
                                                                    +
                                   /                                 \ 1+       +
                                                                                 \
                           + +'
                          /4,
                                                                                     +
                               GERMZNY/u.S.                                           \
75




      72   74            76                     78                      80           82   84
                                          19




     The very strong deviations from PPP can likewise be found in looking at

relative prices. Table 3 shows the variablilty of relative GDP deflators,

measured in a common currency and using the U.S. as the nunieraire country. The

data for these relative price variability measures are quarterly and correspond

to the fixed and flexible rate periods. The Table shows a large increase in

variability in the shift to flexible exchange rates.


            Table 3: Coefficient of Variation of Relative GDP Deflators
               (Quarterly data, deflators measured in common currency)

                             Germany-US        Japan-US         UK-US



1960—72                         9.0%             9.3%            5.5%

1973:3-83                      14.0%            13.4%           17.7%



     The evidence on deviations from PPP leaves little doubt that they have

been large and persistent. To pin down the major sources of these movements,

however, is significantly more difficult. Miiong the chief explanations are

capital flows induced by internationally divergent monetary-fiscal mixes

interacting with sluggish wages and prices. Thus it would appear that a

country that shifts in the direction of tight money and easy fiscal policy, for

example, will experience real appreciation.

     Besides these dominant macro shocks there is, of course, a host of other

factors. Jacob frenkel (1981a and 1981b, pp.694—695) has noted in this

context:


                  "The experience during the 1970s illustrates the extent to which
             real shocks (oil embargo, supply shocks, commodity booms and
             shortages, shifts in the demand for money, differential productivity
             growth) result in systematic deviations from PPP. .. It should be
             noted, however, that to some extent the overall poor performance of
             the purchasing power parities doctrine is specific to the 1970s.
             During the floating rate period of the 1920s, the doctrine seems to
             have been much more reliable."
                                           20




While PPP failed altogether in the 1970s it is now aprarent that even the
evidence from the 1920s is far from supportive as Krugman (1q78) and Eernholz

(1982) have shown.

     The   lack   of solid empirical evidence in support of PPP extends to the

assumption that divergent price developments "cause" exchange depreciation.

From the study of experiences of high inflation it is clear that in some

instances capital flight and exchange depreciation precipitated increases in

inflation. In fact Nurkse (1944) makes much of the point that expectations

acting via capital flight on the exchange rate, not actual money and prices,

often initiate inflationary episode.

     We conclude with a reference to evidence on structural PPP deviations.

The evidence here establishes quite firmly that over time real exchange rates,

rather than showing constancy or a tendency to fluctuate around a constant

level, in fact exhibit a distinct trend. Productivity levels or real incomes

influence systematically the relative prices of traded and nontraded goods

within a country and hence international relative price levels across countries

and across time.

     In the context of an international income comparison project Kravis and

associates have constructed indices of relative national price levels using an

absolute price comparison approach. Drawing on a detailed sample of prices

they construct matched sets of the price of individual commodity groups in a

particular country relative to a reference country. For commodity i the price

relative is p /     1 where   the p's are measured in the respective countries'

currencies with an asterisk denoting the reference country. Using an

arithmetic average with weights a given by final expenditure shares a PPP

index is defined:
                                                       21




(6)              PPP     I a(p1      /   p)

The expenditure shares a used in the weighting may be those of either one of

the countries or some other appropriate weighting scheme. With the help of

this PPP index the (Kravis) real price level of a country (relative to the

reference country) is defined as the ratio of the PPP index in (6) divided by

the actual exchange rate:



(7)            Kravis Real Price Level              PPP/e



This real price level definition represents a measure of the deviation from the

law of one price at the aggregate level.

      Kravis and Lipsey (1983, p.21) report the results of a cross section study

of 34 countries where the 1975 real price level as defined in (7) of the sample

of countries (relative to the U.S.) is explained by the country's real income

compared to the U.S. The evidence shows that the higher is a country's

relative income, the higher is its relative price level. Work by 1-isieh (1982)

using a time series approach further supports the extensive evidence on

divergent productivity trends as a source of structural PPP deviations. It

must be noted, though, that the evidence on structural deviations continues to

be challenged by Officer (1984).



4. Implications of Purchasing Power Disparities:

      The fact that exchange rate movements often or even predominantly do not

conform to tight PPP patterns poses important issues for macroeconomic

measurement, linkages, and policy. We review here several implications:
                                        22




 Real Income Comparisons: With strict PPP based on the law of one price, the

 purchasing power of a given income in one country and currency can he compared

 with the purchasing power of the income of any other country by simply

measuring incomes in a common currency. If one income is twenty times larger

 than the other, measured in the same currency at actual exchange rates, then

its command over goods and services is twenty times larger. But the fact that

PPP does not hold leads to systematic biases in the comparisons. Specifically,

as the work of Kravis and associates (1978, 1982, 1983) has shown the real

income of poor countries is severely underestimated when actual exchange rates

are used to make the comparison. The low relative price of non-tradeables in

poor countries (due to the productivity differential discussed earlier) yields

for poor countries true purchasing power of income significantly above what

exchange rate converted income suggests.

     Table 4 reports on the magnitude of biases in a sample of 34 countries

separated into six income groups with the U.S. as the numeraire country. Note

that the biases are particularly large for countries whose incomes are only a

small fraction of the U.S. level so that productivity differential effects play

a maximal role. The poorer a country the lower the real price level. An

interesting point is that these real price level differences apply both to

commodities and to services. One reason they also apply to goods is that these

always have a local retail component which on account of labor costs (though

perhaps not transport) will tend to be low in poor countries.
                                              23




        Table    4: Kravis—Heston—SUrflfl1erS International Real Income Comparisons
                                      (Index US = 100)

                    (1)              (2)                   (3)         (4)      (5)
                Real Income     Dollar Income                 Real Price of:
Group
                     (mean per capita)                Commodities   Services     GDP



1                   9.0             3.7                  57.2          20.7    40.6
2                  23.1            12.1                  65.1          34.1    51.7
3                  37.3            24.2                  83.1          41.2     64.7
4                  52.4            38.7                  94.0          46.3     73.5
5                  76.0            82.3                 119.0          94.6    107.5
U.S.              100.0           100.0                 100.0         100.0    100.0

Source: Kravis, Heston and Summers (1982).


       The ratio of dollar income to real income for each group (column 2 divided

by column 1) represents the extent to which exchange rate conversions

understate real income. For low income countries actual real income is two to

three times what exchange rate-converted incomes suggest. These structural

deviations from PPP, of course, would be invariant under a purely monetary

disturbance so that the weak form of PPP would still apply.



Interest Rate Linkages and PPP: Under perfect international mobility of

capital and risk neutral speculation there is a linkage between nominal

interest rates and the anticipated rate of depreciation which is given

by the open economy sher equation:



(8)       i=i*+x

where i and i are the nominal interest rates at home and abroad and x is the

anticipated rate of depreciation of the home currency. Adding and subtracting
                                        24




anticipated inflation rates on both sides yields an equation in terms of

inflation—adjusted or real interest rateo:




(8a)      r*r+/R

Real interest parity, according to (8a) prevails when the real interest

differential equals the expected rate of real appreciation, /R. Prom the

real interest parity condition it is apparent that under exact PPP the real

exchange rate is constant. In the absence of restrictions on capital flows,

real interest rates must therefore be strictly equalized across countries.

       The real interest parity equation has two interesting implications. A

first one is the linkages between the level of real exchange rates and

monetary policy. Suppose that in a medium-term macroeconomic context,

following a disturbance, the actual real exchange rate adjusts only gradually

to the trend level R according to the process: 1/R =   (l/a)(R'—R).   Here 1/a

is the speed of adjustment which depends among other things on the extent to

which wages and prices are sticky. Combining this process with (8a) yields

an equation for the equilibriimi real exchange rate:



(9)    R =   R   +   a(r_r*)


The result shown here is that when real interest rates at home exceed those

abroad the real exchange rate will be appreciated relative to its trend

value. A tightening of monetary policy, by raising real interest rates would

thus bring about a (transitory) real appreciation. Equation (9) emerges from

the dynamic Nundell—Fleining models and is often thought to explain real
exchange rate movements and their tendency to cnly return gradually to their

long run value.

     A second way to look at (8a) draws on the fact that the traded—nontraded

goods distinction has implications for real exchange rates. Suppose the law

of one price holds for traded goods and that shares in the two countries' price

indices are the same. Then as argued before, the real exchange rate is equal

to the relative price of nontraded goods (in a common currency) in the two

countries. Structural disturbances such as differential productivity growth

or changes in aggregate demand will now have a systematic impact on relative

nontraded goods prices and hence on real interest rate differentials.

Specifically the country with the higher growth rate of productivity has a

rising relative price of home goods and thus has a lower real rate of interest.

As another example in a country where aggregate demand is transitorily high has

a home goods prices are is high but falling. Accordingly the real interest

rate is high relative to that abroad. Deviations from PPP, trend or shortrun,

thus introduce an equilibrium international interest rates differential.

     PPP deviations affect interest differentials another way. In (a) above we

assumed risk neutrality. But once risk averse speculators are admitted, the

possibility that exchange rate movements could deviate from a strict PPP

pattern introduces portfolio risk associated with the currency composition of

the portfolio. PPP deviations are thus a basic motive for international

portfolio diversification. A risk premium will appear and among the

determinants of this premium is the variability of the real exchange rate.

The risk premium will be an increasing function of real exchange rate

uncertainty. (See the survey in Branson and Henderson (1984)).

     Finance theory—oriented literature has posed the important question

whether deviations from PPP imply economic inefficiency (see Roll (1979)).
                                        26




 Inefficiency means that a rational speculator, using available information,

could make excess profits by borrowing in one country and buying spot and

holding a commodity basket representing the foreign country's CPI. If the rate

of real depreciation predictably exceeds the real rate of interest in a

country, there exists the possibility that markets are inefficient. For

example an investment in foreign goods would yield a real rate of return in

terms of domestic goods equal to —/R. An investment in home financial assets

yield an expected real return r. Let the random differential between these two

investments be K r + /R. Finance theory predicts that in an information-

rational market Kt E(KtIIti) + u where Ut IS a white noise error

uncorrelated with any information 't—i available at time t—1. Hence a

regression of Kt on variables known at time t—1 will not yield a statistically

significant coefficient, nor serial correlation in the errors. The evidence

does not lend unambiguous support to this efficiency hypothesis, possible

explanations being risk premia arid the obvious difficulty of storing the CPI.

(See Cumby and Obstfeld (1984)).



Exchange Rate Policy: In Cassell's view even small deviations from PPP would

bring about large changes in trade flows and hence a rapid discipline to move

prices back into line internationally. But the reversion toward PPP has often

not been quick and deviations from PPP have taken more nearly the pattern of

persistent swings in a country's external competitiveness. The changes in

conipetitiveness in turn have implied large swings in external balances, in

output and in employment in the traded goods sector. Changes in exchange rates

that deviate from PPP at the same time influence the path of a country's

inflation: real depreciation increases inflation and real appreciation dampens
inflation. These effects of purchasing power disparities make the exchange

rate an important issue in macroeconomic policy.

     Countries with high inflation cannot afford a fixed exchange rate since

the loss in external competiveness would soon lead to excessive and growing

external deficits and large unemployment. If freely fluctuating rates are

deemed too unstable the policy answer is often a crawling peg. In a crawling

peg regime the rateS of depreciation follows a PPP path such that over time the

real exchange rate remains constant.   (See Williamson (1965, 1982)). Such a

policy is an important advance over a system of occasional devaluations (too

little, too late), but it is not without risks for two reasons. First,

freezing the real exchange rate may be a bad policy when disturbances in fact

call for a path of, say, real depreciation. Second, there is a trade—off

between stability of the real exchange rate and price stability. A policy of

fully accommodating any and all price or cost disturbances by an offsetting

depreciation may in fact remove price stability altogether (see Dornbusch

(1 982)).

     PPP issues enter exchange rate policy also when a country seeks to gain

macroeconomic advantages by a deliberate policy of driving the exchange rate

away from PPP. A real depreciation serves to gain competitiveness and shift

employment toward the depreciating country. In the 1930s this was called a

"beggar—thy-neighbor" policy and in post World War II Fhirope it became "export—

led growth." A policy of appreciation by contrast serves to reduce

inflationary pressure as the rate of increase of traded goods prices is pushed

below the prevailing rate of inflation. These macroeconomic effects of

purchasing power disparities are not difficult to bring about: easy money, in

the short and medium term, serves to depreciate the exchange rate and thus

create employment. This policy is more effective and more lasting the more
                                            28



 sticky   wages and the smaller the connection between wages, prices and the

 exchange rate. By contrast, in an economy that is strongly indexed and in
 particular with exchange rate influences on indexation, an attempt at creating

employment via easy money would be frustrated as exchange depreciation

precipitates off-setting wage and price inflation.

       Deviations from PPP have also been used as a disinflation policy. (See

Fischer (1984)). Deliberate fixing of the exchange rate or preannounced rates

of   depreciation below the prevailing rates of inflation, have been adopted in
various countries to break inflation. The experience has been almost uniformly
disappointing   and worse. The resulting overvaluation very often has led to

excessive external deficits, borrowing and capital flight and ultimately only

moderate success at disinflation. The cases of Chile and Argentina in the late

1970s were particularly extreme. Exchange rate policies led to extreme

overvaluation. But these economies had been opened to unrestricted trade or

free capital flows. The public therefore could speculate against the

overvalued currency by massive imports or capital flight while the governments

financed the resulting deficits by external borrowing. In the end the scheme

collapsed leaving the private sector with foreign goods or foreign assets and

the governments with huge foreign debts.

      PPP disparities are relevant for the exchange rate choice between

flexible and fixed or managed rates. In a world where exchange rate

movements conform strictly to PPP and monetary policy governs prices there is

no issue. flexible rates then allow a country to chose its preferred rate of

inflation. But once disparities are possible both as a result of structural

trends and   perhaps   as a consequence of short term capital movements, the fixed

versus flexible rate choice becomes more difficult. Flexible rates are

preferable because there is no risk that the government pegs a rate that no
                                       29




longer corresponds to equilibrium. But flexible rates suffer the handicap that

disequilibratiflg capital flows can drive the real exchange rate away from the

level warranted by the fundamentals of the goods market. In particular if

exchange rates respond more to asset markets than price levels, persistent real

appreciation or depreciation become a possibility. Figure 1 above is

suggestive of such disequilibrium movements. When these do occur there is

invariably a call for PPP-based foreign exchange market intervention to bring

rates back to "fundamentals". Explicit target zones have been proposed as a

means of maintaining the advantages of flexible rates within limits to maintain

approximate PPP. (See Williamson(1983)).

     Flexible rates are also a concern because disequilibrating capital flows

can provoke large changes in the rate of inflation. A loss of confidence,

whether warranted or not, induces a capital outflow and a real exchange

depreciation. If domestic financial policies are linked via the budget or

indexation to the exchange rate the real depreciation can initiate a sharp

increase in inflation. Much of the discussion of the merits of flexible

rates has concentrated on the question of whether speculative capital flows

"cause" the inflation or whether they merely respond to an inflationary

situation, bringing about exchange depreciation in line with prevailing

inflation. The Graham-Nurkse—Robinson view asserts, contrary to Milton

friedman, that destabilizing capital flows are the central element in the

outbreak of major inflation experiences. Exchange stabilization, similarly, is

seen as an essential step in stopping a run-away inflation and-initiating a

stabilization program.

    PPP is also relevant in the context of devaluation of a fixed rate. In

the monetary approach to the balance of payments a firm tenet is the

proposition that a devaluation cannot exert a lasting effect on relative
                                               30




prices or the balance of trade. Ecchange depreciation raises the prices of

all traded goods in the same proportion and any effect then must be limited

to a temporary depression of home goods prices due to reduced absorption. As

money responds to the external surplus, real absorption rises and the initial

real equilibrium is restored. This approach has the disturbing implication

that devaluation does not appear to be an effective means of coping with trade

or employment problems. In practice a devaluation will work well when it is

           +r       un    +h   nR i,1!,+m11+   fr,m iu cr.i 1--i   is-i anh,, 1 4h,.-   ,,
situation   where wages arid prices are less than fully flexible downward. But a

devaluation is likely to be ineffective if it is accompanied by a monetary

expansion and wage increases, thus eliminating any real effects.



5.   Concluding Remark.
      PPP remains an essential element of open economy macroeconomics for two

reasons. First it is a benchmark by which to judge the level of an exchange

rate. Cassel argued that without PPP there would be no meaningful way of

discussing over or undervaluation. That recognition has found a very

concrete expression in the real exchange rate series now routinely calculated

and reported by governments, international organizations and financial

institutions. These series show exchange rate adjusted price relatives for a

country relative to its trading partners. The series are constructed on the

basis of GDP deflators, unit labor costs, manufacturing prices and wholesale

prices for all major industrialized countries and increasingly for developing

countries, too. They are used to judge changes in a country's external

competitiveness thus implicitly assuming, as Cassel did, that movements in

equilibrium relative prices are negligible. Changes in real exchange rates
                                           31




then (and only then) unambiguously translate into changes in competitiveness

from which to expect changes in trade flows and net exports.

     There is no question that these data provide a useful benchmark for

policy discussion. But the objections remain the same that have been brought

over the past seventy years. For example from 1978 to 1984 the U.S. dollar

appreciated on a trade weighted basis in real terms by 25 percent using GDP

deflators in manufacturing as the basis of comparison. How much of this real

appreciation represents a movement away from fundamentals? The base year,

1978, may have represented an excessive undervaluation. Furthermore macro and

micro structural changes may have increased the equilibrium relative price of

U.S. goods. With the present state of knowledge it is difficult to judge

whether the overvaluation is ten or twenty percent and hence to decide whether

there is a major market failure calling for intervention.

     The second use of PPP is   to   serve as a prediction model for exchange

rates. Under perfectly flexible wages and prices a monetary expansion would

lead to equi—proportionate increases in wages, prices and the exchange rate,

leaving all real variables unchanged. This combination of the QT and PPP is an

important insight in guiding policy. Expansionary monetary policy can only be

effective if wages and prices are less than fully flexible and will be more

effective the more flexible the exchange rate. The essential channel is the

real depreciation of the exchange rate that serves to create employment, at

least for a while. Similarly, exchange depreciation can only be effective if

money wages and prices are unresponsive. Policy can be effective only if PPP

fails to hold. Macroeconomic theory goes increasingly in the direction of

information,   contracting, and pricing   models to   explore what is   the   basis of

PPP failure and to determine the resulting extent and persistence of policy

effects.
                                            32


                                       REFERENCES

Aizenman, J. (1984), "Testing Deviations from Purchasing Power Parity (ppp)"
     NBER Working Paper No 1475, October.

Balassa, B. (1964), "The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,"
     Journal of Political Economy, December.

Bernholz, P. (1982) Flexible Exchange Rates in Historical Perspective,
     Princeton Studies in International Fnance No. 49, Princeton University
     Press.

Bhagwati, J. (1984), "Why   Services   are Cheaper in Poor Countries," Economic
     Journal, June.

Branson, W. and Henderson, D. (1984), "The Specification and Influence of Asset
     Markets," in P. Kenen and R. Jones (eds.), Handbook of International
     Economics, North Holland, Vol. II.

Cassel, 0. (1916), "The Present Situation of the Foreign Exchanges," Economic
     Journal, March.

       (1918), 'Abnormal Deviations in International Exchanges," Economic
     Journal, December.

       (1922), Money and Foreign Exchange After 1914, The Macmillan Co., 1930.

        (1928a), Foreign Investments, (Lectures of the Harris Foundation),
     University of Chicago Press.

        (192gb), Post—war Monetary Stabilization, Columbia University Press.

Cumby, R. and Obstfeld, M. (1984), "International Interest Rate and Price Level
     Linkages under flexible Rates: A Review of Recent Bvidence," in J.
     Bilson and R. Marston (eds.), Exchange Rate Theory and Practice,
     University of Chicago Press.

Dixit, A. and Stiglitz, J. (1977), "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
     Product Diversity," American Economic Review, June.

Dornbusch, R. (1976), "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
     Political Economy, December.

       (1982), "PPP Exchange Rate Rules and Macroeconomic Stability," Journal
     of Political Economy, February.

        S. Fischer and P. Sainuelson (1977), "Comparative Advantage, Trade and
     Payments in a Picardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," American
     Economic Review, December.

Fischer, S. (1984), "Real Balances, the Exchange Rate and Indexation: Real
     Variables in Disinflation," NBER Working Paper #1 497.
Frenkel, J. A. (1981), 'Flexible 1cchange Rates, Prices and the Role of
     News: Lessons from the 1070s," Journal of Political Economy, August.

       and   H.G. Johnson (1q75), (eds.), The 1onetary ApDroach to the       Balance of
     Payments,   George Allen & Unwin.
      and H.G. Johnson (1978), (eds.), The Economics of Flexible Exchange
    Rates, Addison Wesley Publishing Co.
Great Britain (1610), Report from the Select Committee on the High Price of
     Gold Bullion, House of Commons.

Haberler, G. (1961), "A Survey of International Trade Theory," Special Papers
     in International Economics, Princeton University.

Harrod, R. (1939), International Economics, University of Chicago Press, 1957.

Holmes, J. (1967), "The Purchasing Power Parity Theory: In Defense of Gustav
     Kassel as a Modern Theorist," Journal of Political Economy, October.

Houthakker, H. (1962), "Exchange Rate Adjustment," in Factors Affecting the
     United States Balance of Payments, 87th Congress, U.S. Government Printing
     Office.

Hsieh, D. (1982), "The Determinants of the Real Exchange Rate," Journal of
     International Economics, I'Iay.

Isard, P. (1977), "How Far Can We Push the Law   of   One   Price,"    American Economic
     Review, December.

Katseli, L. (1984), "Real Exchange Rates," in J. Bilson and. R. Marston (eds.)
     Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, University of Chicago Press.

Kravis, I. and H. Lipsey (1983), "Toward an Explanation of National Price
     Levels," Princeton Studies in International Finance, No.52, Princeton
     University Press.

        (1978) "Price Behavior in the Light of Balance of
     Payments Theories," Journal of International Economics, May.

Kravis, I., A. Heston and H. Summers (1978), "Real GDP Per Capita for more than
     One Hundred Countries," Economic Journal, June.

       (1982), World Product and Income: International Comparisons of Real
     Gross Product, Johns Hopkins University Press.

Kruan, P. (1978), "Purchasing Power Parity    and Exchange Rates ," Journal
     of International Economics, August.

Keynes, J. M.(1923), A Tract on Monetary Reform, MacMillan       and   St. Martin's
     Press for the Royal Economic Society, 1971.

League of Nations International Currency Experience, Lessons of the Interwar
     Period, Arno Press, 1978.
                                          74



Metzler, L. A. et.al. (1947), 'International Monetary Policies," Board of
     Governors of the Federal Reserve, Postwar Economic Studies, No.7,
     September.

Mundell, R. A.(1968), International Economics, The Macmillan Company.

          (1971), Monetary Theory, Goodyear Publishing Company.

Mussa, M. (1979), "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and
     Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," in K.Brunner and A. Meltzer
     (eds.), Policies for Employment, Prices, and Exchange Rates, Carnegie
     Rochester Conference Series, Vol. 11, North—Holland.

Officer, L. (1984), Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rates, JAI Press.

Okun, A. (1981), Prices and Quantities, Brookings.

Roll, R. (1979), "Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and their Implications
     for ficient International Commodity Markets," in M. Sarnat and G. Szego
     (eds.), International Finance and Trade, Ballinger Publishing Company.

Samuelson, P. A. (1964), "Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems," Review of
     Economics and Statistics, May.

       (1974), "Analytical Notes on International Real Income Comparisons,"
     Economic Journal, September.

       (1984), "Second Thoughts on Analytical Income Comparisons," Economic
     Journal, June.

Viner, J. (1955), Studies in the Theory of International Trade, George Allen &
     Unwin.

Williamson, J. The Craving Peg, Essays in International Finance No. 50,
     Princeton University Press.

       (1983), The Exchange Rate System, Institute for International
     Economics, Policy Analysis in International Economics, MIT Press.

       (1982)(ed.), The Crawling Peg: Past Performance and Future Prospects,
     Macmillan.

Yeager, L. (1958), "A Rehabilitation of Purchasing Power Parity," Journal of
     Political Economy, December.

Young, 3. P. (1925), European Currency and Finance, Commission of Gold and
     Silver Ehquiry, United States Senate, Serial 9, Reprinted by Gareland
     Publishing, Inc., 1983.
