                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO CALL CENTERS PROMOTE SCHOOL ENROLLMENT? EVIDENCE FROM
                                INDIA

                                           Emily Oster
                                          M. Bryce Millett

                                        Working Paper 15922
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15922


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




Seema Jayachandran, Robert Jensen, Larry Katz, Andrei Shleifer and participants in seminars at the
University of Chicago provided helpful comments. We are grateful to Perwinder Singh for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Emily Oster and M. Bryce Millett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Call Centers Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from India
Emily Oster and M. Bryce Millett
NBER Working Paper No. 15922
April 2010
JEL No. I21,J21,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

Over the last two decades in India there have been large increases in outsourced jobs and large increases
in schooling rates, particularly in English. Existing evidence suggests the trends are broadly related.
In this paper we explore how localized these impacts are; this has implications for understanding how
quickly information about these jobs diffuses. We use panel data on school enrollment from a comprehensive
school-level administrative dataset. This is merged with detailed data on Information Technology Enabled
Services (ITES) center location and founding dates. Using school fixed effects, we estimate the impact
of introducing a new ITES center in the vicinity of the school on enrollment. We find that introducing
a new ITES center results in a 5.7% increase in number of children enrolled; these effects are extremely
localized. We argue this result is not driven by pre-trends in enrollment or endogenous center placement,
and is not a result of ITES-center induced changes in population or increases in income. The effect
is driven entirely by English-language schools, consistent with the claim that the impacts are driven
by changes in returns to schooling.


Emily Oster
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
eoster@uchicago.edu

M. Bryce Millett
5541 S Everett Ave
Chicago, IL
60637
mbmillett@gmail.com
    Do Call Centers Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from India
                              Emily Oster∗                              Bryce Millett
                    University of Chicago and NBER                   University of Chicago
                     emily.oster@chicagobooth.edu                    mbmillett@gmail.com

                                             Draft: April 13, 2010



                                                    Abstract
            Over the last two decades in India there have been large increases in outsourced jobs and large
        increases in schooling rates, particularly in English. Existing evidence suggests the trends are
        broadly related. In this paper we explore how localized these impacts are; this has implications
        for understanding how quickly information about these jobs diffuses. We use panel data on school
        enrollment from a comprehensive school-level administrative dataset. This is merged with detailed
        data on Information Technology Enabled Services (ITES) center location and founding dates.
        Using school fixed effects, we estimate the impact of introducing a new ITES center in the vicinity
        of the school on enrollment. We find that introducing a new ITES center results in a 5.7%
        increase in number of children enrolled; these effects are extremely localized. We argue this result
        is not driven by pre-trends in enrollment or endogenous center placement, and is not a result of
        ITES-center induced changes in population or increases in income. The effect is driven entirely by
        English-language schools, consistent with the claim that the impacts are driven by changes in
        returns to schooling.



1       Introduction

        In 1991, roughly 56,000 individuals were employed in outsourcing-related businesses in India;
by 2010, this figure had increased to 2.3 million (NASSCOM, 2004; NAASCOM, 2010). Over
roughly the same time period, from 1991 to 2006, the share of children completing primary school
increased from 64% to 86% (World Bank, 2009). In recent years parts of India have also seen a
dramatic increase in English language schooling: in Andra Pradesh, for example, the share of
primary school students enrolled in English-language schooling increased from 12 percent to 24
percent between 2002 and 2007.
        Perhaps not surprisingly, these trends appear to be connected. Outsourced jobs pay high
wages, but demand employees with high levels of education and, typically, a good command of
    ∗
    Seema Jayachandran, Robert Jensen, Larry Katz, Andrei Shleifer and participants in seminars at the University of
Chicago provided helpful comments. We are grateful to Perwinder Singh for excellent research assistance.



                                                         1
English. Munshi and Rozensweig (2006) show evidence that the return to English-language schooling
in Bangalore tripled between 1980 to 2000; over the same period, English-language school enrollment
increased among groups best able to take advantage of the new jobs. Similarly, Shastry (2010) shows
evidence that the wage returns to schooling increase over the 1990s in districts with more IT growth;
over this same period, school enrollment also increases. This evidence on India echoes a much larger
literature on the general relationship between returns to education and school enrollment (see,
among many others, Freeman, 1976; Katz and Murphy, 1992; Heckman, 1993; Kane, 1994; Foster
and Rozensweig, 1996; Griliches, 1997).
       An important related issue is how fast and geographically broad these responses are. In the
Indian context, simple calculations suggest that mobility among educated people is fairly high:
roughly 30% of individuals with a high school degree or more end up living and working somewhere
different than where they grew up. This high mobility means that changes in job opportunities will
influence returns to schooling over a relatively broad geographic area. However, knowledge about
these changes may be limited if information travels slowly. To the extent this is the case, changes in
job opportunities may have disproportionate impacts on very local areas. Understanding the extent
to which responses are localized may be valuable for understanding how concentrated the education
and welfare gains to these changes will be, and may also speak to the value of policies which increase
information about returns to schooling (as in Jensen, 2009).
       In this paper, we address this question using a rich new dataset. We begin with panel data on
enrollment at the school level from a comprehensive administrative dataset in three states in India
(Karnataka, Andra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu); each school is observed for a period of four to eight
years over the early 2000s. We merge these data with a newly collected dataset on Information
Technology Enabled Services (ITES) business locations and founding dates.1 Our ITES center
location data allows us to identify the PIN code (similar to a zip code) location of each center, which
we can link to school location. We use an estimator with school fixed effects to estimate how
enrollment changes within an individual school upon the introduction of a new ITES center to the
area. The relatively long panel will allow us to effectively rule out concerns that our results are
driven by omitted variables or pre-existing trends, allowing us to make stronger causal claims than
the existing literature about the IT-schooling link. Our data also includes information on school
   1
     We focus on areas outside of the major cities of Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad where outsourcing businesses are
so common that it is unrealistic to consider the introduction of such businesses as representing a change in job options.


                                                           2
language of instruction, which will allow us to estimate whether effects differ for English and
non-English language schools.
       We begin at the smallest geographic level, estimating the impact of ITES center introduction
on schools in the same PIN code as the ITES center. A PIN code is similar in size to a village or (in
more urban areas) a city neighborhood. We find strong positive effects which occur very quickly: the
introduction of one additional ITES center to the PIN code is associated with a 5.5% increase in
number of children enrolled in the school in the year after the center introduction.2 Our primary
regressions control for school fixed effects, several time-varying school infrastructure controls and
year fixed effects interacted with state dummies and several village-level correlates of ITES center
introduction. Our effects are robust to controlling for district specific trends, and are similar if we
restrict to areas with English-language schools (these areas are more likely to get ITES centers) or to
areas which ever have ITES centers during the sample period. They are of similar magnitude but
slightly less precise if we look at whether the area has any ITES centers, rather than the number.
       Our central results focus on the impact of ITES centers in the immediate vicinity (i.e. the
school’s own PIN code). In a secondary set of results we explore the impact of ITES centers in
neighboring PIN codes, which will give us a sense of how localized the impacts are. We define two
new variables: number ITES centers in the two closest PIN codes (an average of 2.3 miles away from
the local PIN code) and number of ITES centers in the 3rd to 5th closest neighbors (an average of
4.6 miles away).3 ITES centers in the two closest neighboring PIN codes also have a positive impact
on school enrollment, but it is smaller and less significant than the own-PIN code effects. The
slightly further ITES centers have no impact. This suggests that the effects are extremely localized;
they do not extend to ITES centers even a few miles away.
       The primary issue with interpreting these results as showing a causal relationship between
ITES centers in the PIN code and school enrollment is the possibility of pre-trends. The inclusion of
school fixed effects in our specification addresses the concern that ITES center introduction is
associated with some fixed area characteristic, but they do not address the concern that ITES
centers might be introduced to areas which are changing more rapidly.4 To address this, we look
   2
     Based on other data (the National Family and Health Survey) enrollment rate in this period is around 75% at
primary-school ages. Given this, our results imply about a 4.1 percentage point increase in enrollment rate.
   3
     We define distances using GIS data on PIN codes; the GIS data gives the location of the post office for that PIN
code. When we report distances, we therefore report the distance between the post offices in neighboring PIN codes.
   4
     We should note that we have no reason to think this type of endogenous placement is common. Conversations with



                                                         3
directly for pre-trends in the data by estimating the impact of ITES center introduction in future
years.5 The inclusion of the future ITES center measure does not affect our estimate of the impact of
current ITES centers and, more importantly, future ITES centers are never a significant predictor of
school enrollment. As a further test, we show that there are no trends in enrollment in years leading
up to an ITES center introduction.
       Following our estimates of the overall impacts of ITES centers, we turn to estimating whether
these impacts vary by language of instruction. The vast majority of jobs in ITES centers require
knowledge of English in addition to high rates of education. This suggests that ITES center
introduction should be particularly important in impacting English-language schooling; again, the
existing literature already points to increases in English-language schooling in response to the broad
trends in IT. Using data on language of instruction, we find that English-language school enrollment
increases by about 13% with the introduction of each ITES center, whereas there is no change (either
increase or decrease) for local-language schools.
       We can take this a step further and use the variation we observe in ITES center type. We
argue that the impact for English-language schools should be particularly strong when the ITES
center that is introduced is a voice center (as opposed to data processing), since these centers
typically require a better command of English. This is apparent in the data. The impact of a voice
ITES center on an English-language school is 16.4%; this is in comparison to -3.6% for a voice ITES
center and a local language school. The difference for non-voice centers is much smaller: 12.4% for
English-language schools versus 9.1% for local-language schools.
       These results point to a causal impact of ITES centers on school enrollment; one important
question is whether the impacts are driven by mechanical changes resulting from ITES center
introductions. We evaluate three possibilities: changes in number of schools6 , changes in population
and changes in income. We argue (in Section 4.3) that these factors do not explain our results. First,
there is no change in number of schools after ITES center introduction. Second, ITES center
employees are typically young, without children and do not migrate for the job, suggesting ITES
ITES center operators suggested they choose where to locate primarily based on the level of infrastructure and the quality
of possible employees. Nothing was mentioned about locating based on trends.
   5
     This methodology has been used elsewhere to test for similar concerns (Jensen and Oster, 2009; La Ferrara et al,
2009).
   6
     The particular concern in this case is that, since we observe total enrollment at each school, if schools close when
ITES centers are introduced, total enrollment could remain constant while children per school increased.




                                                            4
centers will not increase the population of school-aged children.7 Third, although ITES centers do
increase income, a simple calibration using estimates of the income elasticity of school enrollment
suggests that only a small fraction of our enrollment increases could be explained by income changes.
       We interpret our results as reflecting changes in returns to schooling. In Section 5 we briefly
discuss the more specific mechanism by which this occurs. In particular, we distinguish two
possibilities. First, ITES center introduction may impact perceived returns to schooling by providing
better information about these jobs. Alternatively, an ITES center introduction may impact actual
returns to schooling if people envision working at that particular center. We present a very simple
framework for thinking about this distinction, and argue that the plausibility of the latter
explanation depends on the cost of travel or migration between areas. The effects we observe are
very localized; these are only consistent with the actual returns explanation if migration and travel
for work are extremely limited. We argue based on other data from India this does not appear to be
the case. Although this evidence is only suggestive, we argue it is more consistent with ITES center
introduction changing perceived returns, perhaps by increasing the salience of this type of
employment opportunity. To the extent that this is the case, our results are supportive of policy
interventions of the type evaluated in Jensen (2009) in which people are informed directly about
returns to schooling.
       The findings in this paper relate to a large literature on what policies are effective in increasing
school enrollment in the developing world (e.g. Duflo, 2001; Kremer, 2003; Chaudhury et al, 2005;
Duflo, Hanna and Ryan, 2009; Burde and Linden, 2009). We are most closely related to Jensen
(2010), who evaluates a randomized intervention which provided call center recruiting services in the
area around Delhi. He finds increases in school enrollment among girls as a result of these
interventions, as well as increases in girls’ weight. Relative to this paper, our work provides a clearer
picture of changes which are likely to result without any formal intervention; we also have richer data
on schooling (in particular, on language of instruction). However, that without randomization our
study relies on stronger identification assumptions.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some background on ITES
centers, and describes our education data and our ITES center data. Section 3 describes our
   7
    We make this more explicit using a simple calibration in Section 4.3. In addition, we also show evidence from other
data that migration overall is too limited to explain our effects. In addition, in an Appendix Table we show that, in the
subset of places we can control for population, including this control does not impact the results.



                                                           5
empirical strategy. Section 4 shows the central results of the paper, discusses robustness to
pre-trends and presents our results broken down by language of instruction. This section also
analyzes whether the results are driven by mechanical changes in number of schools, population or
income. Section 5 discusses mechanisms and Section 7 concludes.

2       Background and Data
2.1     Background on ITES Centers

Although the concept of “outsourcing” business processes to low-wage countries has been around
since the 1970s, the industry remained small until the late 1990s, as time and cost restrictions were
large. With the investment in trans-oceanic fiber-optic cables however, the costs of ITES off-shoring
plummeted, and with its highly educated English-speaking low-wage population, India emerged as
the dominant provider of business services ranging from call centers to software development. Only
about 5,000 workers worldwide were employed in this sector in 1986; by 2010, this number had
increased to 2.3 million in India alone (NASSCOM, 2010).
        ITES center jobs are typically high-paying by Indian standards. The average starting salary at
such firms is in the range of 8,000 rupees per month (about $175), which is almost double the
average per capita income of India (Ng and Mitter, 2005). These firms typically come in two types:
multinational corporations with subsidiaries or divisions located in India, and Indian “third-party”
firms that provide ITES centers and other services for Western companies. Jobs at the Indian firms
tend to have lower wages, higher turnover, and less training than the “in-house” multinational
corporation positions (Dossani and Kenney, 2004). The majority of ITES firms are in larger cities
such as Bangalore, Delhi, and Mumbai, but they are spreading rapidly to smaller cities all over
southern India. Workers at these firms are primarily young, and a large share are women (Ng and
Mitter, 2005).
        Many of these firms are call centers, which focus on direct telephone interaction with Western
customers. Workers make outgoing calls (for services like telemarketing), and take incoming calls (for
customer service, tech support, and credit card activation, among other things) for large Western
companies. At these centers, “voice” workers conduct calls almost entirely in English, primarily to
the United States, thus fluency is generally a requirement for entry-level positions.8 Other,
    8
    Indeed, many of these firms go to great lengths to train their workers to speak with American and British regional
dialects, even adopting pseudonyms and memorizing idioms. Some workers report having to watch hours of American



                                                          6
“non-voice” business processes outsourced to such firms range greatly in their skill-level, from data
entry to software design. English proficiency may not be required for these jobs, although in our
survey, almost all non-voice centers reported that English was required.
       From the perspective of this paper, there are at least two central features of ITES centers
which we want to highlight. First, they require relatively high rates of education and pay high wages.
In both existing literature and in research done for this paper, it is clear that the vast majority of
these jobs require at least a high school degree, and in many cases more. To the extent that jobs of
this type have not been available historically, their existence may well affect the returns to education
(both perceived and actual). Second, the vast majority of these jobs require English skills, which is
likely to affect the wage returns to learning English.



2.2      Data on School Enrollment (DISE)

We use a large administrative dataset on primary school enrollment in India called the District
Information System for Education (DISE). This dataset has been collected by the Indian government
since the late 1990s, although the data used in this paper begins in the early 2000s. Data collection
is coordinated at the district level, and involves surveys of schools. These school surveys have several
parts. First, they collect data on primary school enrollment, including comprehensive data on
number of enrolled students by age, grade, gender and caste. These data are designed to reflect
statistics as of September 30th of the school year (which starts in the spring). Second, they collect
data on features of the school, including language of instruction and physical plant characteristics.
Each school, and each village, is given a unique ID number which allows us to follow schools over
time.9
       The village-level survey is less comprehensive and less frequent, but includes some information
on village characteristics. Most importantly, in the village-level survey we observe (for most villages)
the PIN code location of the village, which will allow us to match to ITES center locations. A PIN
code is similar to a ZIP code in the US; they are larger than a village, but not as large as a census
block. In these data, the median PIN code has 10,000 children enrolled in primary school.
television programs to help perfect their speech patterns. (Ng and Mitter, 2005)
    9
      In cities, a “village” is really a neighborhood, or ward. For example, in Bangalore, a city with 6.5 million people in
the 2001 census, there are 668 distinct “villages”.




                                                             7
       The DISE data is collected by the district, and then aggregated by each state government. We
use data from three states which have been significantly impacted by globalization: Karnataka,
Andra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.10 The number of years of data varies across states. Panel A of
Table 1 shows, for each state, the years of data coverage and the range of number of schools by year.
In later years the dataset is more comprehensive, covering a larger share of schools. Although this
means we do not have a balanced panel, by including school fixed effects we ensure we are comparing
the same schools over time.
       Panel B of Table 1 provides some summary statistics on school enrollment and school
characteristics. The average school in our sample is fairly small, with 144 students. Younger grades
are larger on average, consistent with some drop out over time, and there are roughly similar
numbers of girls and boys. This survey covers only primary schools, so we observe enrollment only
up to eighth grade. The physical plant variables indicate schools are not in very good repair. In an
average school, only 70% of classrooms are noted to be in good condition by surveyors. Half of the
schools report having a boundary wall, half report having electricity and slightly above half have a
toilet. When we turn to mechanism we will explore variation based on whether or not the school
teaches in English; 11% of the sample reports at least some instruction in English.
       This data has several limitations. First, although it aims to be a complete census of schools in
India, the coverage sample differs somewhat across years, indicating that some schools are missed in
some years and it seems likely that others are missed completely. Because we run our regressions at
the school level, with school fixed effects, we argue that this is not an issue for interpreting our
estimates. The one note of caution, however, is that if the schools we observe are different than the
schools we do not observe, our results may have limited generalizablity; this is unlikely to be a
significant issue, however, since our best estimates suggest we cover nearly all schools in India.11
       A second issue is that the data collects information on total number of children enrolled, not
enrollment rates. Given the evidence reported in the introduction, and in Section 4.3, that ITES
centers are unlikely to have any noticeable impact on the population of children, this is should not be
  10
     These three are also states in which we have a relatively long time series of data; although we have access to data
for the entire country, in most states they cover only two to three years.
  11
     This is actually a somewhat difficult fact to measure. Official statistics on number of schools in India appear to be
largely based on the same data we use here so there is no outside source that we can use to verify coverage. The fact
that the Indian government uses this as the source of official statistics, however, gives us confidence that we are covering
at least an extremely large share of total schools.




                                                             8
a major issue. However, for a small subset of school years the school also reported the total
population of school-aged children in the area. The coverage of these data are limited, and it is
unclear how the schools estimated total population. Nevertheless, in a robustness check we will use
these data and the variable is summarized in Panel B of Table 1.
       Finally, as noted, the DISE data covers only primary schools. It seems plausible, even likely,
that much of the impact of ITES centers would be on enrollment in high school, since secondary
school education is typically necessary for these jobs. Unfortunately, we do not observe these
enrollments; if anything, this may lead us to understate our impacts since we may not observe the
highest-impact age groups.



2.3    Data on ITES Centers

To match with the data on education, we collected a dataset of ITES center locations in the same
three states. We contracted with a firm in India that helps connect Western firms with Indian ITES
centers to create a directory of ITES centers in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu. They
used their contacts, the Internet, and available directories to compile a list of firms, and called each
to confirm their existence, the PIN code of their location and founding date.
       This data collection project resulted in a dataset of 385 ITES centers. Figure 1 shows a
histogram of ITES center founding dates; the incredible growth in number of centers over time is
clear: in our sample, 68% are founded after the year 2000. As we noted above, our data on schooling
is collected in September, for the year spanning June to April and the ITES center founding dates
are given a simply the calendar year of founding. To match, we code the school year 2005-2006 as
2005, and match with ITES centers this way. So a school in a PIN code with an ITES center
introduced in 2005 is coded as having a new ITES center in the 2005-2006 school year.12
       The breakdown of number of ITES centers by state is presented in Panel A of Table 2. In
Column 1 we show the count of all ITES centers; Andra Pradesh is slightly less well-represented, but
the number of ITES centers is fairly similar across states. In Column 2 we report these counts for
areas outside the major cities of Bangalore, Chennai and Hyderabad (this is the sample we use for
analysis). As expected, this limits the sample considerably, since most ITES centers are in major
  12
    We collected only year of founding date for the ITES centers, not month, which means we are not able to do a more
sophisticated matching with date of entry.


                                                         9
cities. However, we are still left with 244 ITES centers. We choose this sample restriction because,
given the large number of ITES centers in these cities, it is difficult to think of the introduction of
one more as an event.
       In order to undertake our analysis, we aggregate these ITES centers to the PIN code level. The
first column in Panel B of Table 2 reports data on number of ITES centers by PIN code. The vast
majority (97%) of PIN codes do not have any ITES centers; among those with at least one ITES
center, the average is 2.6. Column 2 in Panel B shows these statistics with the data restricted to the
sample we use (areas outside of the three major cities). This sample is similar, and the conditional
average is 2.5 ITES centers.
       Panel C of Table 2 gives a better sense of the source of identification we use by showing three
categories of schools. Our sample contains roughly 238,000 schools which are in PIN codes which
never have ITES centers (or at least not ITES centers we observe). A further 172 schools are in PIN
codes which have ITES centers, but do not change their ITES centers during the survey period.
Finally, we have 408 schools in PIN codes where the number of ITES centers change over the course
of the study. Given that our specifications will include school fixed effects, we are identifying off of
these final 408 schools. In general, we will include all schools in our analyses, and the non-changers
will serve to identify the basic trends over time; in some analyses will we include only schools which
ever have an ITES centers (a total sample of 580 schools).13
       In addition to this basic information on ITES center locations and founding dates, we
undertook a follow-up survey of the centers in our sample to get a sense of characteristics. Although
we attempted to survey all centers, in the end we were able to collect data on 83% (the remaining
were missed largely due to refusal to answer survey questions). For these centers we have data on
whether or not they are voice centers, whether they operate in English, the number of employees and
several employee characteristics. Information on number of employees and whether they are voice or
non-voice is available for all the centers we surveyed; demographic information is available for a
smaller subset.
       The variables are summarized in Panel D of Table 2. The ITES centers are relatively small,
with a median of 80 employees, and about half of them have voice operations. All ITES centers
  13
    One issue we should highlight here is that most of the changes in our sample take place between 2005 and 2006; this
does not seem to reflect the distribution in timing of ITES center introduction, but rather the fact that the meat of our
schooling data is in this period.



                                                           10
which handle voice calls operate at least in part in English. Employees are young (median age of 28),
largely without children and largely from the local area.
      As a final note, in addition to ITES centers within the same PIN code as the school, we use
two variables measuring slightly further centers: those in the two closest PIN codes, and those in the
3rd to 5th most distant PIN codes. To calculate distance, we use GIS data on PIN code locations
(the latitude and longitude are measured at the post office in each PIN code). We calculate the
distance from each PIN code in the data to all other PIN codes, and rank them by distance to define
the closest ones. We then calculate the number of ITES centers in each of these two neighboring
groups. The two closest neighboring PIN codes are an average of 2.3 miles away, and 1,117 schools
ever have an ITES center in one of these closest neighbors; the further neighbors are an average of
4.6 miles away and 1,935 schools ever have an ITES center in one of these areas.



2.4   Placement of ITES Centers

A central issue in our analysis is the fact that ITES centers are not placed randomly. Our analysis
will take advantage of variation over time, so any fixed differences across areas will be adjusted for,
but it remains important to understand what drives placement.
      We undertake two strategies. First, we can get an initial sense of the magnitude of this threat
based on discussion with ITES center operators about location choices. The primary issues they
cited when deciding where to locate were infrastructure and transportation: areas with no electricity
and roads were not appealing places to operate. In addition, center operators cited their need to get
high quality employees cheaply in the local area (this is consistent with the survey data which
suggests limited migration for work). There was some sense of a trade-off: there are more qualified
individuals in larger cities, but people in more isolated areas (smaller cities, towns) demand lower
wages. These discussions certainly do not suggest that ITES centers are placed randomly; it is clear
that center operators are thinking carefully about cost-benefit considerations. However, the central
issues raised are very likely to be constant over time, at least over the short time frame of our study.
      We are also able to evaluate this endogenous placement statistically using our data. To do this
we estimate, at the village level, (a) the determinants of having an ITES center by the end of the
sample in 2007 and (b) the determinants of adding an ITES center during the period we observe. We



                                                   11
focus on variables cited by ITES center operators: whether the area has electricity, whether it is in a
more urban area and whether there is an English-language school in the area. This last variable is
intended to capture the availability of English-speaking individuals. We also include a control for
total school enrollment and, in some cases, state fixed effects.
         The results from these regressions are shown in Table 3. In general, our evidence is supportive
of the interview evidence. More urban areas are more likely to have centers by 2007 and more likely
to add them during the sample; these impacts are true with and without state controls. Areas with
English-language schools are also more likely to have centers and more likely to add them during the
sample; again, this results is robust to state fixed effects. We see limited evidence that electricity
matters, although this may be due to the high correlation with urbanization; enrollment also does
not seem to have any impact.
         The inclusion of school fixed effects means that any differences in levels of enrollment
associated with these variables will not impact our results. However, if there are differential trends in
enrollment across villages associated with these variables, this could impact our results. To address
this, in the results below we will allow for differential year fixed effects for areas that are more
urbanized and areas with any English-language schools; this is discussed in more detail in Section 3.14




3        Empirical Strategy

We estimate the impact of ITES centers on school enrollment using a fixed effects estimator. We
observe enrollment (total number of children enrolled) in school i in PIN code j at time t; denote
this variable nijt . In addition, we observe number of ITES centers in PIN code j at time t, which we
denote cjt . Our basic regression is shown in Equation (1) below


                                   nijt = α + β1 cjt + γi + φt + ΨXijt + ijt                                    (1)

where γi is a vector of school fixed effects, and φt is a vector of date controls. These date controls
include year fixed effects, and year fixed effects interacted with state fixed effects, village-level
electricity, urbanization and controls for the number of English-language schools. Put differently, we
    14
    We do not include separate trends in electricity or initial enrollment level since these do not impact placement;
consistent with this lack of impact on placement, including these does not change our results.



                                                         12
allow the year fixed effects to differ by state and by the variables which drive ITES center placement
in Table 3. In addition to these fixed effects, we include a set of school-specific time-varying controls
(Xijt ) measuring school-level infrastructure. The coefficient of interest is β1 , which captures the
effect of ITES centers on school enrollment, identified off of schools in areas which add ITES centers
during the sample. Throughout the analysis, we cluster our standard errors at the village level.15 We
will also estimate several variations on this regression, including limiting to areas which are more
likely to have centers, estimating the impact of having any centers and controlling for district-specific
time trends.
       As noted in the introduction, we are concerned in this analysis about the possibility that the
results are driven by other variables which are changing over time and influence both ITES centers
and school enrollment. A related issue is the possibility that ITES centers are introduced in places
where school enrollment is increasing. To address both of these issues, we explore whether future
ITES centers predict current enrollment. To do this, we estimate Equation (2) below.


                               nijt = α + β1 cjt + β2 cj,t+1 + γi + φt + ΨXijt + ijt                                     (2)


where cj,t+1 is a variable measuring number of ITES centers in PIN code j in the next year. We
argue that a finding that β2 = 0 implies no pre-trends: that is, enrollment is not higher in areas that
get ITES centers in the future. It is important to note that this technique does not allow us to rule
out the possibility that ITES centers are introduced at exactly the same time as another innovation,
and that other innovation drives school enrollment. However, this possibility seems much less
plausible than the general trend story.
       As a secondary pre-trend analysis, we also estimate Equation (2) including a trend for years
until a new ITES center is introduced. This allows us to look slightly more generally at whether
enrollments are increasing in years up to a new ITES center introduction.
       One important issue is the coverage of our ITES center dataset. Although we worked to cover
as many ITES centers as possible, it seems extremely unlikely that coverage is perfect. There are
  15
    We choose to cluster at the village level (rather than the school) since cjt is the same for all schools within a village-
year. In fact, the level of clustering makes relatively little difference – even clustering at the district level gives very
similar standard errors. We should note that when we include district-specific trends in the regression (see discussion
below) we are not able to cluster at all given the large number of controls (STATA refuses to calculate standard errors).
This means the standard errors are likely biased downward in those regressions, although since the clustering does not
make a large difference in general, it seems unlikely they are biased downwards very much.



                                                             13
very likely areas that have ITES centers which we do not observe. This means that our “control”
group of non-changers also contains some schools which should be in the “treatment” group. To the
extent that there is a positive effect of ITES centers on school enrollment, this imperfect coverage
should bias our estimates of β1 downward, since the changes in the control group will be more biased
upward by the inclusion of “treatment” schools.




4        Results: Impact of ITES Centers on School Enrollment

This section presents our estimates of the impact of ITES centers on enrollment. In the first
subsection we summarize our basic results, report variations in the effect by demographic group and
address the concern that the results we find are driven by pre-trends. The second subsection presents
our results broken down by school language. The third subsection discusses whether our results are
driven by mechanical changes in population or income.



4.1      Baseline Results, Pretrends

We begin by showing the central result in the paper in graphical form, in Figure 2. To generate this
figure, we focus on four groups of schools: schools which always have an ITES center in their PIN
code, schools which add a center between 2004 and 2005, schools which add a center between 2005
and 2006 and schools which never have any ITES centers.16 For all four groups we isolate on a
balanced panel of schools which are observed for four years (2004-2007). Using this sample of
schools, we regress log enrollment on year fixed effects and take the residuals; this removes any
consistent year-by-year variation. These residuals are graphed in Figure 2, which show changes in
these residuals relative to the level in 2004.
         The key result in Figure 2 is that there are large year-on-year changes in enrollment in the two
groups which add ITES centers during the sample, and these changes line up in terms of timing with
the ITES center addition. In areas which add a center between 2004 and 2005, schools see a large
increase in enrollment between these years, whereas there is only a small increase in schools which
    16
    The two groups of changer schools here (add center in 2005 and add center in 2006) cover the vast majority of schools
which add centers; this is due largely to the meat of our schooling data being from this period.




                                                           14
always have centers, and no change for schools which add centers later or never add them.17 Further,
for areas which add an ITES center between 2005 and 2006 there is a large increase in enrollment
between these years, but no change in the year before; further, this is the only group with a large
increase between 2005 and 2006. Overall, the figure demonstrates large changes in enrollment for
areas which add ITES centers during our sample and these changes line up in terms of timing with
ITES center introduction.
       Panel A of Table 4 shows our statistical estimates of the effect of ITES centers on enrollment.
Column 1 presents our primary specification using the entire sample and controlling for school fixed
effects, time-varying school infrastructure variables, year fixed effects and these year fixed effects
interacted with several important determinants of ITES centers. The coefficient on ITES centers is
positive and significant: adding one more ITES center appears to increase school enrollment by 5.7%.
Columns 2-4 of Panel A present several modifications on this regression. In Column 2 we include
controls for district-specific trends, to address the concern that districts which have ITES centers
introduces are trending differently than those that do not. The coefficient is slightly smaller (4.3%)
but within the margin of error of the estimate in Column 1. In Columns 3 and 4 we restrict the
sample to areas which are arguably more comparable to the areas which get ITES centers; this
addresses the concern that it is inappropriate to use areas which are very unlikely to get ITES
centers as the comparison group. Column 3 limits to villages with at least one English-language
school and Column 4 limits to areas which ever have an ITES center which we observe (including
those which change and those which always have a center). In both of these restricted samples, the
effect is actually larger and more significant. Perhaps most striking is the evidence in Column 4,
which contains our most comparable set of schools: even though the sample size is extremely
restricted in this case, the effects are still large and significant.
       In Panel B of Table 4, we estimate the same regressions, but instead of estimating the impact
of number of ITES centers, we focus on a dummy for whether the area has any centers. The impacts
are of similar size but less precise in this case; the p-value on the overall sample is 0.11. The lower
precision may be due to having more limited scope for identification once we throw away some of the
changes. We should note this does suggest that the results we observe do not arise only from the first
  17
    As shown in Table 2, most schools never have any ITES centers. For this reason, the year fixed effects are largely
identified off of these areas, so when we generate residuals removing these fixed effects, the average residuals in these
area are very close to zero.



                                                           15
ITES center introduction.
      The results in Panels A and B focus on the impact of ITES center introduction into the very
local area – PIN codes in the same village as the school. In Panel C of Table 4 we explore whether
the introduction of ITES centers in the slightly broader surroundings matter. As described, we do
this by estimating the impact of ITES centers in the two closest neighboring PIN codes, and slightly
further neighbors (the 3rd to 5th closest). Panel C demonstrates that there are some impacts for
ITES centers in the nearest neighbors: one more ITES center in one of the closest neighboring PIN
codes results in a 3.6% increase in enrollment in the primary specification. However, this impact is
typically slightly smaller than the own-PIN code centers. Further, the effects fall off very quickly.
ITES centers in the slightly more distant neighbors have no impact; this is true even though these
“distant” neighbors are still quite close, at an average of 4.6 miles away. This suggests effects are
extremely localized.
      The evidence in Table 4 suggests a strong connection between ITES centers and total number
of children in school. In Appendix Table 1 we show these effects broken down by demographic group
and state. We find the effects are similar for girls and boys and larger for older than younger
children. The effects are similar for each state, although not significant in Andra Pradesh or
Karnataka, likely due to the more limited sample.



Pretrends

The central threat to the validity of our estimates is that pre-trends in enrollment or other variables
drive our results. This is related to the issue of endogenous ITES center placement, which is clearly a
concern, as can be seen in Table 3. As discussed above, to the extent that endogenous placement
reflects only characteristics which are constant over time this will not drive our results due to the
inclusion of school fixed effects. Further, if trends are different for areas which are urban, or have
more English-language school, we have also addressed this concern. The concern which remains
unaddressed in our main specification is the possibility that ITES centers are located in areas that
are changing more quickly in other ways that we do not observe. We note that, anecdotally, nothing
in discussions with center operators suggest this is the case.
      To address this concern directly we estimate whether future ITES center placement predicts



                                                   16
current enrollment. If ITES centers are being placed in areas in which other variables are changing,
or in which enrollment is increasing in general, then we expect to observe future ITES center
placement affecting current enrollment. This test is similar or identical to the tests for pre-trends in
other comparable settings (Jensen and Oster, 2009; LaFerrara et al, 2009).
      Panel A of Table 5 replicates Panel A of Table 4, but includes a control for the number of
ITES centers in the following year in addition to the indicator for current ITES centers. Adding the
control for future ITES centers has only a small impact on our estimates of the effect of current
ITES centers. In addition, and more importantly, the effect of future ITES centers is small and not
statistically precise, suggesting no strong evidence of pre-trends. We should note, however, that the
estimates are too noisy to reject equality between the coefficients.
      In Panel B of Table 5 we do a similar test, but rather than simply controlling for having an
ITES center next year, we control for a time trend up to the year of ITES center introduction (the
trend is defined so higher values indicate the center introduction is closer in time). If ITES centers
are introduced into places where enrollment is increasing more quickly, we should see evidence of a
positive trend. We do not see this. In Column 1, the coefficient on the trend is 0.002, indicating a
0.2% increase in enrollment for each year closer to the introduction of the ITES center. This is not
significant, and is tiny relative to the 6.1% impact of introducing the ITES center. The trend is
similarly insignificant and small in other columns. It is important to note that the results here do
not indicate that ITES center placement is exogenous – this is effectively ruled out by the evidence
in Table 3 – but instead indicate that this endogenous placement does not drive our results.



4.2   Impacts of ITES Centers by Language of Instruction

The evidence above suggests that overall school enrollment increases in response to ITES center
introduction. Here, we turn to separating the result by language of instruction. One of the most
central features of ITES centers in India is that the vast majority operate in English. In our survey,
all of the voice ITES centers (which make up about half of our sample) use English; the majority of
non-voice centers also require English. Given this, to the extent that what we observe reflects
changes in schooling in response to job opportunities, these changes should disproportionally result
in higher English-language school enrollment. Broadly, we see strong evidence of this in the data



                                                   17
presented by Munshi and Rosenzweig (2006). They show increases in the returns to English-language
education in Bombay over time, and subsequent increases in English-language schooling. Again, we
explore largely the same issue here, but are able to identify responses of English-language schooling
to local job opportunity changes.
        We test for differences across language of instruction in Table 6. To do this, we generate new
variables interacting the number of ITES centers with language of instruction. We control separately
for the impact of ITES centers on local language schools, and on English-language schools.18
        Panel A of Table 6 shows our basic test of differences across school types. Column 1 reports
impacts on total enrollment using the entire sample. We find the total impact of ITES centers in
English-language schools is large and significant; the impact of ITES centers in local-language
schools is effectively zero. Enrollment in English-language schools increases by 14.9% for each ITES
center introduced. The p-values reported at the bottom of the table indicate we can strongly reject
the equality of the impacts in the two school types. In Columns 2-4 we estimate this regressions with
district-specific trends (Column 2) and in the two restricted samples (Columns 3 and 4). In all cases
we see the same pattern of strong impacts on English-language schools and none for local-language.
One thing which is important to note is that we do not see decreases in enrollment in local language
schools. The increase in enrollment in English-language schools does not appear to come at the
expense of enrollment in local-language schools.
        In Panel B of Table 6 we push the data on language further, and separate schools into three
groups: those which do not teach in English at all, those which teach some in English and some in
another local language and those which teach only in English. We replicate Panel A, but control for
each school type interacted with ITES centers. Consistent with the larger impact for
English-language schools overall, we find the effects are largest for schools which teach exclusively in
English. However, the difference between these and those which teach partially in English are fairly
small. The largest distinction appears to be between schools which teach at least some English and
those which teach none.
        We can further explore whether the enrollment changes seem to reflect response to the ITES
center jobs by using the distinction between voice and non-voice ITES centers in our sample. As
noted in Section 2, our sample of ITES centers includes both centers which engage in voice activities
 18
      The two variables are mutually exclusive; each coefficient can be interpreted as the effect for that school type.



                                                             18
(true “call centers”) and those which engage in non-voice activities (data processing, software
development, etc). Speaking English well is particularly valuable for jobs in voice centers. Although
most non-voice centers also require English, they are slightly less likely to do so and the necessary
level of English proficiency is clearly lower. We evaluate the impact of voice centers over and above
the impact of total centers.
       We generate new variables measuring the number of voice and non-voice ITES centers in each
PIN code; we define a center as a “voice center” if at least 50% of employees handle voice calls.19 We
interact each of these new variables with school language. Our goal in this regression is to test
whether the differences between English-language and non-English-language schools are larger for
voice than non-voice centers. These regressions are reported in Panel C of Table 6. In all four
columns, the coefficients tell a similar story. For non-voice centers, the effects for English-language
schools are slightly larger, but the difference is small. Both types of schools see enrollment increases
from non-voice centers. For voice centers, however, the impact for English-language schools is much
larger than for local-language schools. We can typically reject that the difference between
English-language and local language schools is the same for voice and non-voice center introductions.
Interestingly, in some specifications we see evidence of a reduction in enrollment in local-language
schools when a voice ITES center is introduced; this could reflect students substituting between
school types, which is not an effect we observe when we consider the impact of all ITES centers
combined.
       Before moving to robustness, it seems worthwhile to briefly discuss the magnitude of these
results. The evidence in Table 6 points to a roughly 14.9% increase in number of students enrolled in
response to an ITES center introduction. The median English-language school in an area with at
least one ITES center has 158 students, implying an increase of about 23 students per school after an
ITES center introduction. Aggregating to the PIN code level, we estimate the total increase in
enrollment (which is entirely in English-language schools) of 400 students for each ITES center
introduction.


  19
    As noted, we have voice/non-voice data for 83% of ITES centers. For the centers with data, we generate indicator
for whether they are voice centers or non-voice centers. For the purpose of this analysis only, we do not include areas
which have centers but for which we do not observe whether they are voice or non-voice. The results are similar if we
assume they are one or the other.




                                                          19
4.3   Robustness: Number of Schools, Population and Income Changes

This subsection addresses several key robustness issues. In particular, we evaluate whether it is
possible that our results are simply driven by mechanical changes in number of schools, population
or income deriving from the ITES center introduction. Evaluating these mechanical issues is
important before we move to discuss the returns-to-schooling mechanism in Section 5.
      Changes in Number of Schools A key downside of our data on education is that we observe
number of students enrolled, not enrollment rates. This introduces at least two possible mechanical
drivers of our results. The first concern is that our results are driven by changes in the number of
schools in the area. If the introduction of an ITES center causes a decrease in the number of schools
then the remaining schools could see enrollment increases even if the total enrollment rate in the area
remains constant.
      We can evaluate this by estimating the impact of ITES center introduction on the count of
schools in the village. We collapse the data to the village level and generate a new variable which is
the log number of schools in the village. We use this in regression of our standard form, and the
results are shown in Table 7. The results indicate that changes in school count is not a concern: the
impact on number of schools is very small, and not significant.
      ITES Center Driven Population Increases A second related issue is the possibility that
population might increase in response to the ITES center. The controls thus far rule out the
possibility that our impacts are driven by ITES centers being introduced to more populous areas, or
ares which are growing faster. However, if the ITES center itself increases population, this could
produce our result. This would be a concern if we were, for example, considering the impact of
introducing a large manufacturing plant to an isolated area. However, we argue it is unlikely to be a
concern in this setting.
      The main reason to reject this mechanism is that ITES centers tend to employ young, childless
individuals. This can be seen in anthropological and ethnographic work on ITES centers in India
(i.e. Ng and Mitter, 2005) and directly in our ITES center survey data. In the average center in our
sample, managers reported fewer than 10% of employees had children (see Table 2), so the potential
increase in children in the area even if all employees were new to the area is small. Further,
relocation for work in ITES centers is also relatively rare (11.6% of employees). Even if we assume
all this relocation is by people with children we find an average of 5.6% employees with children

                                                  20
relocate; at the median ITES center, this amounts to 4 people with re-located children.20 In fact,
this number is likely to be an upper bound; in reality, the individuals with children will generally be
the least likely to relocate. We argue that this institutional setting effectively rules out the
possibility that ITES-center driven population increases drive our effects.
       There remains a lingering concern that the introduction of an ITES center may bring with it
other businesses, which could increase population. One issue is that businesses which serve ITES
center workers could enter at the same time. Although this is plausible, it seems unlikely the effects
would be large since the number of employees is very small compared to the overall population.
       It is also possible that the introduction of an ITES center is associated with an overall increase
in other types of businesses, which bring in more migrants. The fact that we can reject pre-trends in
the regressions above limits this concern; for this to drive our results, it must be the case that these
other businesses enter at exactly the same time. In addition, we provide two other pieces of data to
address this.
       First, in Appendix Table 2 we show, for the subset of areas for which the school reports total
area (town, village) population, the impact of controlling for population on our results.21 We do not
want to lean very heavily on the evidence in these regressions since (a) we observe population only for
a small subset of the sample and (b) it is unclear how the school estimated population. However, this
table demonstrates that including a control for population in the regressions does not significantly
impact the estimate of the effect of ITES centers. The coefficients are noisier, but this seems to be
due to changes in sample: there is very little difference between Panel A (where we use the restricted
sample but do not control for population) and Panel B (where we do control for population).
       Second, in other household survey data (the 1998 and 2005 National Family and Health
Survey) we can estimate what share of school-age children report migrating to a new area within the
last year. For 88% of clusters in the NFHS sample there are zero in-migrants in the last year among
school-aged children.22 Even the clusters at the 90th percentile on this measure still have only 3.5%
  20
     This is generated by taking the minimum (for each center) of the share relocating and the share with children; this
number is the maximum possible share of people who have children and relocated. If individuals who relocate are mostly
those without children, as seems likely, this is an overstatement.
  21
     Since there are multiple schools in each area, we cannot generate enrollment rates off of these data, since the
population reported is an area-level population not simply the population relevant for that school. The fact that this is
true should also be clear from the coefficient on population; it is much lower than one, which at least partially reflects
the fact that as the area population increases, not all of that increase goes to a given school.
  22
     In the NFHS a survey cluster typically covers a single village or area within a town and includes a randomly selected
subsample of individuals.



                                                           21
of school-aged children who have migrated in in the last year. Put simply, there is very limited total
migration. This further bolsters the argument that population changes are unlikely to drive our
results.
       ITES Center Driven Changes in Income A final possibility, also somewhat mechanical, is that
ITES centers drive enrollment because they increase income and schooling is a normal good.
Although this effect is not mechanical in the way population changes are, it is a very different
explanation than the theory that the effects are driven by knowledge of the new job opportunities.
       To evaluate the contribution of income, we take advantage of the fact that existing literature
has provided estimates of the income elasticity of school enrollment in similar contexts. Using these
estimates, alongside estimates of the increased income generated by new ITES centers, we can
estimate the predicted enrollment increase resulting from income changes.
       This is done in Table 8. We begin by showing (in the top row) several estimates from existing
literature of the income elasticity of school enrollment. These are taken from a studies done in a
variety of developing countries, with varying methodologies (Alderman et al., 2001; Glick and Sahn,
2000; Glewwe and Jacoby, 2004; Orazem and King, 2007). In the second row, we show our estimate
of the percentage increase in income generated by ITES centers; this is the same in all columns.
Details of this calculation are in Appendix A. This increase is extremely small: about 0.57%.
Although ITES centers pay quite well, they simply do not employ a large number of people, so the
income increase is quite limited.
       The first and second rows together allow us to estimate the expected change in enrollment
given the change in income. The predicted percent increase in enrollment ranges from 0.17% to
0.84%. Our actual enrollment increase is 5.5%, an order of magnitude larger; put simply, even at the
largest elasticity estimates in the literature, it is unlikely that much more than a tenth of the effect is
explained by income increases. Unless the relationship between ITES center income and school
enrollment is somehow very different than that between regular income and school enrollment, the
vast majority of the enrollment change must be driven by something other than changes in income.23


  23
    Since the increases we see in schooling are primarily driven by increases in English schooling, it is possible to argue
that there is some other income elasticity for English schooling particularly, which is higher than the income elasticity
than schooling more generally. This seems unlikely; the income elasticity of English schooling would have to be 25.6, or
more than twenty times higher than the highest estimate for income elasticity of schooling in the literature.




                                                            22
      Similar to the case of population, an auxiliary concern is that the ITES center brings other
businesses, which also increase income. It is more difficult to rule this out than in the population
case, since this could occur even though population does not change. However, it is worth noting,
again, that the fact that we do not see evidence of pre-trends suggests that these new businesses
would need to arrive at exactly the same time as the ITES centers. In addition, given the very small
share of the effect which is plausibly explained by ITES center income, in order for income overall to
explain a larger share, these other businesses would need to swamp the ITES centers in their income
contribution.




5    Mechanisms: Actual Changes in Returns Versus Changes in
     Information

Based on the results in Section 4, we draw several conclusions. The introduction of an ITES center
to an area results in an increase in school enrollment and this increase is concentrated in
English-language schools. The observed increase does not appear to be driven by mechanical changes
in the number of schools, population or income. Most importantly, these changes are very localized:
ITES centers even slightly further away have a limited or zero impact on enrollment. The
concentration of the impacts in English-language schools, the absence of pre-trends and the rejection
of mechanical impacts driving our results, lead us to argue that the effects we observe reflect
responses to changes in the perceived value of education after the introduction of new local job
opportunities.
      In this section we provide some initial evidence on whether these changes reflect changes in
actual returns to education resulting from the local job opportunities, or whether they reflect
increases in information about returns to education with limited change in the actual returns. This
distinction is potentially important for thinking about the policy implications of these results. If
these change reflect changes in actual returns, this suggests that in the long term we expect
increasing education to be limited to areas where new job opportunities arise. In contrast, if the
effects reflect increasing information, then policies which inform people about job opportunities (as
in Jensen, 2009) may be effective in increasing schooling. In this section we discuss this distinction
and provide several pieces of evidence which, we argue, suggest that the changes in actual returns


                                                   23
from such local changes are very limited. By extension, this suggests the information story is a more
plausible explanation. However, we caution that this analysis is much more speculative than the
central results shown above.
      To fix ideas, consider the simplest model of schooling decision-making in this context with no
information asymmetries. Assume there are two locations, A and B, both of which begin with no
ITES centers and otherwise identical job opportunities. Assume education is a binary choice, with
wage returns WE representing the increased lifetime wages from becoming educated, and assume
costs of education are the same in both areas. At some date, an ITES center is introduced into area
A and (because we are assuming there are no information asymmetries) it is immediately observable
to individuals in both areas. The existence of this center increases the wage returns to education to
WˆE > WE while education costs remain the same.
      For individuals in area A, the value of education increases by WˆE − WE , the full difference in
educated wages before and after the new job opportunities. For individuals in area B, however, the
increase is less because to take advantage of the new jobs, they would need to migrate to area A;
denote the cost of migration CM . For these individuals, the increase in the value of education is
WˆE − WE − CM . Assuming that CM is positive, we expect the reaction of individuals in area B to be
smaller than area A; how much smaller depends on the size of CM .
      If the relevant costs of migration are very large in our context, then it is plausible that the
impacts we observe reflect changes in actual returns prompted by ITES center introduction. In
contrast, if migration costs seem to be small over the relevant distances, then this is less plausible.
The obvious alternative is a model with information asymmetries which could explain differences in
response with no difference in CM by simply positing that the perceived increase in returns is lower
in the non-local area due to lack of information.
      The effects we observe in the data are very localized; given this, the relevant costs of migration
are between very local areas. Recall that we argue in Section 4 that the impact of ITES centers falls
to zero when we look at those introduced in PIN codes even a few kilometers away. This is consistent
with the actual-returns story only if migration is limited over even this very small distance. We
argue this is unlikely.
      First, based on data from a household surveys (the National Family and Health Survey), we
find that migration among young, high-education individuals (i.e. those who might work in ITES


                                                    24
centers) is actually quite common. Among working men aged 20-35 with at least a secondary school
education, 30.3% have moved in the last five years. For women (again, limiting to those working,
aged 20-35 and with a secondary school education), this figure is 25.7%. Although we cannot observe
how far they moved, or whether they moved for work, this does suggest it is not unrealistic to expect
migration for work as a possibility. This relatively high mobility is confirmed in the census. In the
2001 Census, 29.9% of persons were living in a town other than that of their birth, with most of
these migrants remaining in the same district. For men, the most common reason for migration was
work (37.6%).
      Second, given how localized the impacts are, it is not even clear that an accurate measure of
CM should necessarily include the cost of moving to a new location. Banerjee et al. (2001) shows
that the average commuter in Thane, India travels 30 minutes (on foot) to their job; this amounts to
about 1.5 miles. Roughly 20% of individuals in their sample travel more than 4 miles. To the extent
these figures are similar in our areas, this suggests that the impact of ITES centers falls off to zero
even within reasonable commuting distances, where the cost of “migration” would only involve
commuting costs.
      Together, this evidence suggests that the differential change in returns to schooling for people
living right in the same neighborhood as the new ITES center and those living a few miles away is
probably not very large. Migration is fairly common, and even without moving their home, people
could work a few miles away while still living in their old home. This suggests that the effects of
ITES centers we observe probably do not reflect changes in actual returns to schooling and, by
extension, may reflect changes in perceptions about returns to schooling.
      As a final note, the perceived returns story is also more consistent with the magnitude of our
results. We find a total enrollment increase of roughly 400 students for each ITES center added;
weighted by schools, the median ITES center added has 200 employees. The fact that the additional
enrollment outweighs the additional jobs also makes it less likely that these changes reflect responses
to actual returns to schooling. It is important to be clear, however, that the conclusions in this
section are necessarily much more speculative than the primary results.




                                                   25
6    Conclusion

In this paper we argue that the introduction of ITES centers in India have large impacts on school
enrollment, and these impacts are largely concentrated in the very local area around the ITES
center. We argue this effect is causal, and is not driven by pre-trends or mechanical changes in
number of schools, population or income. The very local nature of our analysis and the fine timing of
the effects are helpful in ruling out the concern that pre-trends in other variables drive the impacts
we see. Further, we provide some suggestive evidence that the very localized nature of the impacts
may reflect limited information about non-local job opportunities; we argue this is more likely than
the claim that these new job opportunities only impact local returns to schooling.
      These results relate to a larger literature on promoting schooling increases in the developing
world. To get a sense of magnitude, we can compare the results here to other interventions designed
to increase schooling. Our overall estimate indicates that an additional ITES center prompts a 5.7%
increase in school enrollment; based on an enrollment rate of around 80% this amounts to an increase
in enrollment rate of around 4.1 percentage points. This number is comparable to enrollment effects
of other interventions designed to increase schooling in the developing world. For example, the
conditional cash transfers in PROGRESA increased schooling 3.4-3.6 percentage points (Schultz,
2004). A program in Kenya which provided school uniforms to girls in Kenya (worth about 1.75% of
average yearly income) increased enrollment by 6 percentage points (Evans, Kremer and Ngatia,
2008). Miguel and Kremer (2004) found that administering deworming drugs decreased absence by 7
percentage points, although they do not report effects on enrollment.
      From a policy standpoint, our results may provide support for interventions which inform
students about returns to schooling (as in Jensen, 2009). In the absence of this type of policy, we
would expect gains in enrollment to be concentrated around areas with local ITES centers; to the
extent that one accepts the argument in Section 5, this concentration could be limited by broader
information sharing. This is also consistent with the findings in Jensen (2010). An important caveat
to this policy argument is that our result hinge on the fact that jobs in ITES centers require
additional education; Atkin (2009) finds that growth in the export sector in Mexico actually leads to
school dropout since export jobs pay well but do not require schooling.




                                                  26
References
Alderman, Peter F. Orazem Harold and Elizabeth M. Paterno, “School Quality, School
    Cost, and the Public/Private School Choices of Low-Income Households in Pakistan,” Journal
    of Human Resources, 2001, 36 (2), 304–326.

Atkin, David, “Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico,” mimeo, Yale
    University, 2009.

Burde, Dana and Leigh L. Linden, “The Effect of Proximate Schools: A Randomized Controlled
   Trial in Afghanistan,” Mimeo, Columbia University, December 2009.

Chaudhury, F. Halsey Rogers Karthik Muralidharan Michael Kremer Nazmul and
   Jeffrey Hammer, “Teacher Absence in India: A Snapshot,” Journal of the European Economic
   Association, 2005, 3 (2-3).

Dossani, Rafiq and Martin Kenney, “The Next Wave of Globalization? Exploring the
   Relocation of Service Provision to India,” Working Paper 156, 2004.

Duflo, Esther, “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia:
    Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4).

    , Rema Hanna, and Stephen Ryan, “Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come to
    School,” Mimeo, MIT, 2009.

Evans, David, Michael Kremer, and Muthoni Ngatia, “The Impact of Distributing School
   Uniforms on Children’s Education in Kenya,” mimeo, World Bank, 2008.

Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, “Technical Change and Human Capital Returns and
    Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolution,” American Economic Review, 1996, 86 (4),
    931–953.

Freeman, Richard, The Overeducated American, New York: Academic Press, 1976.

Glewwe, Paul and Hanan G. Jacoby, “Economic growth and the demand for education: is there
   a wealth effect?,” Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 74 (1), 33–51.

Glick, Peter and David E. Sahn, “Schooling of girls and boys in a West African country: the
    effects of parental education, income, and household structure,” Economics of Education
    Review, 2000, 19, 63–87.

Griliches, Zvi, “Education, Human Capital, and Growth: A Personal Perspective,” Journal of
    Labor Economics, 1997, 15, S330–S344.

Heckman, James, Private Sector Skill Formation: International Comparisons, University of
   Chicago Press, 1993.

Jensen, Robert, “Economic Opportunities and Gender Differences in Human Capital: an
    Experimental Test for India,” Mimeo, UCLA, 2010.

    , “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, Forthcoming.



                                              27
     and Emily Oster, “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s Status in India,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 465–476.

Kane, Thomas, “College Entry by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College Costs, Family
   Background and the Returns to Education,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (5),
   878–911.

Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
   Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (1), 35–78.

Kremer, Michael, “Randomized Evaluations of Educational Programs in Developing Countries:
   Some Lessons,” American Economic Review, 2003, 92 (2).

LaFerrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea, “Soap Operas and Fertility:
   Evidence from Brazil,” mimeo, University of Bocconi, 2009.

Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health
   in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (1), 159–217.

Mirchandani, Kiran, “Practices of Global Capital: gaps, cracks, and ironies in transnational call
   centres in India,” Global Networks, 2004, 4 (4), 355–373.

Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig, “Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World:
   Caste, Gender, and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy,” American Economic Review,
   2006, 96 (4).

NASSCOM, “Strategic Review 2004,” New Delhi: National Association of Software and Service
   Companies, 2004, pp. 185–194.

    , “Strategic Review 2010,” New Delhi: National Association of Software and Service Companies,
    2010.

Ng, Cecelia and Swasti Mitter, “Valuing Women’s Voices: Call Center Workers in Malaysia and
    India,” Gender and Technology Development, 2005, 9, 209–233.

Noronha, Ernesto and Premilla D’Cruz, “Engaging the professional: organising call centre
   agents in India,” Industrial Relations Journal, 2009, 40 (3), 215–234.

Orazem, Peter and Elizabeth M. King, “Schooling in Developing Countries: The Roles of
   Supply, Demand and Government Policy,” Iowa State University, Department of Economics
   Working Paper 07019, 2007.

Schultz, Paul, “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican PROGRESA Poverty
    Program,” Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 74 (1), 199–250.

Shastry, Gauri Kartini, “Human Capital Response to Globalization: Education and Information
    Technology in India,” mimeo, Wellesley College, 2010.

World Bank, World Development Indicators 2009, The World Bank, 2009.




                                                28
                                                                                                                                Figure 1:
                                                                                                              Distribution of ITES Center Founding Dates
                                        40




                                        35




                                        30
Number of Call Centers




                                        25




                                        20




                                        15




                                        10




                                                                     5




                                                                     0
                                                                                      Before 1990   1991    1993     1995       1997        1999          2001   2003          2005          2007


                     Notes: This figure shows the distribution of ITES center founding dates among centers in our sample.




                                                                                                                                    Figure 2:
                                                                                                                   Impact of ITES Centers on School Enrollment
                                                                                        0.1




                                                                                       0.08
                         Log Enrollment Residual, Year FE Removed, Relative to 2004




                                                                                                                                                                                      Add Center in 2005
                                                                                       0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                      Add Center in 2006

                                                                                                                                                                                      Always Center
                                                                                       0.04

                                                                                                                                                                                      Never Center


                                                                                       0.02




                                                                                         0
                                                                                          2003             2004              2005                  2006                 2007                    2008


                                                                                      -0.02




                                                                                      -0.04




                                                                                      -0.06


        Notes: This figure shows changes in enrollment over time for four balanced panels of schools. All enrollment numbers are residuals from a regression of log enrollment on year
        fixed effects and values represent changes relative to the residual values in 2004. The year 2004 refers to the 2004-2005 school year (beginning in June 2004, ending in April 2005);
        enrollment is recorded as of September 2004. Schools are coded as adding a center in 2005 if an ITES center is founded in the area any time during 2005.




                                                                                                                                       29
                                 Table 1: DISE Summary Statistics

                        Panel A: Years of Coverage and Number of Schools
                                                Andhra Pradesh      Karntaka      Tamil Nadu
             Years of Data Coverage          2004-2007   2001-2007                2003-2007
             Number of Schools in:
              2001-02                                      27,136
              2002-03                                      43,409
              2003-04                                      44,636                   43,662
              2004-05                          59,121      48,515                   48,391
              2005-06                          89,474      50,207                   48,283
              2006-07                          99,017      50,889                   50,696
              2007-08                          98,485      52,369                   51,548
                              Panel B: School Summary Statistics
                                                      Mean          Std. Dev.    Observations
             Total Enrollment                         143.8           166.4        905,838
             Grade 1 Enrollment                       40.0            47.3         905,838
             Grade 3 Enrollment                       38.5            47.6         905,838
             Grade 5 Enrollment                       37.6            49.7         905,838
             Grade 7 Enrollment                       27.7            67.6         905,838
             Girl Enrollment                          69.4            88.9         905,838
             Boy Enrollment                           74.4            96.4         905,838
             % Classrooms in Good Condition           70.7            37.2         905,838
             % Schools with Electricity               49.0            50.0         905,838
             % Schools with Boundary Walls            51.3            50.0         905,838
             Teach in English (0/1)                   0.11            0.32         905,717
             Total School-Age Population              163.1           1,404        255,355
Notes: Panel A shows years of data coverage and summary statistics by state for the three states in our data
set. Panel B shows summary statistics on enrollment and school characteristics for the sample of schools used
in the analysis. Population is recorded by the schools for only a subset of schools and years.




                                                     30
                             Table 2: ITES Center Summary Statistics

                             Panel A: Number of ITES Centers By State
                                                       Number of ITES Centers
                                                  Including Cities Excluding Cities
                Andhra Pradesh                          100               74
                Karnataka                               144              121
                Tamil Nadu                              157               65
                          Panel B: Number of ITES Centers by Pin Code
                                                          Number of Pin Codes
                Number of ITES Centers             Including Cities Excluding Cities
                0                                       5,219
                1                                         68              47
                2                                         29              22
                3                                         12              10
                4                                         11               8
                5+                                        25               5
                             Panel C: Number of Schools by Category
                                                          Number of Schools
                Never had a ITES Center                        238,986
                Has Same Number of ITES Centers                  172
                Has Change in Number of ITES Centers             408
                           Panel D: ITES Center Survey Results (n=281)
                Median Number of Employees                                 80
                Median Age                                                 28
                Share with Voice Employees                                .658
                Share with English Voice Employees                        .658
                Share Employees with Children                             .098
                Share Employees Relocated for Work                        .116
Notes: This table shows summary statistics for our sample of ITES centers. Location (PIN code) and founding
year were collected in a primary survey; only centers with both location and founding date were included in the
sample. Panel D reports data from a phone survey which covered 70% of these centers and asked more detailed
questions on employees and services.




                                                      31
                               Table 3: Placement of ITES Centers

    Dependent Variable:             Number of ITES Centers, 2007     Add ITES Center During Sample
                                     (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)
    Ever Had Electricity             -.0002           -.0001          -.0002            .0001
                                    (.0005)          (.0005)         (.0003)           (.0003)
    Urban                           .010∗∗∗          .010∗∗∗         .004∗∗∗           .004∗∗∗
                                     (.001)           (.001)          (.001)            (.001)
    Any English School (0/1)        .007∗∗∗          .006∗∗∗         .003∗∗∗           .003∗∗∗
                                    (.0008)          (.0008)         (.0004)           (.0004)
    Log Enroll. First Survey Year   -.00005           -.0001         .000001            -.0001
                                    (.0001)          (.0002)         (.0001)           (.0001)
    State Fixed Effects                NO              YES              NO               YES
    R-squared                        0.002             0.003           .002              .002
    Observations                     71,667           71,667          71,890            71,890
Notes: This table shows the effects of village characteristics on ITES center placement. The left hand side
variable in Columns (1) and (2) is the number of ITES centers in 2007; in Columns (3) and (4) it is whether
any centers were added during the sample period. Standard Errors in Parentheses, clustered at the village
level.∗ significant at 10% ∗∗ significant at 5% ∗∗∗ significant at 1%




                                                    32
                      Table 4: Effect of ITES Centers on School Enrollment

          Dependent Variable:                       Log Enrollment
                         Panel A: Number of ITES Centers in PIN Code
                 Sample:                         All Schools
                                                          In Village with Any                  Ever Had an
                                                             English Schools                  ITES Center
              Controls:          Standard District Trends       Standard                        Standard
                                     (1)         (2)                (3)                             (4)
                                        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
        Number of ITES Centers     .057       .043                .070∗∗                         .109∗∗∗
                                   (.024)      (.015)             (.028)                          (.035)
            Observations          918,136     918,136            276,044                          2,123
                             Panel B: Any ITES Center in PIN Code
                 Sample:                         All Schools
                                                         In Village with Any  Ever Had an
                                                            English Schools  ITES Center
               Controls:        Standard District Trends       Standard        Standard
                                    (1)         (2)                (3)             (4)
                                        ∗          ∗∗                  ∗
            Any ITES Center       .055        .034               .070             .108
                                  (.034)      (.017)             (.041)         (.066)
              Observations       918,136     918,136            276,044          2,123
                   Panel C: Number of ITES Centers in Neighboring PIN Codes
                 Sample:                         All Schools          In Village with Any      Ever Had an
                                                                         English Schools      ITES Center
                Controls:             Standard      District Trends         Standard            Standard
                                         (1)              (2)                  (3)                 (4)
        ITES Centers in Village        .052∗∗           .039∗∗∗             .063∗∗∗               .099∗∗
                                        (.026)           (.015)              (.023)               (.039)
      # ITES Centers in 1st, 2nd      .037∗∗∗           .039∗∗∗             .048∗∗∗                .064
           Nearest Neighbors           (.013)            (.011)              (.012)               (.079)
      # ITES Centers in 3rd-5th         .013              .008                .019               -.038∗∗
           Nearest Neighbors           (.013)            (.009)              (.012)                .017
              Observations            918,136         918,136               276,044            2,123
      Standard controls: School fixed effects, time-varying school plant characteristics, year
      dummies interacted with dummies for state, urban, and English language school in village.
      District Trend Controls: Standard controls plus district-specific trends.
Notes: This table shows our primary estimates of the impact of ITES centers on school enrollment. The
independent variable measures the number of ITES centers in the same PIN code as the school. Columns 1-2
include all schools. Column 3 is limited to villages with any English schools. Column 4 is limited to schools
which ever have an ITES center in their PIN code (either always have the same number or change during the
sample). Standard Errors in Parentheses.∗ significant at 10% ∗∗ significant at 5% ∗∗∗ significant at 1%. Standard
errors are clustered at the village level in Columns (1), (3) and (4); clustered errors could not be estimated when
district trends are included in Column (2).




                                                         33
                                      Table 5: Effects of Pretrends

         Dependent Variable:                        Log Enrollment
                           Panel A: Number of ITES Centers Next Year
               Sample:                       All Schools            In Village with Any       Ever Had an
                                                                       English Schools       ITES Center
              Controls:            Standard     District Trends           Standard            Standard
                                    (1)           (2)              (3)                             (4)
                                        ∗            ∗∗
             ITES Centers         .054         .040             .065∗∗                          .099∗∗
                                  (.028)       (.018)           (.033)                          (.042)
       ITES Centers Next Year      .006          .005             .007                            .018
                                  (.018)       (.017)           (.020)                          (.024)
       p-value, This Year=Next    0.234         0.261            0.207                           0.163
             Observations        918,136      918,136          276,044                           2,123
                         Panel B: Trends Leading Up to ITES Center Entry
               Sample:                       All Schools            In Village with Any       Ever Had an
                                                                       English Schools       ITES Center
              Controls:            Standard     District Trends           Standard            Standard
                                        (1)              (2)                   (3)                 (4)
            ITES Centers             .063∗∗∗           .060∗                .068∗∗∗             .084∗∗∗
                                      (.019)           (.032)                (.020)              (.027)
          Years Until Entry            .002             .005                 -.0004               -.008
                                      (.007)           (.008)                (.009)              (.013)
             Observations           918,136           918,136               276,044              2,123
       Standard controls: School fixed effects, time-varying school plant characteristics, year
       dummies interacted with dummies for state, urban, and English language school in village.
       District Trend Controls: Standard controls plus district-specific trends.
Notes: This table tests whether there are pre-trends in the data: do future ITES centers predict current
enrollment? The independent variable in Panel A measures the number of ITES centers in the same PIN code
as the school either in the current year or the following year. The independent variable in Panel B measured
the number of ITES centers in the same PIN code as the school, along with the linear trend in enrollment
leading up to the entry of an ITES center. Columns 1-2 include all schools. Column 3 is limited to villages with
any English schools. Column 4 is limited to schools which ever have an ITES center in their PIN code (either
always have the same number or change during the sample). Standard Errors in Parentheses.∗ significant at 10%
∗∗
   significant at 5% ∗∗∗ significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered at the village level in Columns (1), (3)
and (4); clustered errors could not be estimated when district trends are included in Column (2).




                                                       34
                             Table 6: Effects by Language of Instruction

    Dependent Variable:                                 Log Enrollment
    Sample:                                       All Schools
                                                            In Village with Any  Ever Had an
                                                               English Schools  ITES Center
                Panel A: Impact of ITES Centers by School Language of Instruction
    Controls:                       Standard District Trends    Standard         Standard
    # Centers × Local Lang.            -.011       -.023           -.014            .030
                                      (.022)      (.019)          (.030)           (.037)
    # Centers ×English               .149∗∗∗     .133∗∗∗         .149∗∗∗          .213∗∗∗
                                      (.039)      (.022)          (.038)           (.048)
    p-value, English=Local Language   0.000       0.000           0.001            0.001
    Observations                     918,014     918,014         275,981           2,121
           Panel B: Impact of ITES Centers by Detailed School Language of Instruction
    Controls:                     Standard District Trends                     Standard         Standard
    # Centers × Local Lang.          -.011       -.023                            -.014            .033
                                    (.022)      (.019)                           (.030)           (.037)
    # Centers ×Some English         .129∗∗     .118∗∗∗                           .125∗∗          .181∗∗∗
                                    (.058)      (.038)                           (.058)           (.061)
                                        ∗∗∗
    # Centers ×All English         .160        .142∗∗∗                          .162 ∗∗∗
                                                                                                 .235∗∗∗
                                    (.044)      (.028)                           (.043)           (.053)
    Observations                   918,014     918,014                          275,981           2,121
       Panel C: Impact of Voice and All ITES Centers by School                 Language of Instruction
    Controls:                             Standard    District Trends          Standard             Standard
    # Non-Voice ×Local Lang.                .091∗∗         .094∗                  .099∗              .128∗∗∗
                                            (.040)         (.056)                (.053)               (.036)
    # Non-Voice ×English                   .124∗∗∗        .104∗∗∗               .139∗∗∗              .182∗∗∗
                                            (.009)         (.039)                (.010)               (.061)
    # Voice ×Local Lang.                    -.036∗        -.056∗∗                -.051∗                -.019
                                            (.021)         (.023)                (.027)               (.052)
    # Voice ×English                        .164∗∗        .147∗∗∗                .158∗∗              .205∗∗∗
                                            (.070)         (.030)                (.071)               (.074)
    p-value:V.English - V.Local =            0.052         0.015                  0.068               0.099
    N.V.English-N.V.Local
    Observations                          917,955        917,955              275,969                 2,062
    Standard controls: School fixed effects, time-varying school plant characteristics, year
    dummies interacted with dummies for state, urban, and English language school in village.
    District Trend Controls: Standard controls plus district-specific trends.
Notes: This table shows the impact of ITES centers by school language of instruction. Panel A shows the
differential effects for English and local language schools. Panel B shows the effect for local language schools,
schools with some English instruction, and schools with exclusive English instruction. Panel C shows the effects
by school language for voice and non-voice ITES centers. Voice centers are defined as ITES centers where at
least half of employees handle voice calls. Columns 1-2 include all schools. Column 3 is limited to villages with
any English schools. Column 4 is limited to schools which ever have an ITES center in their PIN code. Standard
Errors in Parentheses.∗ significant at 10% ∗∗ significant at 5% ∗∗∗ significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered
at the village level in Columns (1), (3) and (4); clustered errors could not be estimated when district trends are
included in Column (2).

                                                        35
                              Table 7: Robustness: Number of Schools

    Dependent Variable:                                  Count of Schools in Village
    Sample:                               All Schools               Villages with Any             Ever Had an
                                                                 English-Language Schools         ITES Center
    Controls:                    Standard     District Trends              Standard                Standard
    Number of ITES Centers          .007            .010                      .001                   .014
                                   (.053)           (.020)                   (.104)                 (.092)
    Observations                  356,796          356,796                  32,301                   477
    Standard controls: Village fixed effects, time-varying school plant characteristics,
    year dummies interacted with dummies for state, urban, and English language school in village.
    District Trend Controls: Standard controls plus district-specific trends.
Notes: This table shows the effect of ITES centers on number of schools in a village. Columns 1-2 include all
schools. Column 3 is limited to villages with any English schools. Column 4 is limited to schools which ever
have an ITES center in their PIN code (either always have the same number or change during the sample).
Standard Errors in Parentheses.∗ significant at 10% ∗∗ significant at 5% ∗∗∗ significant at 1%. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level in Columns (1), (3) and (4); clustered errors could not be estimated when district
trends are included in Column (2).




                                 Table 8: Robustness: Income Effects

                                                                          (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)
         Existing Estimates of Income Elasticity                         0.25      0.4       1       1.25
         Estimate of % Change in Income from ITES Introduction          0.57%    0.57%    0.57%     0.57%
         Predicted Percent Increase in Enrollment                       0.14%    0.23%    0.57%     0.72%
         Actual Increase in Enrollment                                   5.5%     5.5%     5.5%      5.5%
         Percent of Actual Enrollment Increase Explained                 2.5%     4.2%    10.4%     13.1%
Notes: Income elasticity estimates from (1) Glewwe and Jacoby (2004), (2) Glick and Sahn (2000), (3) Orazem
and King (2007), and (4) Alderman et al. (2001). Appendix A reports details on how we calculate the estimated
% change in income from the ITES introduction. The fourth row reports the percent of the actual enrollment
increase explained, not percentage points.




                                                        36
Appendix Tables
              Appendix Table 1: Enrollment Effects by Demographic Group, State

                      Dependent Variable:                    Log Enrollment
                                                  Number of     Standard Observations
                                                 ITES Centers     Error
                                                          ∗∗
                      (1)   Boy Enrollment           .059         .023      902,616
                      (2)   Girl Enrollment          .050∗∗       .024      907,438
                      (3)   Grades 1-2 Enrol.         .034        .027      828,895
                      (4)   Grades 3-4 Enrol.        .069∗∗       .035      817,038
                      (5)   Grades 5-6 Enrol.         .043        .029      857,209
                                                         ∗∗∗
                      (6)   Grades 7-8 Enrol.       .097          .030      341,845
                      (7)   Andhra Pradesh            .031        .045      359,150
                      (8)   Karnataka                 .066        .071      317,225
                      (9)   Tamil Nadu              .082∗∗∗       .028      241,761

Notes: This table the coefficient on number of ITES centers from regression of the form in Column 1 of Table
4 but with variation in the left hand side variable. The first six rows show the effect on enrollment for different
gender and age demographic groups. The last two three rows divide the sample by state. All regressions
include the standard controls: School fixed effects, time-varying school plant characteristics, year dummies
interacted with dummies for state, urban, and english language school in village. Standard Errors in
Parentheses, clustered at the village level.∗ significant at 10% ∗∗ significant at 5% ∗∗∗ significant at 1%




                                                        37
              Appendix Table 2: Effects on Enrollment with Population Controls

       Dependent Variable:                           Log Enrollment
                         Panel A: Limited Sample, No Population Control
              Sample:                    All Schools              In Village with Any         Ever Had an
                                                                English-Language Schools     ITES Center
             Controls:           Standard    District Trends            Standard               Standard
                                    (1)             (2)                     (3)                   (4)
     Number of ITES Centers        .076∗         .054∗∗∗                  .092∗                  .137
                                  (.043)          (.018)                  (.051)                (.126)
           Observations           327,740        327,740                120,547                 1,075
                          Panel B: Limited Sample, with Population Control
              Sample:                    All Schools              In Village with Any         Ever Had an
                                                                English-Language Schools     ITES Center
             Controls:           Standard    District Trends            Standard               Standard
                                     (1)            (2)                     (3)                   (4)
     Number of ITES Centers        .074∗        0.052∗∗∗                  .091∗                  .131
                                   (.043)         (.018)                  (.050)                (.121)
     Log Village Population       .006∗∗∗        .006∗∗∗                   .004                  -.019
                                   (.002)        (.0008)                  (.003)                (.029)
           Observations           327,740         327,740                 120,547              1,075
     Standard controls: School fixed effects, time-varying school plant characteristics, year
     dummies interacted with dummies for state, urban, and english language school in village.
     District Trend Controls: Standard controls plus district-specific trends.

Notes: This table shows the impact of ITES centers controlling for population. Population is reported by a
subset of school-years, and is reported by the school as the village population. In cases where the school does
not report population but other schools in the village do report population we use the average population
among reporter schools as population for all schools in the village. Panel A does not control for population but
limit the sample to school-years in which population is observed. Standard Errors in Parentheses.∗ significant
at 10% ∗∗ significant at 5% ∗∗∗ significant at 1%




                                                       38
Appendix A: Calculating ITES Center Impact on Income
       The second row of Table 8 reports an estimated percentage increase in income due to ITES
centers. We use a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation to generate this number. Although this is
very unlikely to be perfectly accurate, we argue it’s an upper bound on what the impact might be.
To generate this number, we focus on the median PIN code and the median ITES center (in terms of
size). We observe the number of children enrolled in school in the median PIN code; this number is
roughly 10,000. We use this number to estimate the average number of people in the median PIN
code. To do this, we note that the Indian census indicates children aged 6-12 make up roughly 15%
of the overall population, and from the National Family and Health Survey (which is consistent with
other sources) we observe that roughly 85% of children in this age range are enrolled in school.
Combining these figures we argue that roughly 12.75% of individuals are children enrolled in school,
so we expect the median income to have roughly 78,000 people.
       The median per capita income in these states is $659 (Ministry of Statistics and Program
Implementation, 2008). Applying this value to the population, we estimate total income of the
median PIN code at about $51 million.
       The median ITES center in our sample has 140 employees and based on a survey of a
sub-sample of ITES centers, pays roughly $2100 per year in starting wages. This is more than twice
the median per capita income. We calculate the increase in income due to ITES centers assuming
that the income from ITES center employees is simply added to total income in the PIN code; we
note this is likely to be an overestimate, since these individuals probably substitute into ITES center
jobs away from some lower paying job, not from doing nothing.
       We calculate the increased income, and then calculate the percentage increase implied by this;
the resulting figure is 0.57% as reported in Table 8.




                                                  39
