NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN POLLUTION TAX REBATES PROTECT LOW-INCOME FAMILIES? THE
EFFECTS OF RELATIVE WAGE RATES
Don Fullerton
Holly Monti
Working Paper 15935
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15935

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Kathy Baylis, Garth Heutel, Dan Karney, Gib
Metcalf, and Rob Williams. This paper is part of the NBER research program in Environmental and
Energy Economics. Any views expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Don Fullerton and Holly Monti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Can Pollution Tax Rebates Protect Low-Income Families? The Effects of Relative Wage
Rates
Don Fullerton and Holly Monti
NBER Working Paper No. 15935
April 2010
JEL No. H22,H23,Q52,Q58
ABSTRACT
Pollution taxes are believed to burden low-income households that spend a greater than average share
of income on pollution-intensive goods. Some propose to offset that effect by returning revenue to
low-income workers via reduced labor tax. We build analytical general equilibrium models with both
skilled and unskilled labor, and we solve for expressions that show the change in the real net wage
of each group. A decomposition shows the effect of the tax rebate, the effect on the uses side of income
(higher product prices), and the effect on the sources side of income (relative wage rates). We also
include numerical examples. Even though the pollution tax injures both types of labor, we find that
returning all of the revenue to the low-skilled workers is still not enough to offset the effect of higher
product prices. Moreover, changing wage rates may further hurt low-skilled labor. In almost all of
our examples, the rebate of all revenue to low-skilled labor still does not prevent a reduction in their
overall real net wage.

Don Fullerton
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
BIF Box#30 (MC520)
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu
Holly Monti
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin TX 78712
odellha@eco.utexas.edu

Market-based pollution policies, such as taxes or tradable emissions permits, can
efficiently address environmental problems by forcing polluters to take into account the
full cost of pollution. In order to evaluate policies and determine the tradeoffs among
competing goals of economic efficiency and distributional objectives, it is important to
know not only the overall costs and benefits of environmental policies but also the effects
they have on different people. Additionally, the distribution of the costs depends on what
is done with any revenue. Emissions permits that are distributed freely to polluting firms
do not generate any government revenue, but pollution taxes or auctioned permits do.
The way in which the government spends this revenue or redistributes it to taxpayers
helps determine the final incidence of the policy.
One of the common arguments against pollution taxes is that households with
lower income tend to spend a larger fraction of their income on polluting or pollutionintensive goods, so a tax that raises the prices of polluting goods may disproportionately
hurt those with low income. However, a pollution tax may affect not only output prices,
but relative wage rates as well. To consider both the uses side and the sources side of
income, this paper employs a new analytical general equilibrium model in the spirit of
Harberger (1962) to solve for the incidence of a pollution tax when the government has a
revenue neutrality requirement. Unlike the standard Harberger model with labor and
capital, however, our simple model assumes two types of labor: skilled and unskilled
labor. Any exogenous shock such as a change in the pollution tax can change the
demand for skilled labor relative to unskilled labor, and thus can affect relative wage
rates. We assume that low-income unskilled workers spend a higher fraction of income
on the polluting good, and that government tries to offset this effect by using pollution
tax revenue to reduce pre-existing labor taxes on low-income unskilled workers. Then
we can solve for effects on each wage rate to determine the distribution of net burdens
from this overall tax reform. We show that this rebate is not enough to offset higher
prices for pollution-intensive goods such as gasoline, electricity, and home heating oil.
Moreover, changes in factor prices can further burden low-income families.
Related to this topic is a literature on the “double dividend”, the notion that an
environmental tax reform can clean up the environment and generate revenue to cut preexisting distortionary taxes. Several studies using analytical and computational general
equilibrium models have studied this question about revenue-neutral environmental

-2policy reform, but the question is about efficiency rather than distributional effects. 1
Although some of these studies solve for the change in wage rate, they do not discuss
equity issues and do not report whether the real low-skilled wage rises or falls.
A few papers do consider the distributional side of an environmental tax swap,
using computational models. Using data on the carbon content of different products and
the purchases of different income groups, Metcalf (1999, 2009) shows how an
environmental tax reform could be made less regressive or perhaps not regressive at all.
Using both annual income and lifetime income as measures of well-being, he finds that
the use of pollution tax revenue to reduce taxes for low-income households may be
distributionally neutral or even slightly progressive. Burtraw, Sweeney and Walls (2009)
also calculate incidence based on product price increases (without factor price changes).
Dinan and Rogers (2002) use a general equilibrium model with labor and capital, but they
do not show distributional effects on the sources side. They study the distributional
effects of a permit system that seeks a 15% decrease in carbon emissions, where the
permits are either auctioned off or given away. 2 West and Williams (2004) empirically
estimate the uses-side incidence of a gasoline tax under several scenarios, one of which is
using tax revenue to decrease the tax on labor. They find a gain in efficiency and a
decrease in the regressivity, but the gas tax is still not progressive. 3
To our knowledge, no paper in this literature employs analytical general
equilibrium models to analyze the distributional effects on both the uses side and sources
side from a revenue-neutral pollution tax, where the tax revenue is used to lower a preexisting labor tax (such as the U.S. payroll tax). A limitation of computational models is
that the specific result depends on assumptions about parameter values. In contrast, this
paper finds closed-form solutions for the change in the real unskilled wage and skilled
wage. Since these solutions hold for any parameter values, they show general conditions
under which the relative real wage ratio rises or falls. We also use plausible parameter
values to calculate burdens on each type of labor.
The model here builds upon the model of Fullerton and Heutel (2007), where
1

See Bovenberg and de Mooij (1994a, 1994b, 1998), Bovenberg and Van der Ploeg (1994), Parry (1995),
Goulder (1995), Bovenberg and Goulder (1997), Parry et al (1999), and Fullerton and Metcalf (2001).

2

They assume that government can use permit revenue to cut corporate taxes, to cut payroll taxes, or to
give households lump-sum rebates. The last scenario is the only one that might not be regressive.

3

Hassett et al (2009) emphasize redistribution on a lifetime basis and by region. Metcalf et al (2008) use a
computational model with tax shifting to labor and capital.

-3labor and capital are used in both sectors, and pollution is used in only one of them. They
assume one representative household, so they do not distinguish different expenditure
patterns, and they employ no revenue-neutral rebate. 4 As with their model, we assume
two inputs into production along with pollution, and no assumptions are made about the
functional form for production. Here, however, we distinguish two groups of households.
Instead of using labor and capital as the production inputs, this paper uses unskilled and
skilled labor, abstracting from the use of capital. Low-income unskilled workers spend a
higher fraction of income on pollution-intensive goods. Thus the focus remains on real
relative burdens borne by high and low wage earners, with a swap of a higher pollution
tax for a lower unskilled wage tax. All of the prior general equilibrium incidence studies
mentioned above consider labor to be one homogenous input. 5
Here, we allow for two different types of labor, where the wage for skilled
workers may rise or fall relative to the wage for unskilled labor. Other studies have
shown the effects on rising wage inequality from various exogenous shocks. Higher
demand for skilled labor relative to unskilled labor may occur with changes over time in
technology, trade patterns, globalization, labor force composition, and other exogenous
changes. 6 Similarly, a pollution tax could increase relative demand for skilled labor and
raise the equilibrium skilled wage rate, if firms substitute out of pollution and into skilled
labor. Conversely, it could increase the unskilled wage rate if firms substitute more into
unskilled labor. Which is more likely? These cross-price substitution parameters have
never been estimated, but we suggest that any major environmental policy reform is
likely to spur sophisticated abatement technologies that favor high-skilled labor.
Given the generality of our model, the pollution tax is not guaranteed to raise the
price of the dirty good, or even to reduce pollution. 7 Yet such possibilities do not merely
confirm the notion that "in general equilibrium, anything can happen." To avoid that

4

Instead, they assume that the government uses pollution tax revenue to purchase the two commodities in
the economy in the same proportion as do households.

5

In these prior models, some individuals may have a larger endowment of effective labor units, but every
labor unit earns the same wage rate. Therefore, individuals at all income levels with different endowments
are affected the same way when the single wage rate changes in response to an environmental tax.

6

Several papers focus on the role of skill-biased-technical-change and the effect on relative skilled and
unskilled wages, including Bound and Johnson (1992), Katz and Murphy (1991), and Berman et al. (1994).
Hanson and Harrison (1999) consider trade liberalization as an explanation for rising wage inequality, and
Autor et al. (2005) evaluate the effect of shifts in labor force composition.

7

Such possibilities were shown in Bovenberg and de Mooij (1998) and in Fullerton and Heutel (2007).

-4trap, we carefully categorize those perverse cases and show that they require extreme
parameter values that are highly unlikely. Our paper is not about perverse cases. Even
without those perverse cases, however, we demonstrate multiple ways in which lowincome workers might suffer despite receiving all of the tax rebate. We say nothing
about whether low-income families “ought” to be protected, only whether they can be
protected from a fall in their real net wage rate.
We decompose the change in their real net wage into the effect on their gross
wage, the effect of the tax rebate, and the effect of product prices. Both groups face
higher product prices, and yet we find that the return of all additional pollution tax
revenue just to the low-income group is still not enough to offset the effect of higher
product prices on their real net wage. One reason is that burdens on the two groups
exceed the pollution tax revenue (because of deadweight loss or “excess burden”). This
effect is not captured in papers mentioned above that focus just on product prices and
return of revenue. Moreover, we find that additional changes in relative wage rates may
offset or exacerbate that burden on low-skilled workers. Based on our data, the dirty
sector is low-skilled intensive, so the pollution tax reduces demand for low-skilled labor
and suppresses their wage. In addition, the low-skilled wage may fall if the pollution tax
induces substitution into high-skilled labor and out of low-skilled labor. Their relative
wage can only rise if low-skilled labor is a good enough substitute for pollution to offset
the fact that the polluting sector is low-skill intensive and the fact that the tax rebate is
not enough to offset their disproportionate spending on the dirty good. In almost all of
our numerical examples, the real net wage of low-income workers falls. Only in rare
cases would the return of revenue protect low-income workers.
The first section below presents the theoretical model. Section II shows solution
results and analyzes special cases in order to interpret them. Section III discusses these
results and the implications. Section IV undertakes a numerical calculation based on
those theoretical results, and Section V concludes.
I. The Model
The model presented here is similar to one in Fullerton and Heutel (2007), with
the addition of three features: we consider two household and labor types instead of one,
we model the government’s revenue neutrality condition, and we solve for the labor tax
reduction that exactly rebates the extra pollution tax revenue.

-5One household supplies high-wage skilled labor, while the other household
supplies low-wage unskilled labor. The low-income families spend a disproportionately
high fraction of income on pollution-intensive products like gasoline, electricity, and
heating oil (Metcalf 1999, 2009). We assume that government tries to offset their added
burden on the uses side by using the extra pollution tax revenue to lessen the payroll tax,
a pre-existing tax on the labor of low-wage families. The incidence of the new tax
system on the sources side is characterized by the proportional changes in the two wage
rates, in response to a small exogenous increase in the pollution tax. 8
The setting for the model is a perfectly competitive two-sector economy, with
production of a “clean” good, denoted by X, and a “dirty” good, denoted by Y. Skilled
and unskilled labor are used to produce both goods, and pollution is also an input in the
dirty sector. The outputs are taxed at rates τX and τY, so the prices faced by consumers
are pX(1+τX) and pY(1+τY), respectively. The constant returns to scale production
functions are X=X(LX, HX) and Y=X(LY, HY, Z), where L is low-skilled labor with
wage w, H is high-skilled labor with wage h, and Z is pollution. The use of pollution
is also taxed, so the price of pollution is simply its tax rate, τZ. 9 Both types of labor are
mobile between the two sectors, with fixed total amounts of each ( L and H ). Resource
constraints for these two inputs are LX + LY = L and H X + HY = H . Totally
differentiating the resources constraints yields
Hˆ X λ HX + Hˆ Y λ HY = 0

(1)

Lˆ X λLX + LˆY λLY = 0

(2)

where a hat indicates a proportional change ( Hˆ X = dH X /H X ), and λ ij is sector j’s
share of input i (e.g., λ HX = H X /H ).
Producers of X can substitute between skilled and unskilled labor according to an
elasticity of substitution, σ X . Rearranging the definition of σ X provides a behavioral
equation describing how producers of X respond to any change in input prices, pL and
8

We started this model with one type of labor and one type of capital, just as in Fullerton and Heutel
(2007) and many other papers back to Harberger (1962), but we soon realized that those two factors do not
clearly delineate who has high income or low income. The ratio of capital income to labor income plotted
against total income reveals a U-shaped pattern, primarily because low-income retirees may have no labor
income. A lifecycle model is way beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, the two types of labor in this
paper clearly identify who has high income or low income. Skilled labor differs from unskilled labor, the
ratio of their use may differ by industry, and either one might be a better substitute for pollution.

9

The pollution tax rate, τZ, is a per unit tax, whereas τX and τY are ad valorem tax rates.

-6pH, namely Hˆ X − Lˆ X = σ X ( pˆ L − pˆ H ) . These two input prices are the costs that producers
face and are gross-of-tax, so pL = w(1 + τ L ) and p H = h(1+ τ H ) . We assume that the
increased pollution tax τZ generates revenue used to lower τL, the wage tax on lowskilled labor. For simplicity, all other tax rates are assumed to stay constant (τX , τY , and

τH). Thus, the proportional change in the price of low-skilled labor is pˆ L = wˆ + τˆ L
where wˆ ≡ dw /w , but where we define τˆ L as dτ L /(1 + τ L ) . Since τ H does not
change, pˆ H = hˆ . Thus we have:
Hˆ X − Lˆ X = σ X ( wˆ + τˆ L − hˆ ) .

(3)

Because the dirty sector uses three factors of production, it has slightly more
complicated responses. The firms’ input demands are functions of input prices and
output. Following Mieszkowski (1972), differentiate these demand functions to get:

Hˆ Y = a HH pˆ H + a HL pˆ L + a HZ pˆ Z + Yˆ
Lˆ = a pˆ + a pˆ + a pˆ + Yˆ
Y

LH

H

LL

L

LZ

Z

Zˆ = aZH pˆ H + aZL pˆ L + aZZ pˆ Z + Yˆ
where aij is the elasticity of demand for factor i with respect to the price of factor j.
Then aij = eijθYj , where eij is the Allen elasticity of substitution between inputs i and j
(Allen, 1938), which is negative when the two inputs are complements and positive for
substitutes. Also, θYj is the share of sales revenue from Y that is used to purchase factor
j (e.g., θYH = h(1+ τ H )HY / pY Y ). In the case where a tax per unit of pollution is the only
price of pollution, then pZ = τ Z and pˆ Z = τˆ Z (where pˆ Z ≡ dpZ / pZ and τˆ Z ≡ dτ Z / τ Z ).
Substitute the Allen elasticities and the proportional price changes into the differentiated
factor demands above, and subtract the third equation from the first two:
Hˆ Y − Zˆ = θYH (e HH − eZH ) hˆ + θYL (e HL − eZL )( wˆ + τˆ L ) + θYZ (e HZ − eZZ )τˆ Z

(4)

LˆY − Zˆ = θYH (eLH − eZH )hˆ + θYL (eLL − eZL )( wˆ + τˆ L ) + θYZ (eLZ − eZZ )τˆ Z

(5)

These two equations represent how producers of Y react to changes in prices and tax
rates that are attributable to an exogenous increase in the pollution tax, τZ.
The perfect competition and constant returns to scale assumptions imply that sales
revenue in each sector equals the sum of payments to factors of production.
Differentiating these conditions, we have:

-7Xˆ + pˆ X = θ XH ( hˆ + Hˆ X ) + θ XL ( wˆ + τˆ L + Lˆ X )

(6)

Yˆ + pˆ Y = θYH ( hˆ + Hˆ Y ) + θYL ( wˆ + τˆ L + LˆY ) + θYZ (τˆ Z + Zˆ ) .

(7)

Then, using the perfect competition assumption, differentiate each sector’s
production function to describe how output quantities change with inputs:
Xˆ = θXH Hˆ X + θ XL Lˆ X

(8)

Yˆ = θYH Hˆ Y + θYL LˆY + θYZ Zˆ .

(9)

In order to discuss the distribution of net burdens in the simplest possible way, we
assume that the economy has two types of consumers, low-skilled and high-skilled
laborers, where subscripts L and H denote these groups (e.g. XL is the amount of good
X consumed by low-skilled workers). These two groups may spend on X and Y in
different proportions, but they have the same elasticity of substitution in utility, σU,
between X and Y. This simplifying assumption makes the model easier to solve, and
yet does not detract from the purpose of the paper to find effects on these two groups.
The elasticity of substitution has major impacts on economic efficiency, but it has only
second-order effects on burdens. The first-order impact of pˆ X and pˆ Y on the relative
burden of each group is the major pre-existing difference in the fraction of income that
each group spends on Y. Rearranging the definition of σU yields behavioral equations
that show how the two consumers’ demands respond to changes in output prices:
Xˆ L − YˆL = σ U ( pˆ Y − pˆ X )

(10)

Xˆ H − YˆH = σU ( pˆ Y − pˆ X )

(11)

The two goods are purchased by both types of workers. The total quantity of
good X can then be expressed as X = XL + XH, and similarly Y = YL + YH.
Differentiating these equations yields:

X
X
Xˆ = Xˆ L L + Xˆ H H
X
X

(12)

Y
Y
Yˆ = YˆL L + YˆH H .
Y
Y

(13)

The government budget constraint requires a fixed amount, G, matched by tax revenue:
G = τ Z Z + hτ H H + wτ L L + pY τ Y Y + pX τ X X .

-8Rather than specify direct government spending on X and Y, we say that the fixed
revenue G is returned to the two groups [δG to the high-income group, and (1-δ )G to
the low-income group]. Since G is fixed, these lump-sum transfers are fixed and do not
affect our results. Only the increase in pollution tax revenue is used to cut τL (leaving
G fixed). With the revenue neutrality condition (dG = 0) and the assumption that only
tax rates τZ and τL can change, we differentiate the government budget constraint and
rearrange to solve for the proportional change in the labor tax: 10

τˆ L =

1
[−Zτ Z (τˆ Z + Zˆ ) − H hτ H hˆ − τ L wˆ − pY τ Y Y ( pˆ Y + Yˆ ) − pX τ X X( Xˆ + pˆ X )] .
L pL

(14)

The two consumer groups allocate spending on the two goods according to their
preferences and budget constraints. For example, the budget constraint for skilled labor
is pX (1+ τ X )X H + pY (1+ τ Y )YH = h(H X + HY ) + δG. Of the two spending equations, one
is independent. The second can be derived from the first, using Eqs. (6) and (7).
Therefore, only one consumer group budget constraint is necessary, and differentiation of
the skilled labor budget constraint yields:
pX (1+ τ X )X H ( pˆ X + Xˆ H ) + pY (1+ τ Y )YH ( pˆ Y + YˆH ) = h(H X + HY ) hˆ .

(15)

Equations (1)-(15) are fifteen linear equations in sixteen unknowns: Hˆ X , Hˆ Y , Lˆ X ,

LˆY , wˆ , hˆ, pˆ X , Xˆ , Xˆ L , Xˆ H , pˆ Y , Yˆ , YˆL , YˆH , Zˆ , and τˆL . Good X is chosen as numeraire, so that
pˆ X = 0 . The model can be solved through successive substitution to obtain equations for

each of the remaining fifteen endogenous variables in terms of exogenous parameters and
the exogenous change in the pollution tax, τˆ Z .
II. Results

The variables of most interest are the price changes, to determine the relative
incidence on skilled and unskilled labor. Table 1 shows solutions for these selected
variables and the change in pollution, Zˆ .
The expressions for p̂H and p̂L are “closed form” solutions, because they contain
only parameters and the exogenous policy shock ( τˆ Z ), but the expression for ŵ contains

τˆL (which is endogenous). All of these solutions can be expressed just in terms of
10

Tax rates τX and τY are fixed, but changes in X and Y will affect revenue.

-9exogenous parameters and τˆ Z , but that would make the expressions much longer. For
example, a closed-form solution for Zˆ can be obtained by substituting expressions for
hˆ and wˆ + τˆ L into the Zˆ expression shown in Table 1, and that Zˆ can be used to

obtain closed-form expressions for τˆ L and wˆ .
Table 1: Proportional changes in prices, wage rates, and amount of pollution

θ θ
hˆ = pˆ H = XL YZ [ A(eHZ − eZZ ) − B (eLZ − eZZ ) − (γ H − γ L )(σ U N + J )]τˆZ
D
wˆ = pˆ L − τˆL =
pˆ Y =

θ XHθYZ
D

(16a)

[ A(eZZ − eHZ ) − B (eZZ − eLZ ) + (γ H − γ L )(σ U N + J )]τˆZ − τˆL

(16b)

(θYLθ XH − θYH θ XL )
θYZ [A(eZZ − e HZ ) − B(eZZ − eLZ ) + (γ H − γ L )(σU N + J)]τˆ Z + θYZ τˆ Z
D

1
Y
X
1
hH ( H − H )]ĥ
Zˆ = − [[θYH [β H (e HH − eZH ) + β L (eLH − eZH ) + σU N + J] −
YL X L
CH
C
+ θYL [β H (e HL − eZL ) + β L (eLL − eZL ) + σU N + J](wˆ + τˆ L )
+ θYZ [β H (e HZ − eZZ ) + β L (eLZ − eZZ ) + σU N + J]τˆ Z ]

τˆL = [

(16c)

(16d)

1+τL
][(− Zτ Z + TX (θ XH γ H + θ XLγ L ) − TY ) Zˆ + [− Zτ Z +
L pL

(16e)

TX θYZ (θ XH γ H (eHZ − eZZ ) + θ XLγ L (eLZ − eZZ )) − TYθYZ (1 + θYH (eHZ − eZZ ) + θYL (eLZ − eZZ ))]τˆZ
+ [− Hτ h + ML p + T ( F − θ ) + (T θ γ − T θ ) E + (T θ γ − T θ ) E ]hˆ]
H

L

Y

YH

X

XH

H

Y YH

H

X

XL L

Y YL

L

λ HY HY
λ
L
=
, γ L ≡ LY = Y , β H ≡ XX θ XH γ H + YY θYH , β L ≡ XX θ XLγ L + YY θYL ,
λ HX H X
λ LX LX
Y
A ≡ γ L β H + γ H (β L + Y θYZ ), B ≡ γ H β L + γ L (β H + YY θYZ ), C ≡ β H + β L + YY θYZ ,

where γ H ≡

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

D ≡ Cσ X + A[θ XH θYL (e HL − eLZ ) − θ XLθ XH (e HH − e HZ )] − B[θXH θYL (eLL − eLZ ) − θXLθYH (e HL − e HZ )]
1
Y
X
hH ( H − H )
− (γ H − γ L )(σ U N + J )(θ XH θYL − θ XLθYH ) − (γ H − γ L )
YL X L
CH
TX ≡ pX τ X X, TY ≡ pY τ Y Y , F ≡
E H ≡ θYH (e HH − eZH ) −
N≡

θYLθ XH
τ θ XH
, M≡ L
,
θ XL
1 + τ L θXL

θYLθ XH
θ θ
(e HL − eZL ), E L ≡ θYH (eLH − eZH ) − YL XH (eLL − eZL )
θ XL
θ XL

Y
Y
X
X
X
+ (1− α H )( H − H ), J ≡ α H ( H − H )
YL X L
YL X L
XL

C H ≡ pX (1 + τ X )X H + pY (1 + τ Y )YH , and α H ≡

pY (1 + τ Y )YH
pX (1 + τ X )X H + pY (1 + τ Y )YH

-10For further simplification, parameters are combined into definitions. That is, γ H
and γ L are relative factor intensities. Our data below indicate that γ L > γ H , so the dirty
sector is low-skilled labor intensive (or, equivalently, the clean sector uses skilled labor
intensively). The constants A and B are difficult to interpret, but they are weights on
the terms involving the Allen elasticities (eij). In equations (16), these terms represent
“substitution effects” and indicate how producers of Y substitute among inputs when
pollution becomes more expensive. The constant C partly determines the change in
pollution ( Zˆ ) in (16d). The constants A, B, and C are all positive, but the denominator
D cannot be signed in general. Constants TX and TY represent tax payments received
by the government on the two goods prior to the pollution tax increase, and these help to
determine the magnitude of the decrease in the unskilled labor tax rate. The E constants
that appear in the solution for τˆ L help determine how the substitution effects impact the
magnitude of τˆ L . The terms N and J summarize the relative consumption of the two
goods by the two consumer groups. While N can be shown to be positive, the sign of J
is ambiguous without additional assumptions (discussed below). 11
Two effects appear in (16a), (16b), and (16c) that are comparable to effects
identified by Mieszkowski (1967) and discussed by Fullerton and Heutel (2007). First,
the “substitution effect” is the term [A(eHZ – eZZ) – B(eLZ – eZZ)]. Through this term, the
higher pollution tax ( τˆ Z > 0) tends to help high-skilled labor ( hˆ > 0) whenever eHZ is
larger than eLZ, that is, when H is a better substitute for pollution than is L. Second,
the “output effect” is represented here by the term (γ H − γ L )(σU N + J) . If low-skilled
labor is used more intensively in the dirty sector, then (γ H − γ L ) < 0 . Because σU and N
are both positive, then the first part of this term, (γ H − γ L )σU N is negative. A higher tax
on emissions, τˆ Z , reduces the dirty output in a way that depends on consumer preferences
represented by σU, and therefore reduces demand for L relative to H (reducing w and
raising h). It places more burden on the factor intensively employed in the dirty sector.
The additional term J means that this effect on factor prices also depends on the
relative consumption by the two groups. For concreteness, assume that low-skilled
consumers spend a greater proportion of income on the dirty good than do high-skilled
consumers. In other words, assume YL/XL exceeds YH/XH, which makes J negative.
11

By rearranging terms, N = (xL+αHxH)/xL + (1–αH)yL/yH where both terms are positive.

-11The additional J term does not appear in results of Fullerton and Heutel (2007)
because they assume government spends the tax revenue in the same way as the one
representative consumer. Here, the extra tax revenue is rebated to unskilled labor, with
disproportionate spending on the dirty good, so this particular use of the revenue
increases purchases of Y. This J term helps the factor used intensively in Y, offsetting
the usual output effect. 12
Because the solutions for these variables are complicated, with offsetting effects,
the determination of the overall sign of each is difficult. In this most general case, the tax
on pollution might even reduce the price of the dirty good, or increase the amount of
pollution. Therefore, we employ special cases that simplify the expressions and allow
more definitive results. The rest of this section focuses on the sources side of income,
and a later section focuses on the uses side.
Case 1: Equal Factor Intensities ( γ H = γ L = γ )

For the first special case, suppose that the two sectors have the same ratio of highskilled to low-skilled labor ( H Y / H X = LY / LX ). This condition eliminates the output
effect, (γ H − γ L )(σU N + J) and leaves the sign of each price change to depend only on the
substitution effects – the eij parameters. In this simple case, the solutions are:
pˆ Y = θYZτˆZ

(17a)

θ θ γ (e − eLZ )
τˆZ
hˆ = pˆ H = XL YZ HZ
D1

(17b)

wˆ = pˆ L − τˆL =

− θ XHθYZ γ (eHZ − eLZ )
τˆZ − τˆL
D1

(17c)

where D1 = (σ X − θ XLθYH γe HH − θ XH θYL γeLL ) + γ (θ XLθYH + θ XH θYL )e HL . In this case, pˆ Y in
(17a) is clearly positive, since θYZ is positive, and because the pollution tax is increased
( τˆ Z > 0). The sign of hˆ depends on whether eHZ > eLZ and D1 > 0. To put a sign on
this denominator, define
Condition 1: e HL >

−σ X + θ XLθYH γe HH + θ XH θYL γeLL
.
γ (θ XLθYH + θ XH θYL )

The denominator D1 is positive if and only if Condition 1 holds. Since eHH < 0, eLL < 0,
and all other terms are positive, the ratio on the right side of the inequality is strictly
The N and J terms show how expenditure patterns affect demands for X and Y, and thus demands for
L and H, with effects on the sources side. Later, we show how different expenditures affect the uses side.

12

-12negative. For this condition to hold, it is sufficient that eHL > 0, which means that lowskilled labor and high-skilled labor are substitutes. More generally, Condition 1 may still
hold if low-skilled and high-skilled labor are not too complementary.
If that condition holds, and high-skilled labor is a better substitute for pollution
than unskilled labor (eHZ > eLZ), then the pollution tax raises the high-skilled wage
( hˆ > 0). If Condition 1 fails, and the two types of labor are “too” complementary, then
hˆ is negative. 13 Less unlikely is that Condition 1 holds but unskilled labor is a better

substitute for pollution, where again hˆ is negative. 14
The sign of wˆ depends on τˆ L and on the p̂L term (with sign opposite to that of

hˆ = pˆ H ). The extra pollution tax revenue is used to reduce the low-skilled tax, so τˆ L is
negative. 15 The reduction in this tax rate has a powerful, positive impact on wˆ , since the
goal of the tax swap is to raise the net wage for low-income families. If unskilled labor is
a better substitute for pollution than is high-skilled labor (eLZ > eHZ), then the p̂L term in
(17c) is positive, as long as D1 is positive. In that case wˆ is unambiguously positive.
The positive effect of τˆ L on wˆ can be overwhelmed, however, if unskilled labor is
enough less of a substitute for pollution (eHZ >> eLZ), so that a reduction in Z leads to a
large reduction in demand for L. Then the net unskilled wage may fall.
Table 2 summarizes these results and conditions. 16 In the first row of Table 2, eHZ
< eLZ, so low-skilled labor is a better substitute for pollution, and the increased pollution
tax definitely raises the net low-skilled labor wage (even before accounting for τˆ L < 0 ). 17
In the next two rows of Table 2, high-skilled labor is a better substitute for pollution than
low-skilled labor, a situation that tends to help high-skilled labor and reduce the low-

Intuition is difficult for the perverse case where Condition 1 fails and D1 <0. How could the pollution
tax hurt high-skilled labor, even though H is a better substitute for pollution (eHZ > eLZ)? The higher price
of pollution induces substitution into H, but if L and H are sufficiently complementary, then the firm wants
to employ more L, which raises w relative to h.
13

14

If both conditions fail, so that D1 < 0 and eHZ < eLZ, then h would rise.

15

We assume that the pollution tax rate is on the normal side of the Laffer curve, so that increasing the rate
yields additional revenue that can be used to cut τL.

The τˆ L term is endogenous. The three conditions in Table 2 can be expressed in terms of exogenous
parameters only, but these conditions would then be extremely long and complicated.

16

But even this case does not guarantee that L is held harmless, because this analysis does not yet account
for the effect on L from spending disproportionately on Y when p̂Y > 0. So far, we discuss only the
17

sources side ( ŵ and ĥ ), but later we discuss effects on the two groups from the uses side ( p̂Y > 0).

-13skilled wage. In the second row, the decrease in τL is not enough to overcome this injury,
so the net-of-tax low-skilled wage falls. In the third row, however, the decrease in τL is
large enough to offset this burden, so that the low-skilled wage rises. The intuition for
the sign of hˆ is similar and depends on whether low-skilled labor or high-skilled labor is
a better substitute for pollution. Since the high-skilled labor tax rate does not change,
though, any burden on the high-skilled wage cannot be offset by tax changes.
Table 2: Changes in w and h for the case of equal factor intensities

If high-skilled labor and unskilled labor are not too complementary (D1>0):

hˆ

(1) e HZ < eLZ

<0 >0

(unskilled labor is a better substitute for pollution)

wˆ

e HZ > eLZ and
(2)
−θ θ γ (e − e )
τˆL > XH YZ HZ LZ τˆ Z
D1

>0 <0

e HZ > eLZ and
(3)
−θ θ γ (e − e )
τˆL < XH YZ HZ LZ τˆ Z
D1

>0 >0

Case 2: Equal Factor Intensities and eHZ = eLZ

This case is a special version of Case 1 with equal factor intensities ( γ H = γ L = γ ),
with the additional requirement that low-skilled labor and high-skilled labor are equally
substitutable for pollution. In this most simple case, the solutions are now just:

pˆ Y = θYZτˆZ > 0
wˆ = −τˆL > 0
hˆ = 0

(18a)
(18b)
(18c)

The change in the price of Y is the same as in Case 1 and is positive. Whereas equal
factor intensities removes the output effect, setting eHZ = eLZ removes the substitution
effect. Now relative wage rates do not change at all ( pˆ L = pˆ H = 0 ), but pollution tax
revenue is used to cut the low-skilled labor tax ( τˆL < 0, so ŵ > 0). These simplifying
assumptions remove factor price effects and leave only the product price effects analyzed
by Metcalf (1999, 2009) and Burtraw et al (2009). The remaining question, analyzed
below, is whether the rebate is enough to overcome the burden from pˆ Y > 0.

-14Case 3: Fixed Input Proportions (eij = 0)

In this case, all the elasticities are set to zero, so that the substitution effects
disappear, and only the output effects remain. Now results are driven by whether sector
Y is high-skilled labor intensive or low-skilled labor intensive. The solutions are:

pˆ Y =

[Cσ X − (γ H − γ L )

Y
X
1
hH ( H − H )]θYZ
CH
YL X L
τˆZ
D3

(19a)

θ θ (γ − γ L )(σ U N + J )
hˆ = pˆ H = − XL YZ H
τˆZ
D3
wˆ = pˆ L − τˆL =

θ XHθYZ (γ H − γ L )(σ U N + J )
D3

(19b)

τˆZ − τˆL

(19c)

1
Y
X
hH ( H − H ) .
CH
YL X L
The denominator D3 can be positive or negative, depending on whether the dirty sector

where D3 = Cσ X − (γ H − γ L )(σU N + J)(θ XH θYL − θ XLθYH ) − (γ H − γ L )

is low-skilled or high-skilled labor intensive, as well as on other parameters. Even with
the removal of the substitution effects, the results are still complicated and difficult to
sign. An additional simplification is that the elasticity of substitution in consumption
between X and Y, σU, is equal to unity (the value used in the numerical section of
Fullerton and Heutel, 2007). This simplifying assumption means that the term (σU N + J)
is now unambiguously positive, and it allows us to sign the results based on factor
intensities in the dirty industry and several other conditions. The Appendix contains a
diagram of these sub-cases and shows the signs of pˆ Y , hˆ , and wˆ .
When the dirty sector is high-skilled intensive (γH >γL), the results are definitive:
pY increases, h decreases, and w increases. These results are consistent with the
intuition stated earlier that the output effect places more of the burden on the factor used
intensively in the dirty sector. When the dirty industry is low-skilled intensive (γH < γL),
the situation is more complicated. In this case, unskilled labor might be hurt despite their
tax cut. Also, the dirty good’s price could actually decrease. When the industries have
very different factor intensities, so that γL is much larger than γH, then w likely
decreases. The output effect hurts intensively-used unskilled labor, which can overtake
the opposing decrease in the tax on unskilled labor. A full categorization of results for
case 3 is provided in Figure 1 of the Appendix.

-15III. Effects on the Uses Side

Thus far, we have only discussed the effect that a pollution tax swap has on the
sources side of income for both types of workers. We next consider the uses side and
changes in the real net unskilled wage. Define ω ≡ pL (1 − τ L ) / pQL = w / pQL , where pQL is
a price index, pQL ≡ α L pY (1 + τ Y ) + (1 − α L ) pX (1 + τ X ) . 18 Differentiation yields
pˆ QL = α L pˆ Y . We then calculate the change in the real net unskilled wage:

ωˆ = pˆ L − τˆL − pˆ QL .

(20)

This equation nicely decomposes the effect on the real net wage into three components:
the change in the gross wage, the change in the tax rate, and the change from product
prices. Similarly, define the real net wage for skilled labor as ψ ≡ pH (1 − τ H ) / pQH
= h / pQH , with analogous definitions of pQH and αH.. Since τ H is fixed, we have:

ψˆ = pˆ H − pˆ QH .

(21)

In Case 1 with equal factor intensities, we show above that pˆ Y > 0 , so wˆ may be
positive or negative. Thus ωˆ is definitely negative when wˆ < 0 ; in particular, when
high-skilled and unskilled labor are not too complementary, and low-skilled labor is
highly complementary with pollution, then the real unskilled wage falls. For wˆ > 0 , it
is more likely that the real net wage increases if α L is small, that is, if unskilled laborers
do not spend too disproportionately on good Y. Case 2 simplifies the analysis even
more, with the additional assumption that high-skilled labor and unskilled labor are
equally substitutable for pollution. In this case pˆ Y > 0 , and the real wage increases if
−τˆ L > α L pˆ Y . Thus, if the wage tax cut is very large, or if unskilled workers do not spend

too much on Y, then their real wage is likely to rise.
Case 3 is unique because pˆ Y may be positive or negative. Therefore, ωˆ is
definitely positive when wˆ > 0 and pˆ Y < 0 . Otherwise, as before, ωˆ may still be
positive as long as unskilled labor’s expenditure share on Y is not too large. It is also
possible that ωˆ > 0 in the perverse case where both the net wage and pY fall.
18

The weight α L is unskilled labor’s share of expenditures on Y (using initial values, so α L is a fixed
parameter). Thus, α L ≡ pY (1 + τ Y )YL /[ p X (1 + τ X ) X L + pY (1 + τ Y )YL ] . Below we set initial prices to 1.0
and output tax rates to zero, so we have α L ≡ YL /(YL + X L ) .

-16We now summarize all our analytical results. Ignoring unlikely perverse cases
where pY may fall or Z may rise, we have identified several reasons that the real net
wage of low-income workers (ω) may fall, even when pollution tax revenue is used to cut
their labor tax rate. First, ω may fall if H is better than L as a substitute for pollution.
Second, ω may fall if the dirty sector is low-skill intensive. Third, ω may fall if lowskill labor spends disproportionately on the dirty good.
IV. Numerical Analysis

Because the general model’s results are complicated and difficult to sign, we now
assign plausible parameter values and solve numerically for changes in wage rates and
other variables. We then can change certain parameter values, in a sensitivity analysis, to
see if and when extreme parameter values generate perverse results. This section
provides only an illustration of plausible magnitudes in the analytical model, however,
not a fully detailed numerical simulation of the pollution tax reform (particularly since
we omit capital and changes in returns to capital).
We use several data sources. First, we define the “dirty” sector as the fourteen
most polluting industries using data from the EPA’s Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) for
2006. The “clean” sector then includes all other industries. 19 The TRI contains
information on nearly 650 chemical releases for various kinds of manufacturing, electric
utilities, and metal and coal mining. We use this information along with data from the
Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) survey from 2007 in order to identify factor
income shares for each sector. 20 The OES has data on employment and average wages
for each of over 800 occupations, grouped by NAICS industry code. We classify skilled
labor as occupations with mean annual wage of at least $50,000. Adding total
compensation to workers in the clean sector implies that the clean sector represents about

19

No industry is perfectly “clean”, especially when considering intermediate inputs that are ignored here.
We simply separate the dirtiest 14 from other industries. These initial steps follow Fullerton and Heutel
(2007), but here we use more recent data. TRI industry data use 3 and 4-digit NAICS codes. Aggregating
to the 3-digit level, the industries we put in the “dirty” sector are those with the most on- and off-site
disposal of monitored chemicals: mining, utilities, chemical manufacturing, primary metals, paper
manufacturing, waste management, food manufacturing, beverage and tobacco manufacturing, petroleum
and coal product manufacturing, fabricated metals, transport equipment, plastics and rubber manufacturing,
nonmetallic mineral products manufacturing, and wood products manufacturing. The “clean” sector is
comprised of the remaining 75 industries. This data set is available at
http://www.epa.gov/triexplorer/industry.htm.
20

The Occupational Employment Statistics survey is available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’
website: http://www.bls.gov/data.

-1793% of income. 21 The share of the clean sector’s compensation to low-skilled workers is
about 54%, and the share of the dirty sector’s compensation to low-skilled workers is
about 64%, indicating that the dirty sector is indeed low-skilled labor-intensive.
This information allows us to specify that θXL = 0.54 and θXH = 0.46 in the clean
sector. In the dirty sector, however, we do not have data on the fraction of sales revenue
attributable to pollution, so we cannot yet determine all factor shares. Following
Fullerton and Heutel (2007), we choose θYZ = 0.25. The remaining 75% of sales revenue
is paid to labor, of which 64% is to low-skilled labor (so θYL = 0.48), and the remainder
to high-skilled labor (so θYH = 0.27). We define a unit of each input or output so that all
initial prices are one (w = h = pZ = pX = pY = 1). Also, perfect competition implies zero
profits, so X = (1 + τH)HX + (1 + τL)LX and Y = (1 + τH)HY + (1 + τL)LY + Z. Defining
total factor income to equal one as well means that (1 + τX)X + (1 + τY)Y = 1. Using all
these relationships, we can then solve for all the initial factor allocations and parameters
shown in the top portion of Table 3.
Table 3: Summary of parameters
= 0.017
= 0.029
HY
LY
= 0.301
= 0.459
HX
LX
θYΗ = 0.317
θYL = 0.433
θXH = 0.455
θXL = 0.545
λHY = 0.052
λLY = 0.059
λHX = 0.948
λLX = 0.941
= 0.055
= 0.063
γH
γL

τH = 0.4, τL = 0.1
τX = 0, τY = 0, τZ = 1
αH = 0.05, αL = 0.12 , δ = .39
We also need numerical values for the tax rates (τX, τY, τH, and τL), expenditure
shares (αH and αL), the fraction of initial tax revenue returned to high-skilled labor (δ),
and elasticities. We choose zero for the tax rates on X and Y, 10% as the tax rate on
unskilled labor, and 40% as the tax rate on skilled labor. 22
21

For each industry, we multiply employment in each skilled occupation by the mean annual wage for that
occupation, and sum over all skilled occupations to calculate total compensation to skilled labor. Similarly,
for unskilled labor, we take employment in each occupation times the mean wage for each, and sum.
22

Excise and other output taxes in the two sectors are similar to each and do not add much to the model, so
we choose the simplest case where the tax rates on X and Y are both zero. Labor tax rates of 10% and 40%
for unskilled and skilled labor, respectively, approximate payroll and income taxes for the two groups.

-18We approximate the expenditure shares for each group of workers using data on
income quintiles from the 2007 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). The bottom three
quintiles correspond to our low-skilled workers, with average pre-tax incomes of
$10,531, $27,674, and $46,213 respectively. The top two quintiles, representing highskilled workers, have mean incomes of $72,460 and $158,388. We add up expenditure
per quintile on natural gas, electricity, fuel oil, and gasoline in order to obtain an
approximation of the fraction of income spent on the “dirty” good. 23 This yields αL =
12% (so 0.88 is the fraction spent on the clean good by low-skilled workers) and αH =
5% (so 0.95 is the fraction spent on the clean good by high-skilled workers). We assume
that initial government revenue is simply distributed in proportion to each group's initial
income, so δ = 39%.
We use an elasticity of substitution in production for the clean sector of one, and
an elasticity of substitution in utility of one (following Fullerton and Heutel, 2007). No
study has estimated which factors of production are better substitutes for pollution,
especially for our two factors (high-skilled and low-skilled labor). The point here is to
see how much these Allen cross-price elasticities matter, so we use values ranging from
–1 to 1. These then determine the own-price elasticities. We are now able to solve for
the relevant magnitudes in changes from the initial equilibrium, as shown in Table 4.
Table 4: A 10% Increase in the Pollution Tax (% changes)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Low-Skill High-Skill
Price of
Pollution
Wage
Wage
Dirty Good
Row
eLZ
eHZ
ŵ
p̂Y
Ẑ
ĥ
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

23

1
0
0.5
1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-0.5
0
0.5

-0.5
0
0
0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
1
1
1

-3.932
-2.932
-4.567
-6.190
-3.488
-5.148
-6.797
-8.433
-5.676
-7.350
-9.012

0.173
0.285
0.195
0.105
0.311
0.219
0.128
0.038
0.246
0.154
0.062

0.124
0.012
0.048
0.083
-0.065
-0.029
0.007
0.043
-0.106
-0.069
-0.033

2.494
2.499
2.498
2.496
2.503
2.501
2.500
2.498
2.505
2.503
2.501

Our dirty industries include mining, chemicals, and primary metals, but these outputs are not purchased
directly by consumers and so do not appear in the CEX. The most pollution-intensive consumer goods
categories are natural gas, electricity, fuel oil, and gasoline. Consumer expenditure for these four
categories is about 6.8%, which is close to our definition of the dirty sector (representing 7% of income).

-19Table 4 shows results for the relevant changes of interest, assuming that the
pollution tax rate increases by 10%. The different rows show results when the elasticities
eHZ and eLZ are varied, while eHL is held constant at a value of one (so skilled and
unskilled labor are substitutes). 24 For all of the combinations of parameters shown in the
table, the increase in the pollution tax always reduces the amount of pollution ( Zˆ < 0 )
and increases the price of the dirty good ( pˆ Y > 0 ).
In all rows, the output effect dampens the unskilled wage, since the dirty sector is
L-intensive. The net wage for unskilled workers (w) always rises, however, because it
includes the rebate of pollution tax revenues through the reduction in τL. The overall
changes in w are quite small, ranging from about 0.04% to 0.31%. This net wage rises
most when the substitution effect favors low-skilled labor, that is, when L is a better
substitute for pollution (when eLZ > eHZ , as in rows 5 and 9). The price of the dirty good
rises, however, so the effect on the real net wage is not yet clear.
In Table 4, the changes for the high-skilled wage ( hˆ ) are positive or negative, but
small in magnitude. Through the substitution effect, the higher pollution tax tends to
raise the high-skilled wage ( ĥ >0) whenever eHZ > eLZ (high-skilled labor is a better
substitute for pollution than is unskilled labor, as in rows 1, 3, 4, and 8). When eLZ >eHZ,
however, the high-skilled wage falls (in rows 5, 6, 9, 10, and 11).
While changes in both real net wage rates may be small, the taxed sector is only
7% of national income. The nationwide wage rates are driven primarily by the clean
sector, which employs 93% of labor. Thus, even a 10% higher pollution tax has only
small effect on w relative to h. As shown in Case 2 above, the tax has no effect on
relative wage rates when factor intensities are the same in the two sectors and substitution
parameters are equal (eHZ = eLZ). The extra pollution tax also collects only a small
amount of revenue. Indeed, the change must be small for our linear approximations to be
valid. The fact that it’s small, however, does not detract from our ability to address the
question in this paper, namely whether the rebate of all extra revenue is enough to make
up for higher product prices and for changes in factor prices. The answer to that question
is based on our decomposition of all effects on each real net wage rate.

We also tried eHL = eHZ = eLZ =1, where the implied own-price elasticities are: eHH = –2.2, eLL = –1.2,
and eZZ = –3. These elasticity value are not “perverse”, but they do not result in positive additional
revenue, violating our assumption that the pollution tax rate is on the normal side of the Laffer curve.

24

-20We undertake that decomposition in Table 5, where the rows correspond exactly
to the rows of Table 4, as indicated by eLZ and eHZ in the first two columns. Then
column (3) shows just the effect on the gross nominal wage pL, which already includes
both the output effect and the substitution effect. The output effect always acts to reduce
the low-skilled wage, because the dirty sector is low-skilled labor intensive. The
substitution effect exacerbates that output effect when eLZ < eHZ (as in the first row), and
it offsets the output effect when eLZ > eHZ (as in rows 5, 6, 9, 10, and 11).
Table 5: A Decomposition of Effects from Factor Prices, Rebates, and Product Prices
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
Factor
Tax
Product Real Net
Factor
Product Real Net
Price
Rebate
Prices
Wage
Price
Prices
Wage
L
H
Row
eLZ
eHZ
− τˆL
p̂L
= ω̂
p̂H
= ψˆ
− p̂
− p̂
Q

1
1
-0.5 -0.103
2
0
0
-0.010
3
0.5
0
-0.040
4
1
0
-0.069
5
-0.5 0.5
0.054
6
0
0.5
0.024
7
0.5
0.5
-0.006
8
1
0.5
-0.036
9
-0.5
1
0.088
10
0
1
0.058
11
0.5
1
0.028
The real net wage change is ωˆ =

0.277
-0.299
-0.126
0.295
-0.300
-0.015
0.235
-0.300
-0.105
0.175
-0.300
-0.194
0.257
-0.300
0.011
0.195
-0.300
-0.081
0.134
-0.300
-0.172
0.074
-0.300
-0.262
0.158
-0.301
-0.054
0.096
-0.300
-0.147
0.034
-0.300
-0.238
L
pˆ L − τˆL − pˆ Q for low-skill labor, ψˆ

Q

0.124
0.012
0.048
0.083
-0.065
-0.029
0.007
0.043
-0.106
-0.069
-0.033
= pˆ H − pˆ QH

-0.125
-0.001
-0.125
-0.113
-0.125
-0.077
-0.125
-0.042
-0.125
-0.190
-0.125
-0.154
-0.125
-0.118
-0.125
-0.082
-0.125
-0.231
-0.125
-0.194
-0.125
-0.158
for high-skill labor.

Column (4) shows the effect of the tax rebate, τL, which always helps low-skilled
labor. Interestingly, the amount of that rebate varies, because it depends on the amount
of revenue from the pollution tax. That pollution tax revenue is small when pollution
abatement is relatively easy, so the rebate is small when both types of labor are good
substitutes for pollution (rows 8 and 11). The final component is the effect of product
prices, pQL , in column (5), which always reduces the real net wage. These three
components add to the total effect on the real net wage ω in column (6).
The real net wage falls in almost every case ( ωˆ < 0 , where ωˆ = pˆ L − τˆL − pˆ QL ). It
rises slightly in row 5 only, where low-skilled labor is much better than high-skilled labor
as a substitute for pollution (eLZ > eHZ). This result answers the key question of our
paper: only under special conditions can the rebate of revenue to the low-income group
necessarily protect them against a loss in real income.

-21An estimated distribution of elasticities in Table 5 could be used in a Monte Carlo
simulation to calculate the expected change in the real net wage ω. Without such
estimates, we cannot state the probability of each row in Table 5. Yet the table makes
clear that Monte Carlo simulations are not necessary. Any feasible set of probability
weights for the rows of Table 5 could only yield an expected fall in the real net wage.
Importantly, the decomposition allows us to address why the real net wage falls.
Notice first that the effect of the rebate is relatively large. In this model, however, the tax
rebate in column (4) is never enough to offset the effect of product prices in column (5).
This result seems somewhat remarkable, since the pollution tax places some burden on
high-skilled labor as well as on low-skilled labor, and yet all of the pollution tax revenue
is given as a rebate just to low-skilled labor! Why? In this general equilibrium model,
because of “excess burden”, consumers lose more than the revenue from the tax,
especially in the cases where abatement is easy (where eLZ and eHZ are both positive,
and revenue is small, as in rows 8 and 11). 25
Thus, the rebate of the entire tax is not enough to protect low-income families just
from the effects of higher prices for electricity, heating fuel, and gasoline. This problem
is even worse when factor prices also change to hurt low-skilled labor, especially where
H is better than L as a substitute for pollution (rows 1,3, 4, 8).
In the last three columns of Table 5, the effect of the tax on the gross wage for
high-skilled labor ( p̂H ) plus the effect from higher produce prices, ( − p̂QH ) add to the
effect on their real net wage (ψˆ ). The gross nominal wage may rise or fall, depending
on elasticities, but high-skilled labor gets no rebate in this tax swap. The effect of higher
prices always swamps any positive effect on the wage rate, however, so the real net wage
always falls. In Table 5, both real net wage rates always fall (except for a tiny gain to
low-skilled labor in row 5 discussed above).
So far, in all scenarios, our illustrative parameters have yielded positive values for
the change in the nominal net low-skilled wage ( wˆ > 0 in every row of Table 4). We
next perform sensitivity analysis to see the effect on w with more extreme parameter
values. As described in Case 1 of the previous section, whenever H and L are not
25

Our general equilibrium model could be used to derive and calculate excess burden, but we choose here
to focus instead on distributional effects. Suffice it to say that marginal excess burden per additional dollar
of tax revenue is small when eLZ and eHZ are small. It rises with the value of those parameters and
becomes infinite at the peak of the Laffer curve where the extra revenue is zero.

-22“too” complementary, the denominator is positive (D1 > 0). Then if high-skilled labor is
a much better substitute for pollution, the low-skilled nominal net wage may fall. 26 Here
we find that if eLZ = –1, then wˆ is negative and hˆ is positive whenever eHZ is bigger
than about 2.4 (still keeping eHL = 1). These new parameter values are a bit different
from those in Tables 4 and 5, but they generate a very different outcome.
Conversely, we also consider the case where high-skilled and low-skilled labor
are highly complementary with each other. We take eHL = –5 and then check for values
of eHZ and eLZ where wˆ is negative. For example, eLZ = 10 and eHZ = 9 is a case
where wˆ is negative, and hˆ is positive, even though low-skilled labor is a better
substitute for pollution. Other combinations of eHZ and eLZ also can make w fall, but
their values must still be quite large.
Other extreme parameters can yield other perverse outcomes such as a decrease in
the price of the dirty good or an increase in pollution. Without a comprehensive search,
we were able to find one example where pollution rises (eHL = 5, eHZ = –8, and eLZ = 6,
which imply that eHH = –0.52, eLL = –7.12, and eZZ = –0.25). The point is certainly not
that a pollution tax is likely to raise pollution. Rather, finding this one case confirms that
only extreme elasticity values can generate perverse results.
The intended effect of a tax rebate for low-income workers is for their net wage
not to fall relative to the high-skilled wage. However, we have identified several
examples where a very different result is possible. For policy reasons, it is important to
understand that any intended protection of low-skilled labor may not be realized. We
have shown that even when the nominal low-skilled wage increases, low-skilled labor
may still bear a disproportionate share of the tax burden. Still, however, low-skilled
labor in these cases could be hurt even more without the rebate.
V. Conclusion

In order to evaluate different policies, it is important to understand not only the
efficiency costs of environmental taxes but distributional effects as well. Using pollution
tax revenue to reduce pre-existing labor taxes can lessen the regressivity of the tax, and
that might make a pollution tax more politically viable. While the double dividend
literature has focused on the efficiency side of this kind of tax swap, this paper considers
equity issues and the circumstances under which real net wages may rise or fall. The
26

Our numerical example does not exactly match Case 1, however, because factor intensities are not equal.

-23model developed here is simple but can provide key insights into the effects of a
pollution tax increase and labor tax decrease on low-skilled and high-skilled workers.
Using a general equilibrium model, we derive closed-form solutions for changes
in wage rates of both types of workers, the price of the dirty good, and the amount of
pollution. We find perverse cases where the price of the dirty good may fall, or where
pollution may rise, but these cases are unlikely and are not the point of this paper. More
to the point is that even without extreme parameter values, the use of the pollution tax
revenue to cut low-income workers' labor tax may not raise their real net wage. The tax
cut for low-skilled workers certainly has a positive impact on the net low-skilled wage,
but for three reasons this effect may not be enough to overcome the burden imposed by
an increased pollution tax. First, their real net wage may fall if high-skilled labor is better
as a substitute for pollution than is low-skilled labor. Second, it may fall if the dirty
sector makes intensive use of low-skilled labor. And third, of course, it may fall if lowincome families spend disproportionately on the dirty good.
In our numerical analysis, using reasonable parameter values, we find that the
nominal net low-skilled wage increases in all cases, but low-skilled workers can still bear
a disproportionate burden of the tax, due to the increase in the price of the dirty good.
This numerical simulation does not provide definitive results for the incidence of this tax
swap, but it does indicate what parameters need better estimation, and what values of
those parameters make policy unable to offset the adverse effects of pollution taxes on
low-income families.

-24Appendix Figure 1: Results for Case 3
Case 3: Fixed Input
Proportions (eij = 0)

γH > γL

γH < γL

D3 > 0

Condition 2
holds

Condition 2
violated

D3 > 0

Cond. 3
violated

Cond. 3
holds

Cond. 5
holds

ˆpY > 0
ˆh < 0
ˆ >0
w

Cond. 5
violated

Condition 4
holds

Cond. 5
holds

D3 < 0

Cond. 5
violated

Condition 4
violated

Cond. 3
holds

Cond. 5
holds

Cond. 3
violated

Cond. 5
violated

Cond. 5
holds

Cond. 5
violated

pˆ Y > 0
hˆ > 0

pˆ Y > 0
hˆ > 0

pˆY < 0
hˆ > 0

pˆY < 0
hˆ > 0

ˆpY > 0
hˆ < 0

pˆ Y > 0
hˆ > 0

pˆ Y > 0
hˆ > 0

pˆ Y < 0
hˆ > 0

pˆY > 0
hˆ > 0

wˆ > 0

wˆ < 0

ˆ >0
w

ˆ <0
w

wˆ > 0

wˆ > 0

wˆ < 0

wˆ > 0

wˆ < 0

Condition 2 (unskilled labor does not spend too disproportionately on Y):
(σ U N + J )(θ XH θ YL − θ XL θ YH ) +

1
CH

hH (

YH
YL

−

XH
XL

Condition 3 (similar enough factor intensities):

)>0

γ −γ
L

H

<

Cσ X C H
X
Y
hH ( H − H )
XL
YL

Condition 4 (different enough factor inensities):

γL − γ H >

−Cσ X
(σU N + J)(θ XHθYL − θ XLθYH ) +

1
Y
X
hH ( H − H )
CH
YL X L

Condition 5 (similar enough factor intensities):

θ XH θYZ
D3

(γ L − γ H )(σU N + J)τˆ Z < −τˆ L

-25References

Allen, R.G.D. (1938). Mathematical Analysis for Economists. New York: St. Martin’s.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. (2005). “Rising wage
inequality: The role of composition and prices.” NBER Working Paper 11628.
Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches. (1994). “Changes in the demand for skilled
labor within US manufacturing: Evidence from the annual survey of
manufacturers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 367-398.
Bound, John and George Johnson. (1992). “Changes in the structure of wages in the
1980s: An evaluation of alternative explanations.” American Economic Review
82, 371-392.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Lawrence H. Goulder. (1997). “Costs of environmentally
motivated taxes in the presence of other taxes: General equilibrium analyses.”
National Tax Journal 50, 60-87.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Ruud A. de Mooij. (1994a). “Environmental levies and
distortionary taxation.” American Economic Review 84, 1085-1089.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Ruud A. de Mooij. (1994b). “Environmental taxes and labormarket distortions.” European Journal of Political Economy 10, 655-683.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Ruud A. de Mooij. (1998). “Environmental taxes, international
capital mobility and inefficient tax systems: Tax burden vs. tax shifting.”
International Tax and Public Finance 5, 7-39.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Frederick van der Ploeg. (1994). “Environmental policy,
public finance and the labour market in a second-best world.” Journal of Public
Economics 55, 349-390.
Burtraw, Dallas, Richard Sweeney and Margaret Walls. (2009). “The incidence of U.S.
climate policy: Alternative uses of revenues from a cap-and-trade auction.”
National Tax Journal 62, 497-518.
Dinan, Terry and Diane Rogers. (2002). “Distributional effects of carbon allowance
trading: How government decisions determine winners and losers.” National Tax
Journal 55, 199-222.
Fullerton, Don and Gilbert E. Metcalf. (2001). “Environmental controls, scarcity rents,
and pre-existing distortions.” Journal of Public Economics 80, 249-267.

-26Fullerton, Don and Garth Heutel. (2007). “The general equilibrium incidence of
environmental taxes.” Journal of Public Economics 91, 571-591.
Goulder, Lawrence H. (1995). “Environmental taxation and the “Double Dividend:” A
reader’s guide.” International Tax and Public Finance 2, 155-182.
Hanson, Gordon H. and Ann Harrison. (1999). “Trade liberalization and wage inquality
in Mexico.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52, 271-288.
Harberger, Arnold C. (1962). “The incidence of the corporation income tax.” Journal of
Political Economy 70, 215-240.
Hassett, Kevin A., Aparna Mathur, and Gilbert E. Metcalf (2009). "The incidence of a
U.S. carbon tax: A lifetime and regional analysis." The Energy Journal 30, 15779.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. (1991). “Changes in relative wages, 19631987: Supply and demand factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 35-78.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. (1999). “A distributional analysis of green tax reforms.” National
Tax Journal 52, 655-681.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. (2009). “Designing a carbon tax to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas
emission.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1), 63-83.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., Sergey Paltsev, John M. Reilly, Henry D. Jacoby, and Jennifer Holak
(2008). "Analysis of a carbon tax to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions,"
Cambridge, MA: MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change.
Mieszkowski, Peter. (1967). “On the theory of tax incidence.” Journal of Political
Economy 75, 655-681.
Mieszkowski, Peter. (1972). “The property tax: An excise tax or a profits tax?” Journal
of Public Economics 1, 73-96.
Parry, Ian W.H., Roberton C. Williams III, and Lawrence H. Goulder. (1999). “When
can carbon abatement policies increase welfare? The fundamental role of
distorted factor markets.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
37, 52-84.
Parry, Ian W.H. (1995). “Pollution taxes and revenue recycling.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 29, S64-S77.
West, Sarah E. and Roberton C. Williams III. (2004). “Estimates from a consumer
demand system: Implications for the incidence of environmental taxes.” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management 47, 535-558.

