NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENERGY CONSERVATION "NUDGES" AND ENVIRONMENTALIST IDEOLOGY:
EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY FIELD EXPERIMENT
Dora L. Costa
Matthew E. Kahn
Working Paper 15939
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15939
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

We thank Maximilian Auffhammer, the participants at the 2010 POWER Conference, and seminar
participants at Princeton and the University of Illinois for comments. We thank the UCLA Ziman
Real Estate Center for funding. We thank the editors and five reviewers for their comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Dora L. Costa and Matthew E. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Energy Conservation "Nudges" and Environmentalist Ideology: Evidence from a Randomized
Residential Electricity Field Experiment
Dora L. Costa and Matthew E. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 15939
April 2010, Revised January 2015
JEL No. Q41
ABSTRACT
“Nudges” are being widely promoted to encourage energy conservation. We show that the popular
electricity conservation “nudge” of providing feedback to households on own and peers’ home electricity
usage in a home electricity report is two to four times more effective with political liberals than with
conservatives. Political conservatives are more likely than liberals to opt out of receiving the home
electricity report and to report disliking the report. Our results suggest that energy conservation nudges
need to be targeted to be most effective.
Dora L. Costa
Bunche Hall 9272
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
costa@econ.ucla.edu
Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Department of Economics
Department of Public Policy
Anderson School of Management
UCLA Law School, Box 951496
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu

Europe, especially Scandinavia, has high taxes on electricity and gasoline to encourage
conservation and counter global warming. Taxes in Denmark represent more than half of the
cost of electricity to consumers.1 In contrast, the U.S. has low taxes and little political will to
sacrifice for the sake of conservation. Congressional voting patterns highlight that conservative
Representatives are highly unlikely to vote for carbon mitigation legislation (Cragg, Zhou,
Gurney, and Kahn 2012).
Facing political gridlock in the Congress and concerned about the challenge of climate
change, an ongoing policy agenda is seeking out alternative strategies for encouraging
conservation. Recent psychology research suggests an alternative tool for changing household
behavior is to focus on well crafted messages offering peer comparisons (see Griskevicius,
Cialdini and Goldstein 2008). Robert Cialdini and his coauthors have conducted a series of field
experiments that have demonstrated that low cost persuasion strategies or “nudges” can change
an individual’s behavior by making him aware of the actions of others who have been in a
similar situation (Goldstein et. al, 2009, Schultz et. al 2007). Nudges may be a low cost strategy
for encouraging energy conservation (Allcott and Mullainathan 2010; Thaler and Sunstein
2008).2
We posit that liberal/environmentalists are more likely to respond to energy conservation
nudges. A series of recent empirical papers has documented that environmentalists are more
1

See Eurostat News Release, 75/2010 – 28 May 2010.
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_PUBLIC/8-28052010-AP/EN/8-28052010-APEN.PDF
2
In the UK, where electricity taxes are low, David Cameron has touted the behavioral
transformations of putting “the typical electricity bill for a house like theirs in a neighborhood
like theirs” in front of households. Speech of June 13, 2008.
http://www.aletmanski.com/files/davidcameron-powerofsocial-innovation.doc
2

likely to engage in “voluntary restraint” than the average person (Kotchen and Moore 2008).
Those who vote in favor of “green policies” and register for liberal/environmentalist political
parties are more likely to have a smaller carbon footprint and to purchase green products such as
the Toyota Prius (Kahn 2007, Kahn and Morris 2009).

Such environmentalists consciously

avoid free riding and voluntarily restrain their consumption of goods and services that generate a
negative externality.
Our evidence on the role of ideology in energy conservation “nudges” comes from a
randomized field experiment carried out by a large California utility district in which we can
observe a household’s ideology (an unobservable in prior studies), its socioeconomic and
demographic characteristics, and its behavioral responses.

Starting in Spring 2008, this utility

has been sending households in the treatment group a Home Energy Report (HER). The report
provides household specific information on own monthly electricity usage over time and relative
to neighbors’ usage over the same time period. The report provides energy saving tips.

To

examine the role that political ideology and environmentalism play in determining how randomly
selected households respond to these reports, we have collected data on the customer’s political
party of registration, household donations to environmental organizations and household
participation in renewable energy programs, and data on the characteristics of the local
residential communities where the households live. Households who are registered in liberal
political parties and who live in residential communities with a large liberal share and who have
previously signed up for energy from renewable resources and donate to environmental causes
are arguably environmentalists. Our focus on ideology, an unobservable in previous studies,
distinguishes our work from other research (e.g. Allcott 2011; Ayres et al. 2009).

3

We find that the effectiveness of energy conservation “nudges” depends on an
individual’s ideology. In the United States, Democrat, Peace and Freedom, and Green party
members (liberals in the U.S. terminology) are more likely to vote for environmentalist causes
than Republican, American Party, or Libertarian party members (conservatives in the U.S.
terminology). We measure ideology not just with registered political party, but also with
indicators of living in a liberal or conservative community and willingness to pay for energy
generated from renewable resources and to donate to environmental organizations. Although
liberals and environmentalists are more energy efficient than conservatives (Costa and Kahn
2010), thus making it harder for them to reduce consumption further, we find that liberals and
environmentalists are more responsive to these nudges than conservatives.
We find that among political liberals who purchase electricity from renewable resources,
who donate to environmental causes, and who live in a census block group where the share of
liberals is in the top 75th percentile, receiving a HER led to reductions in electricity usage of
3.6%. In contrast, among political conservatives who do not pay for renewable electricity, who
do not donate to environmental groups, and who live in a census block group where the share of
liberals is in the bottom 25th percentile, receiving a HER led to reductions in electricity usage of
1.1%. Liberals are more likely to turn down the air-conditioning in the summer in response to
the HER report.

Political liberals were 15% less likely to opt out of receiving the report and, in

a survey, political liberals are also less likely than conservatives to state that the reports were
useless and to report disliking them.
By documenting the role that ideology plays in determining the effectiveness of a specific
“nudge”, this paper contributes to the growing literature on the consequences of political
4

ideology. Much of this work has focused on the role of political ideology in shaping preferences
for redistribution (e.g. Piketty 1995). Our work focuses on the role of political ideology in
shaping responses to non-market mechanisms designed to reduce consumption. Recent work on
the determinants of political ideology has examined the causal role of the media (DellaVigna and
Kaplan 2007), property rights (Di Tella, Galiani and Schargrodsky 2007), and historical
circumstances (Alesina and Fuchs-Schundeln 2007; Giuliano and Spilimbergo 2009) in shaping
a person’s ideological outlook. Both social psychologists and economists have argued that
beliefs on how society and the economy work predominately are formed at ages 18-25 (see
Giuliano and Spilimbergo 2009). In this study, we will take as given that a household either is or
is not a liberal/environmentalist and we will study how these political and social views influence
household response to the same randomized treatment.
The Energy Conservation“Nudge”
The “nudge” that the electric utility company sends to treatment households in an ongoing randomized experiment to encourage reductions in electricity consumption is a two page
Home Electricity Report (see Appendix A for a sample). Similar reports have been used by
other utilities in the U.S. The front page compares the electricity consumption of the household
with all neighbors with similar size homes and heat type and with neighbors who are in the
bottom 20th percentile of electricity usage. The back page compares the household’s electricity
usage in the current month relative to the same time month in the prior year and awards green
stars in every month the household consumed less relative to the same month in the past year
(panel not shown in Appendix A because it is not publicly available).

It also provides three

tips for saving energy, such as turning down the thermostat when using an electric blanket or

5

purchasing an Energy Star durable, and indicates the dollar amount in energy savings per year
(shown in Appendix A).
Each report contains two pieces of information: the household’s absolute level of
consumption and how its consumption compares with that of 100 neighbors living in similarsized homes. We also know whether a household in the treatment group received a message of
“great,” “good,” or “room for improvement” in the first report. As we discuss in the Web
Appendix, we use this information to implement a regression discontinuity design to test whether
the change in electricity consumption for the treatment group differs depending on the normative
message that the household receives in the first report.3
The HER Experiment
Between March 14 and May 9 2008, the electric utility sent the first Home Electricity Reports to
a treatment group of approximately 35,000 households. By April 1, 43% of all treatment
households had received the report and by April 15 the figure was 62%. Households are still
receiving the report, either on a quarterly or monthly basis. A control group of roughly 49,000
households have never received a Home Electricity Report.
The HER experiment selected households from 85 census tracts with a high density of
single-family homes (see ADM Associates 2009). Both treatment and control households had to
have a current account with the electric utility that had been active for at least one year, could not
be living in apartment buildings, and had to be living in a house with square footage between 250
and 99,998 square feet. Groups of contiguous census blocks were randomly assigned to either
the treatment or control group. A “block batch” of 5 contiguous census blocks was randomly
3

We thank a reviewer for suggesting this research strategy.
6

assigned to the treatment group and then a contiguous census block batch was assigned to the
control group. The process continued until roughly 35,000 households were assigned to both the
treatment and control groups. The remaining census blocks (about 14,000 homes) were
assigned to the control group. Contiguous block groups were used because the implementation
contractor, Positive Energy (now OPOWER), believed that increased communication among
people receiving the Home Electricity Reports in the same community would lead to greater
energy savings.4
Allcott (2011) , Ayers, Raseman, and Shih (2009), and Schultz et al. (2007) found that
providing feedback to customers on home electricity and natural gas usage with a focus on peer
comparisons decreased consumption by 1 to 2 percent, potentially saving 110 million kWh per
year if feedback were provided to all of the utility’s customers (Ayers et al. 2009). Additional
evidence that social incentives can make a difference comes from California’s 2001 media
campaign to promote voluntary conservation after rolling blackouts in 2000 and early 2001.
Consumption in San Diego declined by 7% during the initial two phases of the campaign, before
rebounding (Reiss and White 2008).
Why Could Ideology Mediate the Response to this Nudge?
Within a household production framework, a household values electricity as an input in
producing comfort (e.g. indoor temperature) and leisure and household production activities .
Total household electricity consumption in any given period is the sum of electricity used in each
of these activities. A household's total electricity consumption depends on choices over 1) the

4

In a 2009 Home Energy Use Survey conducted by the electric utility, households in the control
group were more likely to report talking to friends and neighbors about their electricity bill than
households in the treatment group, suggesting that receiving the Home Energy Report did not
inspire discussion and that any positive peer effects operate through implicit social pressure.
7

attributes of the house, such as size; 2) the attributes of appliances; and 3) the intensity of
utilization of appliances for leisure and household activities, indoor temperature control and
illumination.

These choices, in turn, depend on climate, prices and personal attributes,

including ideology.
We view environmental ideology as a set of prior beliefs including those about the
importance of energy conservation

The ideological divide on environmental issues between

Democrats and Republicans could affect how a household responds to an energy conservation
“nudge.” In the United States, conservatives consistently oppose environmental regulation and
energy policies intended to further environmental aims, as seen in polling data on the belief in
climate change (Dunlap and McCright 2008) and Congressional voting patterns (Cragg, Zhou,
Gurney and Kahn 2012). Dunlap and McCright (2008) report that in 2008 there was 34
percentage point gap between Democrats and Republicans in their agreement with a statement
that the effects of global warming have already begun, up from a 4 percentage point gap in 1997.
The 2008 National Environmental Scorecard of the League of Conservation Voters gives the
House Democratic leadership a score of 95 (out of a best score of 100) and the Republican
leadership a score of 3.5 A 2009 Pew survey found a 23 percentage gap between Democrat and
Republican agreement with the statement that people should be willing to pay higher prices to
protect the environment. Republicans and Democrats respond differently to “carbon offsets”
versus “carbon tax” (Hardistry, Johnson, and Weber 2010), suggesting that ideology moderates
how individuals think of key words.
European studies have highlighted the role that environmental ideology plays in
determining the willingness to take voluntary actions to mitigate one’s carbon externality and the
5

See http://www.lcv.org/2008-pdf.pdf .
8

willingness to pay to purchase a “green product.” Thalmann (2004) and Halbheer, Niggli and
Schmutzler (2006) document that voters who are left-of-center or who are environmentalists
were more likely to vote for Swiss environmental referenda. Brounen and Kok (2011) found
that the price premium for residential homes that are certified as highly energy efficient in
Holland is higher in “green” communities, that is communities where the Green Party and the
Party for the Animals had received a larger fraction of the vote.
Given this background, there are two main hypotheses that can be tested. Many
households will read the report and respond to it for non-ideological reasons, such as wanting to
lower their bill. These households, regardless of ideology, may reduce their consumption. The
response of liberals is ambiguous. Liberals may reduce their consumption by more than
conservatives because of their ideology and have been observed to consume less electricity
(Kotchen and Moore 2008; Costa and Kahn 2010). However, because they have already
invested more time and effort in monitoring their electricity bills and in engaging in voluntary
restraint (i.e. lowering the air-conditioner in the summer), their response could be lower than that
of conservatives.

Secondly, and more controversially, it is possible that anti-environmentalist

conservatives who receive a green looking report and learn that they consume more than their
peers may refuse to decrease their consumption or even increase their consumption in an act of
defiance. People find information more reliable when it conforms to their strong prior beliefs
(e.g. Lord, Ross, and Leper 1979; Miller et al. 1993; Munro and Ditto 1997; Gentzkow and
Shapiro 2006, 2010) and are influenced mainly by those in their network (Murphy and Shleifer
2004).
Data

9

Our primary data set consists of residential billing data from January 2007 to October
2009. These data provide us with information on kilowatt hours purchased per billing cycle, the
length of the billing cycle (measured in days), whether the house uses electric heat, and whether
the household is enrolled in the electric utility's program to purchase energy from renewable
sources. We link each billing cycle to the mean temperature in that billing cycle.6
We link the billing data to the treatment and control data which contain information on
when the household began to receive the Home Energy Reports, as well as information on square
footage of the house, information on whether the home heats with electricity or natural gas, and
the age of the house. We cannot match 1,976 observations in the pilot and control data to the
residential billing data. In our final data set, the treatment and control data therefore contain
81,722, with 48,058 households in the control group. Among the households in the treatment
group, 24,028 received a monthly report and 9,636 received a quarterly report.
We merge individual voter registration and marketing data for March 2009 to our data
set.7 For registered voters we know party affiliation, and whether the individual donates to
environmental organizations. We were able to link half of our sample to the voter registration
data. We linked either the person whose name was on the utility bill or the first person on the
utility bill.8

The individuals we could not link were living in smaller households and in census

block groups with a low proportion of the college-educated, were more likely to receive a
subsidy for electricity because of their low income, and were more likely to have a household

Two different households in the same calendar year and same month who are on different
billing cycles will face different climate conditions.
6

7
8

We purchased the data from www.aristotle.com.
Only 5% of households were “mixed” between conservatives and liberals.
10

head above age 60.9 We also merge to these data, by the census block group, the share of
registered voters who were liberal (Democrat, Green, or Peace and Freedom) in 2000 and the
share of the college-educated in the block group. We expect that environmentalists are more
likely to live in liberal, educated communities (Kahn 2007).
We have access to two revealed preference measures of a household’s environmentalism.
From the data base with voter registration information, we know whether a household has
donated money to an environmental group. We also know whether the household has signed up
for the company’s renewable power program prior to the treatment. This is the electric utility’s
major program to increase the share of its customers who have signed up for renewable energy.
Each household decides whether to opt in and pay a fixed cost of $3 a month to have 50% of its
power generated by renewables or $6 a month to have 100% of its power generated by
renewables.10
We also have access to an ancillary data set which we use to examine household attitudes
about the HER by ideology. In 2009 the electric utility company surveyed 1,375 households
who received the HER, asking them questions about the HER report. We restrict this sample to
households for whom we have information on age and the fraction of liberals in the block group
and to households who were not in minor parties we could not classify as liberal or
conservatives. This leaves us with 1061 observations in this ancillary data set.

9

Relative to all homeowners in the same county these individuals were also more likely to be of
Asian or other ancestry rather than of European ancestry, but were less likely to be Spanish
speaking. They were also lower income.
10
The collected revenue is used by the electric utility to purchase and produce power from wind,
water, and sun.
11

Table 1 shows that the treatment and control groups are roughly representative of all
homeowners in the county in terms of household and neighborhood characteristics. But, there
are some clear differences. The treatment and control groups consume roughly 10% more
electricity than the average county homeowner as of 2007 (before the experiment). Relative to
the average homeowner, the experiment homes are older and more likely to be electric homes.
The households in the experiment group are roughly 10% richer than the average county
homeowner.11 The geographical areas included in the experiment have a higher share of college
graduates than the average county home owner’s community.
The randomization of the HER across blocks was effective. Ayers et al. (2009) reported
that controlling for house characteristics, household demographics, and the number of cooling
degree days and heating degree days, there was no systematic difference in energy usage
between treatment and control groups prior to the treatment (also see Table 1 where we report no
systematic differences between treatment and control groups adjusting for block batch group
correlation). Households living in electric homes were more likely to receive a monthly rather
than a quarterly report.12
Table 2 shows that registered conservatives are slightly younger, have higher household
incomes, larger households, and larger homes than registered liberals. While both conservatives
and liberals donate to environmental causes and pay for renewable energy, liberals are more
likely to do so. We could explain only 2-4% of the variance in registered conservative status
11

Household income is available from credit bureau data.
Within a treated “block batch” households received either a monthly or quarterly report.
Roughly 71% of households received the monthly report. Households with a low baseline
electricity consumption received the quarterly report while households with a high baseline
electricity consumption received the monthly report. Conditional that a household’s daily
average electricity consumption was less than 20 kWh per day it had a 2.5% chance of receiving
the monthly report. Households whose 2006 electricity consumption was greater than 23 kWh
per day had a 99% chance of receiving the monthly report.
12

12

with age, household income, house value, house size, electric heat, and renter status (see Web
Appendix Table 1 for details).
Among the treated, liberals are more likely to receive the quarterly report, indicating that
they use less electricity than conservatives. Liberals living in a liberal community (defined as a
community in which the liberal share is in the top quartile) are almost three times as likely to
receive the quarterly report as conservatives living in a conservative community (defined as a
community in which the liberal share is in the bottom quartile). If political ideology does not
affect the response to the HER, conservatives should respond more because they are treated more
intensely.
Econometric Framework
Previous studies have examined the HER report’s average treatment effect and have also
examined how its effect varies by standard characteristics such as attributes of the home and
socio-economic characteristics of the owner. The distinguishing feature of this study is our
emphasis on household environmental ideology as an important determinant for how households
respond to well-meaning new information.
We estimate intent-to-treat effects (which we will simply refer to as treatment effects) of
receiving the HER by seven specifications of the form:
1)

)

13

where the unit of analysis is the household in a year and month and where TREAT is a dummy
equal to one if the household received the Home Energy Report and where the different
specifications use different subsets of the variables. TREAT thus is equal to 0 either if the
household is never treated or is not yet treated. In all regressions we control for household and
month/year fixed effects, a cubic in mean daily temperature within the billing cycle, and an
interaction of the cubic mean daily temperature with a dummy indicator if the house is an electric
house (Temp, Electric). We also interact party registration, green indicators, individual
characteristics, block characteristics, and house characteristics with an indicator for whether the
treatment period has started. Our political party indicators are liberal (Democrat, Green, or
Peace and Freedom), other party (Reform, Conservative, Natural Law or Other), no party
affiliation, and not registered, with conservative (Republican, American Party, and Libertarian)
as the omitted dummy variable. Our green indicators are whether the household purchases
energy from renewable sources and whether the household donates money to environmental
causes. We cluster the standard errors on the block batch group to account for correlation within
the block batch group. Our specifications differ in the number of included treatment interaction
effects.
We examine who accepts treatment by estimating, for the treatment group, a probit
regression of the form
2)
where OptOut is a dummy variable equal to one if the household opts out of receiving the
treatment, High is a dummy variable equal to one if the household’s consumption is above the
neighborhood average, Usage is the household’s electricity usage in 2006, Age is the age of the
head of the household, Liberal is a dummy equal to one if the household head was registered as

14

either a Democrat, Green, or Peace and Freedom party member, and Unregistered is a dummy
equal to one of if the household was not registered.
Using a small surveyed sample, we also examine who, in the treatment group, found the
reports of no value or disliked the reports by estimating probit regressions of the form
3)

where Report Reaction is either a dummy variable equal to one if the household found the
reports of no value (responses of not at all or not very valuable) or a dummy variable equal to
one if the household disliked the reports (responses of did not like or indifferent).
Results
Own ideology, whether measured by political party affiliation, donations to
environmental organizations, or the purchase of green energy, is associated with differential
treatment effects (see regression 2 in Table 3). 13 Although the mean overall treatment effect is 0.021 (see regression 1 in Table 3) when we do not allow for heterogeneous treatment effects, a
registered conservative will decrease mean daily kWh by 1.7 percent in response to the treatment
but a registered liberal will reduce consumption by 2.4 percent, all else equal (see regression 2 in
Table 3). Those purchasing energy from renewable resources reduce their consumption by 0.9
percent in response to the treatment relative to those not purchasing green energy. Those
donating to environmental organizations reduce their consumption by 1.1 percent more than
households who do not donate to environmental organizations.
13

We also have information on household monthly expenditure on electricity. In the presence
of an increasing block tariff structure, some recipients of the Home Energy Report may reduce
their expenditure by more than their electricity consumption. We have estimated regressions
similar to equation 1 in which we use the log of household monthly electricity expenditure as the
dependent variable. We obtained very similar results.
15

The fraction of liberals and the fraction of college-educated in the census block group
affects treatment response, independent of own characteristics (see regression 3 in Table 3). An
increase of 0.1 in the fraction of liberals in the census block group reduces consumption by 0.6
percent in response to the treatment. Controlling for the fraction of liberals in the block group
leads to statistically insignificant effects of own party affiliation but leaves the effects of
ideology as measured by donations unchanged.

Own ideology, donating to environmental

groups, and paying for renewable energy remain jointly statistically significant. The higher the
fraction of college graduates in a census block group, the lower consumption.
The fourth regression in Table 3 controls for the effect of house characteristics on
treatment response. Those in older houses, in bigger homes, and in electric homes reduce their
consumption more. Housing characteristics may reflect occupant characteristics. Liberals are
more likely to be in older houses (but less likely to be in bigger homes). Controlling for housing
characteristics, each increase of 0.1 in the fraction of liberals in the census block group reduces
consumption by 0.4 percent in response to the treatment.
The fifth regression in Table 3 adds controls for the effect of household income, home
value, and renter status on treatment response. There is no statistically significant differential
treatment effect of renter status. The treatment effect is increasing in home value. The addition
of these and the previous control variables reduces the impact of liberal share within the block
group but does not affect how liberals respond to the treatment.
The sixth regression in Table 4 examines the linearity assumption on liberal share within
census block group by substituting quintiles of the liberal share for liberal share within blocks. It
shows that a greater liberal share relative to the lowest quintile is associated with households’

16

reducing their electricity consumption in response to the treatment. The quintiles are jointly
significantly different from 0 at the 10 percent level (F(4,956)=2.29). We observe a similar
pattern when we examined quartiles instead of quintiles (see regression 1 in Web Appendix
Table 2).
Our seventh and final regression (predicted values are graphed in Figure 1 and the
regression is given in the last column of Web Appendix Table 2) tests for persistence over time
by adding indicators for whether the time period is during the first or second half of the
experiment. It shows that registered conservatives who do not purchase renewable energy and
who do not donate to environmental organizations reduce their consumption in response to the
treatment by 0.01 in the first half of the experiment and by 0.02 in the second half of the
experiment.

Registered liberals who purchase renewable energy and who donate to

environmental organizations reduce their consumption in response to the treatment by 0.04 in the
first half of the experiment and by 0.05 in the second half of the experiment.
When we restricted the sample to households whose electricity usage was above the
median in 2006 (precisely those households a utility would want to target to reduce total
electricity demand), we obtained a similar response for liberals but a larger response for
households who pay for renewable energy (see Web Appendix Table 3). The effects of being in
an electric home are no longer as large. When we examined households with baseline electricity
usage below the median we found a smaller treatment effect and a statistically insignificant
effect of paying for renewable energy and for donating to environmental groups (see Web
Appendix Table 4).

17

Table 4 examines the role that ideology plays in responding to receiving the HER.

We

use the regression results from Table 3’s column (4) and (6). Evaluating all characteristics at the
median and using the regression in column (4), the treatment effect for liberals who purchase
energy from renewable resources, who donate to environmental causes, and who live in a block
group where the share of liberals is at least in the 75th percentile (less than 1 percent of our
sample) is -0.036. The treatment effect for registered liberal who live in a block group where the
share of liberals is at least in the 75th percentile (26% of our sample) is -0.021. The treatment
effect for a conservative who does not pay for renewable energy, does not donate to
environmental groups, and is in bottom 25th percentile liberal block group (22 percent of our
sample) is -0.011. When we use the regression results from Table 3’s column (6) we obtain a
treatment effect of -0.008 for a conservative who does not pay for renewable energy, does not
donate to environmental groups, and is in the bottom quintile liberal block group. The treatment
effect for a liberal who pays for renewable energy, donates to environmental groups, and is in the
top quintile liberal block group is -0.048.
We further probed the robustness of our results by estimating equation 1 using quantile
regressions (see Table 5).

Estimating the impact of the HER reports at the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th

and 90th quantiles, our predicted results show that at the lower quantiles liberals who pay for
renewable energy and donate to environmental organizations are three to four times as likely to
reduce their consumption in response to the treatment as conservatives who do not pay for
renewable energy and do not donate to environmental organizations. At the 90th quantile,
differences between conservatives and liberals are smaller.
Persistence of the Report Effects

18

Our examination of seasonal patterns of response to the treatment leads us to conclude
that liberals are more likely to turn down the air-conditioning in the summer in response to the
treatment. When we added to Equation 4 in Table 3 an interaction between treatment and
summer months (May 1-October 31) and an interaction between treatment, summer months, and
liberal, we obtained a coefficient on the interaction between treatment and summer months of 0.002 ( =0.006) and a coefficient on the interaction between treatment and summer months and
liberal of -0.012 ( =0.004) (see Web Appendix Table 2, column 3).
It is theoretically ambiguous whether the HER reports will have a larger impact in the
short run or the medium term. When a household first receives such a report this may be a
salient event whose “new news” shocks the household and subsequent reports reinforce the
original news. In this case, we might observe a large drop in consumption followed by a
constant level (climate adjusted).
Alternatively, in the medium term a household is more likely to adjust more of its
durables stock and may make more energy efficient investments when it makes new investments
in such durables. The evidence suggests that this strategy is being pursued. We found that
households in the treatment group were more likely to obtain a rebate from the utility for
purchasing an energy efficient durable.

In a probit regression (see Web Appendix Table 5) of

the probability of obtaining a rebate on whether the household was in the treatment group, the
household’s political affiliation, the age of the household head, and the household’s baseline
electricity usage, we found that the derivative of the coefficient on the treatment dummy was a
statistically significant 0.006 ( =0.002). At the sample mean of 0.056, this represents an 11
percent increase in the probability of obtaining a rebate.

19

Opting out of the Treatment
The decision to quit the HER treatment and consumer survey reactions to the HER
provide additional evidence on which subgroups of the population disliked the treatment that are
consistent with our identity story.

Households could opt out of receiving the HER either by

emailing, phoning, or mailing the utility. Although the information is free, 2% of households
took action not to receive it and 36% of the survey group reported disliking the report. Our
results have implications not just for our identity hypothesis but also for the long-term success of
the HER program among different types of households.
Households that opted out of the treatment were more likely to be high electricity
consumers, both relative to their neighbors and in absolute levels, and they were less likely to be
liberals than conservatives (see Table 6). At the mean opt out rate of 0.020, a liberal was 15%
percent less likely to opt out.

High electricity users relative to their neighbors were 65% more

likely to opt out.
In a subsample of 1,061 consumers interviewed about the home energy reports, high
electricity users, both relative to their neighbors and in absolute levels, were more likely to claim
that the reports were useless or that they disliked them. Liberals were less likely than
conservatives to state that the reports were useless or that they disliked them. Being liberal
decreased the probability of finding a report useless by 0.131, a decrease of 44% from the sample
mean of 0.301. Being a liberal decreased the probability of disliking the report by 0.102, a
decrease of 28% from the sample mean of 0.363.

High electricity users relative to their

neighbors were 27% more likely to find the report useless and were 38% more likely to report
disliking the report.

20

Liberals and conservatives did not report differential rates of spending less than 2
minutes reading the report (see the last column in Web Appendix Table 5). High users were
statistically, significantly more likely to spend less time reading the report.
A Regression Discontinuity Test of Differential Responses to Normative Messages
This paper's main focus has been to estimate the differential response of
environmentalists and non-environmentalists to receiving a HER report. We have also examined
whether, among those who received a HER report, there is a differential response between
political liberals and conservatives to the normative message included with the first report.
Households received one of three normative messages: “great,” “good,” or “room for
improvement.” These normative messages were based on the household’s consumption
compared to that of 100 neighbors living in similar-sized houses. For the first report only we
observe both the normative message and the ratio of the household’s electricity consumption in
the last month divided by the average consumption of 100 nearby neighbors.
As discussed in the Web Appendix, we implemented a regression discontinuity design
(see Lee and Lemieux 2010) to test whether political ideology influences how households
respond to receiving sharp normative feedback. Although our point estimates suggest that a
political conservative increases consumption by 5.7% in response to receiving a normative
message of “good” versus “room for improvement” whereas a political liberal increases
consumption by only 0.9%, the 95% point wise confidence intervals are large and we fail to
reject the hypothesis that there is no “normative message” for either conservatives or liberals.
Conclusion

21

“Nudges” can make us healthier, richer in our retirement (through opt out defaults), and
better environmental citizens.

Given that such information treatments are cheap to produce and

distribute, these could be cost-effective policies especially for those subsets of households who
are most responsive to these treatments.14
This paper exploited a unique data merge of information from an electricity information
provision field experiment to study how liberal/environmental ideology mediates responses to
peer comparison information. Liberal households are less likely to drop out of the experiment
and more likely to report that they like receiving the report than political conservatives. In
response to receiving the report, liberals reduce their electricity consumption by a larger
percentage than conservatives.
Our results suggest that environmental nudges are most effective in relatively liberal
communities. What works in California may not work in Lubbock, Texas. And even in
California, targeted messaging may be more cost-effective than random assignment of home
energy reports. Future research should continue to test for what might be effective conservation
messages with political conservatives.

14

Allcott (2011) provides an excellent cost-benefit analysis of electricity nudges.
22

Appendix A: Sample Home Electricity Report

23

Source: Residential Energy Use Behavior Change Pilot, OPOWER white paper,
http://www.opower.com/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=cLLj7p8LwGU%3d&tabid=76

24

References
ADM Associates, Inc. 2009. The Impact of Home Electricity Reports. September.
Alesina, Alberto and Nicola Fuchs-Schundeln, Nicola. 2007. Good-Bye Lenin (or Not?): The
Effect of Communism on People's Preferences. American Economic Review. 97(4): 1507-28.
Allcott, Hunt. 2011. Social Norms and Energy Conservation. Journal of Public Economics.
95(9-10): 1082-1095.
Allcott, Hunt and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2010. Behavior and Energy Policy. Science.
327(5970): 1204 - 1205
Ayers, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. 2009. Evidence from Two Large Field
Experiments that Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage. NBER
Working Paper 15386.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119(1), pp.
249-75.
Brounen, Dirk and Nils Kok. 2011. On the Economics of Energy Labels in the Housing Market.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 62: 166-179.
Cialdini, Robert.G et. al. 2006, Managing Social Norms for Persuasive Impact, Social Influence,
1, 3-15.
Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. Why Has California’s Residential Electricty
Consumption Been So Flat Since the 1980s? A Microeconometric Approach. NBER Working
Paper 15978.
Cragg, Michael, YuYu Zhou and Kevin Gurney and Matthew E. Kahn. 2012. Carbon
Geography: The Political Economy of Congressional Support for Legislation Intended to
Mitigate Greenhouse Gas Production. Economic Inquiry doi: 10.1111/j.1465-7295.2012.00462.x
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(3): 1187-1234.
Di Tella, Rafael, Sebastian Galiani, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2007. The Formation of Beliefs:
Evidence from the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
February: 209-241.
Dunlap, Riley E. and Aaron M. McCright. 2008. A widening gap: Republican and Democratic
views on climate change. Environment. 50 (5): 26-35.

25

Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2006. Media Bias and Reputation. Journal of
Political Economy. 114(2): 280-316.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from
U.S. Daily Newspapers. Econometrica. 78(1): 35-71.
Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo. 2009. Growing Up in a Recession: Beliefs and the
Macroeconomy. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15321.
Goldstein, Noah, Robert B. Cialdini and Vladas Griskevicius. A room With a Viewpoint: Using
Social Norms to Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels, Journal of Consumer
Research.
Griskevicius, Vladas, Robert B. Cialdini, and Noah J. Goldstein: Social Norms: An
Underetimated and Underemployed Lever for Managing Climate Change, IJSC 3 (2008) 5-13.
Halbheer, Daniel; Niggli, Sarah; Schmutzler, Armin. 2006. What Does it Take to Sell
Environmental Policy? An Empirical Analysis of Referendum Data. Environmental & Resource
Economics. 33 (4): 441–462.
Hardistry, David, Eric Johnson, and Elke Weber. 2010. A Dirty Word or a Dirty World?
Attribute Framing, Political Affiliation, and Query Theory. Psychological Science. 21(1): 86-92.
Kahn, Matthew. E. 2007. Do greens drive hummers or hybrids? Environmental ideology as a
determinant of consumer choice. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 54(2),
129-145.
Kahn, Matthew E. and Eric Morris. 2009. Walking the Walk: The Association Between
Environmentalism and Green Transit Behavior, Journal of the American Planning Association.
75(4) 389-405.
Kahn, Matthew E and Ryan K. Vaughn. 2009. Green Market Geography: The Spatial
Clustering of Hybrid Vehicles and LEED Registered Buildings. Contributions in Economic
Policy. Berkeley Electronic Press Journal
Kotchen, Matthew & Michael Moore, 2007. Private provision of environmental public goods:
Household participation in green-electricity programs. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 53(1): 1-16.
Kotchen, Matthew & Michael Moore, 2008. Conservation: From Voluntary Restraint to a
Voluntary Price Premium. Environmental & Resource Economics, 40(2): 195-215.
Lee, David, S. and Thomas Lemieux, 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” Journal
of Economic Literature, 48(2), 281-355.

Lee, David S, & Enrico Moretti & Matthew J. Butler, 2004. "Do Voters Affect Or Elect Policies?
Evidence from the U. S. House," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 807-859.

26

Lord, Charles G., Lee Ross, and Mark R. Lepper. 1979. Biased Assimilation and Attitude
Polarization: The Effects of Prior Theories on Subsequently Considered Evidence. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 37 (11): 2098–2109.
Miller, Arthur G., John W. McHoskey, Cynthia M. Bane, and Timothy G. Dowd. 1993. The
Attitude Polarization Phenomenon: Role of Response Measure, Attitude Extremity, and
Behavioral Consequences of Reported Attitude Change. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 64 (April): 561–74.
Munro, Geoffrey D., and Peter H. Ditto. 1997. Biased Assimilation, Attitude Polarization, and
Affect in Reactions to Stereotype-Relevant Scientific Information. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin. 23 (6): 636–53.
Murphy, Kevin and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. Persuasion in Politics. American Economic Review.
94(2): 435-9.
Piketty, Thomas. 1995. Social Mobility and Redistributive Policies. Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 110(3): 551–84.
Reiss, Peter and Matthew White. 2008. What Changes Energy Consumption? Prices and Public
Pressure. Rand Journal of Economics. 39(3): 636-663.
Schultz, P. Wesley, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J. Goldstein, and Vladas
Griskevicius. 2007. The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social
Norms. Psychological Science 18, 429 –34.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health,
Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Thalmann, Philippe. 2004. The public acceptance of green taxes: 2 million voters express their
opinion. Public Choice. 119: 179-217.

27

