NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF INTERGENERATIONAL INCOME MOBILITY
Andrea Ichino
Loukas Karabarbounis
Enrico Moretti
Working Paper 15946
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15946

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

We would like to thank Alberto Alesina, Giacomo Calzolari, Ed Glaeser, John Hassler, Larry Katz,
Mattia Nardotto, Sevi Rodriguez-Mora and seminar participants at C6-Capri, ESSLE-CEPR 2008,
Edinburgh University, Harvard and Sorbonne for useful discussions. We also thank two anonymous
referees for their helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Andrea Ichino, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Enrico Moretti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Political Economy of Intergenerational Income Mobility
Andrea Ichino, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Enrico Moretti
NBER Working Paper No. 15946
April 2010
JEL No. J01
ABSTRACT
The intergenerational elasticity of income is generally considered one of the best summary measures
of the degree to which a society gives equal opportunity of success to all its members, irrespective
of their family background. We present a parsimonious political economy model and show how the
interaction between private and collective decisions determines the equilibrium level of mobility. Contrary
to what it is generally assumed, a low correlation between father income and son income is not always
desirable, as it may imply more inefficiency due to the distortionary effects of mobility-enhancing
public policies. Moreover, taking into account the heterogeneity in preferences for intergenerational
mobility leads to the conclusion that even if a fully mobile society is desirable ex ante, it may not be
politically sustainable ex post. Our model clarifies the structural parameters behind the widely studied
intergenerational elasticity of income in terms of political economy forces. Finally, we show some
empirical evidence on the relationship between intergenerational elasticity of income across countries
and its underlying determinants that is consistent with the predictions of the model.

Andrea Ichino
University of Bologna
Dipartimento di Economia
piazza Scaravilli, 2
40126, Bologna - Italy
andrea.ichino@unibo.it
Loukas Karabarbounis
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
karabarb@fas.harvard.edu

Enrico Moretti
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

The intergenerational elasticity of income is generally considered one of the best summary
measures of the degree to which a society gives equal opportunities of success to all its members,
irrespective of their family background. Starting with pioneering work by Solon (1992) and
Zimmerman (1992), the economic literature has made important advances on the question of
how to measure this parameter using the Galton-Becker-Solon regression:
ys = a + βyf + us

(1)

where ys is son’s log income and yf is father’s log income. A lower β denotes a smaller association
between father’s and son’s income and therefore a higher degree of social mobility. As such, a
lower β is often interpreted as being a desirable feature of a society.
While we have learned a lot on how to estimate this reduced-form parameter, less progress
has been made on understanding its underlying structural determinants. What does β actually
measure? Is a lower β necessarily more desirable? Important progress on these questions has
been made by Becker and Tomes (1979), who have shown how the intergenerational persistence
of income reflects both “nature and nurture”. In their model individuals are assigned talent
by nature, and parents can add to that talent by privately investing in their children. The
intergenerational transmission of income is therefore a combination of exogenous biological
factors and endogenous optimizing behavior of parents. However, the Becker and Tomes model
generally ignores the role of redistributive policies and their deeper determinants. Redistributive
policies have the potential to play an important role in determining how income is transmitted
from one generation to the next. For example, public education can significantly affect economic
opportunities of individuals who come from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds. At the
same time, it can also affect parents’ incentives to privately invest in their children human
capital, both directly and throughout the disincentive effect of taxes. More in general, most
redistributive policies—including taxation, affirmative action, welfare programs, subsidies that
target poor individuals—potentially affect the intergenerational elasticity of income. While
some studies have highlighted the role of public policies as a determinant of social mobility,
most existing studies take these policies as exogenous.
In this paper we use a model with exogenous talent endowments, endogenous parental
investment in children and endogenous redistributive institutions, to identify the structural
parameters that govern the intergenerational mobility. Our framework extends the Becker and
2

Tomes framework and clarifies how the interaction between private and collective decisions determines the equilibrium level of social mobility. The model allows for a structural interpretation
of the widely studied parameter β. This is important because it allows a better understanding
of the deeper politico-economic determinants of intergenerational mobility and the role of public policy. The model also shows how we should interpret and rank differences over time and
across countries in β. Since redistributive policies generate a trade-off between insurance and
incentives, the optimal β is not necessarily zero for all societies. In addition, international comparisons of intergenerational elasticity of income are shown to be not particularly informative
about fairness without taking into account differences in politico-economic institutions. The
predictions of the model seem generally consistent with the empirical evidence.
Our framework focuses on how parents transfer economic endowments to their children
through private and collective investment in their human capital. Before having children,
parents know their own genetic ability but are uncertain about their children genetic ability.
Consistent with Becker and Tomes (1979) and Loury (1981), parents can decide to invest
privately in the human capital of their children, given an exogenous degree of transmission of
genetic ability. This private investment offsets some of the risk of having low genetic ability,
thus reducing the probability that an individual might turn out to have low productivity and
therefore low income. Since private investment can offset some but not all of the genetic risk,
parents “under the veil of ignorance” have an incentive to collectively create public institutions
that provide further insurance against the risk of low genetic ability. A natural example of this
type of policy is public education.
We model public education as an insurance system that increases the income of the low
talented children, at the expense of lowering the income of the more talented children. We show
how and why a more progressive educational policy increases social mobility in equilibrium.
The equilibrium level of social mobility depends on the costs and benefits of public education.
This trade-off is resolved by two forces: (i) the balance between costly insurance and incentives
to privately invest in children’s human capital and (ii) the political process that aggregates
conflicting interests regarding the desired degree of social mobility.
A novel insight of our analysis is to show how political economy forces shape the equilibrium
level of social mobility. Even if public education is relatively costless to provide for the average
family, it may hurt the interests of the rich dynasties who, in a world of increased social mobility,
are more likely to move down the income ladder. As a result, the maximum amount of mobility
(β = 0) is not necessarily the equilibrium one, even when public insurance is relatively cheap
3

to provide.
More generally, the model shows that existing differences in β across countries are (at least
in part) governed by all those political institutions that affect public education. Therefore,
two societies with similar fundamentals (such as the degree of parental altruism, variability in
market earnings, degree of biological and cultural transmission of family characteristics, labor
market discrimination, asset market incompleteness etc.) may display very different degrees of
intergenerational mobility depending on the identity of the politically decisive family.
In the last part of the paper, we use data on a cross section of countries for which reliable
estimates of β are available to test the predictions of the model. In general, we find that they
are consistent with the empirical evidence. For example, our model predicts that in countries
where rich dynasties are more politically active than poor dynasties, social spending for public
education should be lower and therefore income mobility should be lower. We find that this
appear to be the case in our sample. The difference in the probability of party affiliation
between rich and poor appears to be strongly correlated with β. Such difference has five times
larger predictive power than the rate of return to education, which is often considered as one of
the most prominent determinants of mobility (Solon, 1999, 2004; Corak, 2006). While causality
is obviously unclear, these empirical correlations are at least consistent with our model.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. In
Section 3 we describe the model and examine its positive properties. In Section 4 we derive
the politico-economic determinants of social mobility and show their relation to the GaltonBecker-Solon regression. In Section 5 we present our empirical evidence. Section 6 concludes.
All omitted derivations are in Appendix 1. Appendix 2 describes the data.

2

Related Literature

The objective of our model is to derive the structural politico-economic parameters underlying
the intergenerational elasticity of income. This coefficient—β in equation (1)—has been the
main focus of the existing empirical literature, see among others Solon (1992), Zimmerman
(1992), Björklund and Jäntti (1997), Mulligan (1997) and Solon (1999). Our model is also
related to a more recent empirical strand of research that examines within-country trends in
mobility and compares β over time, see for instance Mazumder (2005, 2007), Lee and Solon
(2006), and Aaronson and Mazumder (2008).
Most theoretical work in this area has focused on the role of the genetic transmission of

4

ability, the incentives for parental investment, and the role of the asset market in explaining
the intergenerational transmission of income. Our framework builds on the theoretical work
of Becker and Tomes (1979), and on extensions of this work by Goldberger (1989), Mulligan
(1997) and Solon (2004).
While some studies have highlighted the role of public policies as a determinant of social
mobility, most existing studies take these policies as exogenous. Examples of papers that have
argued that institutions may be important determinants of mobility, but take these institutions
as exogenous include, among others, the original contribution of Becker and Tomes (1979),
Glomm and Ravikumar (1992), Checchi, Ichino and Rustichini (1999), Solon (1999, 2004),
Davies, Zhang and Zeng (2005), Mayer and Lopoo (2005), and Hassler, Rodriguez Mora, and
Zeira (2007).
In our setting, social mobility depends on public redistributive policies that we model as the
outcome of a politico-economic equilibrium. In this sense, our model relates to the equilibrium
models of Saint-Paul and Verdier (1993), Alesina and Rodrik (1994), and Persson and Tabellini
(1994). These papers show how cross sectional inequality causes growth, through endogenous
public policies. Benabou (1996) further develops this strand of literature and endogenizes
the relationship between inequality, social mobility, redistribution and growth as a function
of the incompleteness of the financial market. While our model abstracts from (physical)
capital accumulation, it emphasizes the endogenous production of human capital (talent) as an
intermediate input for the production of final income. Fernandez and Rogerson (1998) analyze a
reform from a locally financed to a centralized educational system in a multicommunity model
with endogenous choice of location. Relative to their paper, we instead focus on explaining
cross country outcomes. In this case, migration becomes a less important determinant of
social mobility and differences in political institutions become stronger determinants of social
mobility. As in our paper, Bernasconi and Profeta (2007) endogenize institutions in a model
with mobility and argue that the politically-determined level of public education may reveal
the true talent of the children and relax the mismatch of talents to occupations. Relative to
this paper, our model includes both economic and political choices.
In a seminal paper, Piketty (1995) explains the emergence of permanent differences in
attitudes toward redistribution. Benabou and Ok (2001) show how rational beliefs about one’s
relative position in the income ladder affect the equilibrium level of redistribution. These
papers derive the implications of social mobility for redistributive policies, while we focus on
the reverse channel. Specifically, we analyze how endogenously chosen public policies affect the
5

intergenerational mobility.
It is important to note that because the direction of causation in our model differs from the
one emphasized in Benabou and Ok (2001), we obtain a different prediction for the relationship
between mobility and redistribution in the US and Europe. In their paper, more mobility is
associated with less redistribution because voters who are below the mean oppose redistribution
in the rational expectation of income gains in the future. This explanation is intuitive, but cross
Atlantic evidence suggests that the US is less mobile and less redistributive than continental
Europe.1 In our paper, political economy forces that constraint the development of public
education also lead to a lower degree of social mobility. Thus, our model predicts a positive
correlation between social mobility and redistribution of income across countries.

3

A Simple Model of the Intergenerational Transmission
of Income

We first setup the model and derive the intergenerational transmission equation for income and
talent. Then, we derive the first and second moments of income and talent distributions and
discuss how these moments evolve in response to more progressive public policies.

3.1

Set-up of the Model

We consider an infinite horizon overlapping generations economy populated by a measure one
of dynasties, i ∈ [0, 1]. In each period t = 0, 1, 2, ... two generations are alive, fathers and
sons. In each generation, earnings (which we also call “output” or “income” interchangeably)
are produced according to the production function Yi,t = f (µt , Θi,t , Ui,t ). The parameter µt
represents the public policy; Θi,t is father’s human capital or basic skill (e.g. IQ) which we call
“talent”; and Ui,t denotes a random and inelastic factor of production which represents “market
luck”. Specifically, we assume that the production function is given by:
Yi,t = µαt (Ui,t Θi,t )µt

(2)

where µt ∈ (0, 1] and α ≥ 0.
Figure 1 shows the production function graphically. Public policy and its effects are characterized by two parameters, µt and α. The parameter µt characterizes the amount of redistribution in the economy. A lower µt implies a more progressive public policy, but also more
1

See the evidence in Section 5. See also Alesina and Glaeser (2004) for more on this point.

6

distortions. This is shown visually in the left panel of Figure 1, where for given amount of talent
and market luck, a lower µt is associated with less output for the talented or lucky families, but
with more output for the less talented or unlucky families. The most natural example of the
public policy represented by µt is public education. In Section 5 we offer evidence in line with
this interpretation of µt .2 Henceforth, a lower µt is called a more progressive public policy or
a more progressive educational system.
The parameter α characterizes the efficiency of public education. For a given µt , a higher
α implies that a smaller fraction of talents Θi,t gains from progressivity because the system
creates disincentives for high talented agents. In the right panel of Figure 1, the area to the
left of the intersection of the production function with the 45 degree line measures the gains
from progressivity. As α increases, this area becomes smaller relative to the area to the right
of the intersection of the production function with the diagonal, which measures the efficiency
costs of progressivity.3 Henceforth, a higher α denotes more distortions.
In each period t the following events take place:
1. Fathers produce output Yi,t according to equation (2), given the predetermined talent
Θi,t , market luck Ui,t and public policy µt .
2. Fathers choose the policy for their sons, µt+1 , according to the institution or political
process P .
3. Sons are born with a random family endowment Vi,t+1 . The random factor of production
Ui,t+1 is realized.
4. Fathers observe Vi,t+1 and Ui,t+1 and choose investment Ii,t to maximize the dynastic
utility, given resources Yi,t . Investment produces son’s talent according to the production
function Θi,t+1 = g(It , hi Vi,t+1 ).
5. Fathers die, sons become fathers and the process repeats ad infinitum.
For this Section we treat µ as an exogenous parameter. In Section 4 we endogenize it. Son
i is born with random family endowment Vi,t+1 , which, following Becker and Tomes (1979), is
2

Pekkarinen, Uusitalo and Kerr (2008) show how the major Finnish educational reform in the 1970s decreased
the intergenerational elasticity of income from 0.30 to 0.23. Their finding is consistent with our interpretation
of µt .
3
We do not restrict Θi,t to be smaller than unity. If in some period Θi,t ≤ 1 for all families i, we can think
the special case with α = 0 as a growth-enhancing reform that benefits every family, with the least talented
families gaining relatively more.

7

assumed to follow a “Galtonian” AR(1) process:
vi,t+1 = (1 − ρ1 )ρ0 + ρ1 vi,t + ǫi,t+1

(3)

where v = ln V (small caps denote logs of corresponding variables throughout the paper).
For every dynasty i, ǫi,t+1 is a white noise process with expected value E(ǫi,t ) = 0, variance
Var(ǫi,t ) = σv2 and zero autocorrelations. We have 0 ≤ ρ1 < 1 and therefore the logarithm of
family endowment regresses towards the mean, has stationary expectation E(vi,t ) = ρ0 , and
has stationary variance Var(vi,t ) = σv2 /(1 − ρ21 ). The parameter ρ1 characterizes the cultural
or genetic inheritance of traits related to talent and income, and is assumed identical across
families i.
A second random component is represented by market luck, Ui,t+1 , whose logarithm is a
white noise process, has variance σu2 , and is independent to ǫi,t . The difference between Ui,t and
Θi,t is that the latter is an elastic factor of production. As a result, talent is affected by the
inefficiencies associated with the policy µ.
Fathers care about the quality of their children. They observe Vi,t+1 and Ui,t+1 and decide
how to allocate their predetermined income Yi,t into consumption Ci,t and investment Ii,t in
order to maximize the dynastic utility:
ln Ci,t +

1
ln Yi,t+1
γ

(4)

subject to the budget constraint:
Ci,t + Ii,t = Yi,t

(5)

where Yi,t+1 is children’s income.4 The parameter γ > 0 captures the degree of parental altruism,
with higher values denoting smaller altruism. Parental investment Ii,t can be thought as an
private educational input (e.g. tuition fees) that increases a child’s talent.
Sons’ talent is produced with the following production function:
Θi,t+1 = (hi Vi,t+1 )Ii,t

(6)

where hi is a family-specific time-invariant ability effect which allows dynasties to be ex-ante
heterogeneous. This heterogeneity captures long-run differences in market incomes, for instance
due to labor market discrimination against certain racial, ethnic or religious groups. We assume
that hi is distributed according to the density function φh with bounded support H ⊂ R++ ,
and is orthogonal to the disturbances ǫi,t+1 and ui,t+1 .
4

We assume that fathers cannot borrow against their son’s future income. See Loury (1981), Becker and
Tomes (1986) and Mulligan (1997), for an analysis of the relationship between social mobility and borrowing
constraints. See also Benabou (1996, 2000).

8

3.2

The Transmission of Income Across Generations

In this Section we restrict attention to steady state public policies, i.e. we set µt+1 = µt = µ for
all t. Under this assumption, income and talent are stochastic processes with well defined and
easy to analyze unconditional stationary moments. We generalize our analysis in Section 4,
where we endogenize the choice of µ. Solving the problem in (4)-(5), using the production functions (2) and (6), and taking logs, we obtain the equation that describes the intergenerational
transmission of income in family i:
yi,t+1 = δ0,i + δ1 yi,t + δ2 vi,t+1 + δ3 ui,t+1

(7)

δ0,i = δ0 + δi

(8)

where:

δ0 = µ ln



µ
µ+γ



+ α ln µ

(9)

δi = µ ln hi

(10)

δ1 = µ

(11)

δ2 = µ

(12)

δ3 = µ

(13)

The intercept δ0,i can be decomposed into two parts. δ0 is a common effect across all dynasties i, and δi is the dynasty-specific time-invariant effect due to hi . Our autoregressive
coefficient, δ1 , is different from the one in Becker and Tomes (1979) because we assume multiplicative (in levels) production functions for output and talent.5 While the previous literature
has focused on the role of private incentives for the intergenerational mechanism, our δ1 coefficient emphasizes instead the role of public policies. Specifically, the novel element of our model
5

Goldberger (1989) explains in detail the difference between the additive production function (as in the
Becker and Tomes model) and the multiplicative production function. We also note that in our specific CobbDouglas environment, the degree of parental altruism (γ) does not enter into the intergenerational transmission
equation directly, i.e. for given policy µ (see Solon, 2004, for a similar result).

9

is that the slope δ1 is collectively decided by the fathers of each dynasty. Therefore, our mechanism maps collective action outcomes to equilibrium levels of intergenerational transmission
of income. In the Appendix we present the intergenerational transmission of talent.

3.3
3.3.1

The Trade-Off Between Equity and Efficiency
Expectations

From (7) we take the unconditional, stationary expectation of income (“long-run income”) for
family i:
E(yi,t+1 |hi ) =

h

i
µ
µ ρ0 + ln hi + ln µ+γ
+ α ln µ

(14)

1−µ

for all t. In (14), the expectation is conditioned only on hi to denote the dependency of long-run
income on long-run family ability hi . There are four ways through which the public policy µ
affects long-run income.
1. Distortions in Private Investment: This is captured by the ln



µ
µ+γ



term. When public

policy becomes more progressive (lower µ), the marginal propensity to invest in human
capital, µ/(µ + γ), is lower and as a result the long-run level of income tends to decline.
This effect is identical for every dynasty i.
2. Direct Distortions in Output: This effect is shown in the α ln µ term, and is associated
with the shifter µα in the production function for income in equation (2). The effect of µ
on output is more adverse when the parameter α increases.
3. Social Insurance or Benefits of Public Education: The µ term that multiplies the bracket
in the numerator of (14) captures the exponent of the term Θµ in equation (2). For low
ability dynasties (low hi ), a more progressive public educational system increases longrun income. The opposite happens for sufficiently high ability families. The intuition is
shown in Figure 1.
4. Intertemporal Insurance or Social Mobility: This effect is given by the denominator 1 − µ
and is associated with the slope of the intergenerational transmission of income δ2 in (7).
For sufficiently low ability dynasties (low hi ), the numerator is negative and the prospect
of upward mobility (lower µ) increases long-run income. For high ability dynasties, the
numerator is positive and increased mobility decreases their long-run income.

10

We can write father i’s conditional (on the state of the system) expectation for son’s income
as the sum of the long-run level of income in (14) and the transitory deviation of current income
and current family endowment from their long-run levels:
Et (yi,t+1 |hi ) = E(yi,t+1 |hi ) + µ (yi,t − E(yi,t+1 |hi )) + µρ1 (vi,t − ρ0 )

(15)

where the time subscript in the left hand side denotes conditioning on the information set as of
period t (which is summarized by father’s income, yi,t , and family endowment, vi,t ). As we show
in Section 4.1, fathers take into account how progressivity affects this conditional expectation
when voting for µ.
This analysis highlights two important points. First, there is a trade-off between equity
and efficiency. Second, there is political conflict over the equilibrium level of social mobility.
In particular, as we discuss more formally in Section 4.2, fathers with higher ability hi or with
favorable shocks in their market activity, ui,t , or in their family endowment, vi,t , prefer less
progressive policies. It is this heterogeneous effect of µ on dynastic welfare that makes the
political economy aspect of the model interesting and supports our argument that politicoeconomic determinants may be significantly associated with mobility outcomes.
3.3.2

Variances

To understand the implication of our model for inequality, we first consider the stationary,
unconditional variability that a given dynasty hi faces in its income process. From equation
(7) this is:
Var(yi,t+1 |hi ) =

µ2
µ2 1 + ρ1 µ σv2
σu2
+
2
2
2
1 − µ 1 − ρ1 µ 1 − ρ1 1 − µ

(16)

Inequality across generations occurs because the disturbances ǫi,t+1 and ui,t+1 have different
realizations across time for a given family i. From inspection of (16), we see that a more
progressive system (lower µ) reduces the variability of income. In addition, it lowers the fraction
of variability attributed to family luck vi,t+1 . Intuitively, market luck ui,t+1 matters only for the
final production of income, while family luck vi,t+1 affects both the production of talent directly,
and the production of final output indirectly (through talent). As a result, more progressive
public policies reduce the relative importance of the latter in the intergenerational variance of
income.
If all families were identical, then the variance that families face across generations in (16)
coincides with the stationary inequality in the cross section of families. More in general, with
heterogeneous families, the ex-post or cross-sectional variance of income can be decomposed in
11

two parts:6
Var(yi,t+1 ) = Var(yi,t+1 |hi ) + Var(E(yi,t+1 |hi ))

(17)

The second term in (17) represents the variance “under the veil of ignorance”, which from
(14) equals:

µ2 Var(ln hi )
(18)
(1 − µ)2
To summarize, in (17) the stationary total inequality in the cross section of families is
Var(E(yi,t+1 |hi )) =

decomposed into the dynastic variability in the process for income—common to all families
i—and the inequality that arises because heterogeneous families have different levels of longrun income. It is immediate to see that a more progressive educational system reduces all
inequalities. In the Appendix we also discuss the variance of talent.
3.3.3

Covariances

Consider now the intergenerational correlation of income. This summary statistic is what
the literature calls social mobility, inequality across generations or “equality of opportunity”.
Conditioning on hi , we distinguish the intergenerational correlation of income within family,
Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi ), from the correlation we may observe in the data when families are heterogeneous, Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t ). The latter is discussed in Section 4.3 in relation to the GaltonBecker-Solon regression. Consider the time series of output and talent for some family i with
time-invariant ability level hi . Given that we are in a stationary state with Var(yi,t+1 |hi ) =
Var(yi,t |hi ), we can derive the dynastic intergenerational correlation of income:
Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi ) =

(µ + ρ1 )σv2 + µ(1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )σu2
Cov(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi )
=
Var(yi,t |hi )
(1 + ρ1 µ)σv2 + (1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )σu2

(19)

For talent, the correlation Corr(θi,t+1 , θi,t |hi ) is given in Appendix 1.

3.4

Summary

In Proposition 1 we summarize how a more progressive public policy (lower µ) affects the
moments of income and talent.
Proposition 1. Effects of Progressivity on Income and Talent: In any stationary state,
with a time invariant public policy 0 < µt+1 = µt = µ ≤ 1 we have:
6

In (16) the variance is not indexed by i and as a result Ehi (Var(yi,t+1 |hi )) = Var(yi,t+1 |hi ). The variance
of income is common to all families i because hi enters multiplicatively into the production of talent (6). The
same comment applies for the intergenerational correlation of incomes, in Section 3.3.3. In a more general
version of our model, we could allow for heterogeneity in the returns to investment (e.g. with a production
ξi
). Under this specification the slope of the regression (δ1 ) in equation
function of the form: Θi,t = (hi Vi,t+1 ) Ii,t
(7) depends on i.

12

1. A more progressive system (lower µ) decreases / increases long-run income and talent
for sufficiently high / low hi families. A more progressive system favors families with
temporarily low output, yi,t < E(yi,t+1 |hi ), and it favors families with temporarily low
family endowment, vi,t < ρ0 .
2. The dynastic variance of income, Var(yi,t+1 |hi ), and the dynastic variance of talent,
Var(θi,t+1 |hi ), are increasing in µ. Var(yi,t+1 |hi )/Var(θi,t+1 |hi ), i.e. the intra-family
ratio of intergenerational inequalities, is bounded above by 1, and is increasing in µ.
3. The cross sectional inequality of income Var(yi,t+1 ) and the cross sectional inequality of
talent Var(θi,t+1 ) increase in µ. Their ratio is bounded above by 1 and also increases in
µ.
4. The dynastic intergenerational correlation of income Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi ) is increasing in
µ. The ratio Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi )/Corr(θi,t+1 , θi,t |hi ) is smaller than 1, and increases in
µ.
Proposition 1 shows how a more progressive public policy decreases the dynastic and cross
sectional inequalities of income and talent, and also decreases the within-dynasty intergenerational correlation of income. These two predictions are consistent with the general equilibrium
effects of educational subsidies as derived recently in Hassler, Rodriguez Mora and Zeira (2007).
They also tend to imply a positive comovement of the cross sectional and the intergenerational
inequality, as discussed in Solon (2004). Finally, our model predicts that in a society with no
public policy (µ = 1), the ratio of variances and intergenerational correlations of income over
talent take their maximum value (unity). As public policy becomes more progressive these ratios decrease. Intuitively, when the progressivity of public education increases, a given amount
of variation in the production of talent across time or across families matters less for final
earnings in the market.7 In Section 5 we offer some evidence in line with this prediction.

4

The Political Economy of Social Mobility

First, we define the politico-economic equilibrium. Then, we derive the equilibrium choice of
the public policy µ in terms of deeper political, economic, cultural and genetic parameters.
7

This result reflects the difference between the coefficients δ2 and λ2 (or δi and λi ) in the two intergenerational
transmission equations. See Appendix for the details.

13

Finally, we show the relationship between the equilibrium level of µ and the slope of the
Galton-Becker-Solon regression, β.

4.1

Politico-Economic Equilibrium

In period t, father i observes and takes as given the realization of last period’s output, yi,t ,
and endowment, vi,t . However, fathers do not know the realization of children’s endowment
vi,t+1 and market luck ui,t+1 before they vote for µt+1 and they need to form rational expectations. Father i’s preferences over public policies µt+1 are ordered according to the conditional
expectation of (4):
1
(20)
W (µt+1 ; hi , yi,t , vi,t , s) = ln Ci,t + Et (yi,t+1 |hi )
γ
where s is the vector of structural parameters, and the conditional expectation, Et (yi,t+1 |hi ), is
given by (15). Ci,t is the optimal level of consumption:
Ci,t =

γ
µt+1 + γ

Yi,t

(21)

which is a function of the public policy. Note that we reinstate the time subscript in µ.
An important simplification for deriving the equilibrium in our model is that sons are born
after fathers have chosen the public policy µt+1 . As a result, sons do not affect the choice
of µ. Under this assumption, preferences of fathers over current policies are independent of
future policies, and there is no need to explicitly consider dynasties’ expectations about future
policy outcomes.8 This assumption is intuitive in the context of intergenerational mobility.
As we discuss in Section 5 in a cross section of OECD countries, it is public spending on
education—rather than other forms of government activity—that strongly correlates with social
mobility. Since public education is regarded as highly redistributive at the primary level, i.e.
before sons’ political rights are extended, our assumption captures this realistic feature of the
intergenerational transmission.
The policy that maximizes (20) is called the “most preferred policy for dynasty i”:
µi,t+1 = µ(hi , yi,t , vi,t ; s) = arg max W (µ; hi , yi,t , vi,t , s)
µ

8

(22)

That is, the indirect utility W in (20) depends only on the current choice variable, µt+1 , and not on future
public policies, µt+2 , .... As a result, we do not have to consider the policy fixed point problem that arises when
current policies depend on expectations of future policies but also affect future policies through the optimal
consumption and investment choices and the resulting intergenerational transmission of income and talent. Our
setup resembles the equilibrium in the models of Persson and Tabellini (1994), Benabou (1996), and Fernandez
and Rogerson (1998), with “one period-ahead commitment to policy”. Krusell, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (1997)
show how to formulate and numerically solve for time-consistent politico-economic equilibria in a general class
of models. Hassler, Rodriguez Mora, Storesletten and Zilibotti (2003) solve closed-form the Markov Perfect
Equilibrium in a non trivial dynamic voting game under the assumption of risk neutrality.

14

The most preferred policy for every father reflects various trade-offs. First, it reflects the
four channels that affect the long-run value of income in Section 3.3.1. In addition, transitory
deviations from long-run income and transitory deviations from long-run family endowment also
affect the most preferred policy, as shown in equation (15). Finally, public policy allocates resources intertemporally and creates a trade-off across generations. The consumption-investment
ratio for every father is γ/µt+1 . A less progressive system (higher µt+1 ) distorts less the incentive of parents to privately invest in their children talent and therefore when µt+1 decreases
parents transfer more resources to the next generation.
To solve the model we define a relevant family-specific summary of the system which we
call “income potential”, Qi,t . Income potential therefore summarizes the history of all relevant
market and family shocks. Our functional form assumptions—log preferences and multiplicative
production functions—imply that income potential for family i at time t is the log-sum of three
terms: life-long ability level ln hi , current log income, yi,t , plus a term proportional to log family
endowment, vi,t .
Qi,t = ln hi + yi,t + ρ1 vi,t

(23)

Proposition 2. Preferences over Public Policy:
1. Induced preferences over µi,t+1 as described by W (.) in (20) are single-peaked if (but not
only if ) α > 1 for any Qi,t .
2. The most preferred policy µi,t+1 is strictly increasing in Qi,t .
The first part of the Proposition establishes a sufficient condition for the indirect utility
W to be single-peaked. The second part shows that families with higher income potential
prefer less progressive public policies. Families with high income potential may be families
from advantaged groups (high hi ) or families that face favorable economic (yi,t > E(yi,t+1 |hi ))
or cultural (vi,t > ρ0 ) shocks. Therefore, in our model families from disadvantaged social groups
(low hi ) may still prefer less progressive public policies, if their last generations experienced
good luck in the market or in the production of talent.
Because transitory shocks affect preferences for public policies, in general the equilibrium
policy will not be time invariant, as assumed for simplicity in Section 3. The easiest but
most restrictive way to proceed is to assume a pre-commitment institution in which the initial
generation of fathers observe {yi,0 , vi,0 , hi } and choose once and for all a time invariant system
µ, which by assumption remains active in all future periods. A second possibility is to consider
15

the stochastic steady state of the model, in which the distribution of income potentials in the
population is stationary. In this case, the optimal µ remains constant in time, but the identity
of the decisive family is allowed to vary, since in the steady state families are hit by different
market and family shocks. Under both these cases, the analysis for the long-run moments in
Section 3 applies, and the time invariant coefficients for the stochastic processes are given by
the optimal stationary µ. Finally, we can apply our comparative statics to the most general
case, when the dynastic variance and the public policy depend on calendar time along the
transitional dynamics in a period-by-period decision making process. Under this setting, the
equilibrium public policy (yet to be defined) will in general depend on the current state Qi,t of
the decisive father.9
Let the distribution of income potential in the cross section of dynasties at time t be Φt (Q) =
RQ

Ql,t

φt (z)dz. We define the political institution in terms of the equilibrium outcome that it

implies.
Definition 1. Institution P: An institution P results in the public policy µet+1 mostly preferred
by the dynasty in the 100pth percentile of the income potential distribution Φt , i.e. the family

with an income potential such that p = Φt (Qi,t ). We denote the decisive dynasty as Qp,t .
Our definition encompasses some commonly used institutions, both in the optimal policy
R
and in the political economy literature. Let the average income potential be Q̄t = Qt zdΦt (z).

Then if p = Φt (Q̄t ), one obtains the utilitarian social rule that maximizes the welfare of the
average father or the welfare “behind the veil of ignorance” for Qi :
Z
max
W (µ, z; s)dΦt (z)
µ

(24)

Qt

In reality, however, public policies are determined by the aggregation of known, conflicting
political interests. The leading choice in the political economy literature is the one person, one
9
As a result, income and talent become regime switching stochastic processes, i.e. with time varying coefficients. One interesting and realistic case occurs if there is an adjustment cost associated with an educational
reform that aims to switch µ. In this case the process for output would be a threshold ARMA(2,1) process,
where the thresholds are defined by the distribution of Qi,t in the cross section of families. For instance, suppose that the fixed costs of expanding the public schooling infrastructure are too prohibitive and therefore
µ can take only two values: 0 < µl < µh < 1. Assuming that in period t − 1, µt = µh was the optimal
RK
grandfather’s choice, a majority of fathers support a switch of regime to µt+1 = µl , if Ql,t φt (z)dz > 1/2 where


γ
µh
µh
γ+µl
α
K = ln γ+µ
µl −µh − 1 − ln µl + µl −µh ln µl − ρ0 (1 − ρ1 ) is a constant, φt denotes the probability distribution
h
of income potential in the cross section of dynasties as of the beginning of period t and Ql,t is the lowest realized
income potential. We index the distribution by t to show the possible dependency on µt and hence on calendar
time. Under this setting, the expectations, variances and intergenerational correlations derived in Section 3
hold within each educational regime.

16

vote democratic institution. If α > 1, then by Proposition 2 induced preferences over policies
are single-peaked. As a result, the father with the median most preferred policy is the decisive
voter. By the second part of the same Proposition, this is the father with the median income
potential, Q50,t . Note that this formulation allows both the identity, and the income or the
family endowment of the decisive father to vary over time. Since the median father’s vote is
decisive, it follows that p = 1/2 is the unique equilibrium outcome of the pure majority rule
game (i.e. the Condorcet winner).
More in general, we can allow for p > 1/2, capturing campaign contributions or more
active political participation of the rich fathers. Alternatively, a higher p may parameterize the
ideologically diverse preferences for parties of the poor fathers, as in the probabilistic voting
model. If p < 1/2, then social preferences are averse to inequality and can be thought to
internalize the ex-ante variance given in (18). From a political economy point of view, a lower
p may capture the bargaining power of socialist parties or labor organizations in unionized
economies. In the limit, p = 0 leads to the “Rawlsian institution” that maximizes the welfare
of the least well-off dynasty. Henceforth, we parameterize political preferences with p. In
Section 5 we show how to measure this key parameter in the data.

4.2

Politico-Economic Determinants of Social Mobility

Given this definition, the properties of the equilibrium level of the public policy, µet+1 , are given
in the following Proposition.
Proposition 3. Equilibrium Public Policy: The equilibrium policy µet+1 is increasing both
in α and in p. It increases in hp , yp,t , vp,t and in ρ0 , it decreases in γ, and it does not depend
on σv2 and σu2 . It increases in ρ1 if and only if vi,p − ρ0 > 0.
This Proposition shows how public education becomes less progressive (higher µt+1 ) when
output costs α increase, but more progressive as the position of the decisive dynasty in the
income potential distribution p decreases. Our result shows that, as long as optimally chosen
public policies have the potential to affect intergenerational mobility (which in our model is
shown in Section 4.3), there is no reason to expect that a collective action of fathers transmits a
perfectly mobile society to their sons (µe = β = 0). It is important to note that for the refusal
of this proposition, one would need to show both that the costs of progressive public policies
are negligible and that institutions favor the low ability families. This is an interesting point,
because empirically it may be difficult to find evidence for the magnitude of α or in reality some
17

public reforms may entail small efficiency costs (Lindert, 2004). On the other hand, a recent
strand of research in political economy points out that various politico-economic outcomes can
be simply explained by the fact that rich families have a larger “say” in the political equilibrium,
i.e. that the political system is wealth-biased (Benabou, 1996; Campante, 2007; Alesina and
Giuliano, 2009; Barenboim and Karabarbounis, 2009).
What is the novelty of our results? Most of the existing literature following the initial
Becker and Tomes (1979) contribution has attributed to the reduced-form coefficient in (1)
a specific meaning for social mobility, namely that equality of opportunity is desirable.10 If
equality of opportunity is however costly for private incentives, more of it is not necessarily
desirable.11 Relative to these views, our model emphasizes—in addition to standard incentive
costs—political economy constraints that may further limit or enhance the extent of social
mobility. For instance, in our model perfect social mobility may be optimal under a utilitarian
institution (if α is very small), but not politically sustainable if rich families and business
interests restrict the development of the welfare state and the provision of public education (i.e.
if p is sufficiently high). To put it differently, two societies with similar dynastic fundamentals
may display very different degrees of intergenerational mobility depending on which is the
decisive dynasty selected by the existing political institutions.
The politico-economic trade-off behind our model can be conceptualized by a decline in the
position of the decisive voter p. Societies in which families with lower income potential have
a larger “say” for the equilibrium outcome, choose more progressive systems, expect higher
mobility and lower inequality. However, progressivity results in a lower long-run level of income
for sufficiently high ability families, and may even lower average income.12 In our model, if the
distribution of income potential φt is right skewed (Q50 < Q̄)—perhaps because the ability
distribution φh is skewed—then a majority voting of fathers chooses a more progressive public
10

Becker and Tomes (1979; abstract and page 1182) argue that “Intergenerational mobility measures the
effect of a family on the well-being of its children.” (emphasis added). Another influential contribution is that
of Mulligan (1997, page 25), who in defining social mobility notes that “The degree of intergenerational mobility
is [...] an index of the degree of ‘equality of opportunity’. Equality of opportunity is often seen as desirable
because, with little correlation between the incomes of parents and children, children from rich families do not
enjoy much of a ‘head start’ on children from poor families.”. The same presumption may be implied by the
introductory paragraph in Solon (1999).
11
Piketty (2000) and Corak (2006) make this point. In an influential paper, Atkeson and Lucas (1992) have
shown the optimality of zero mobility. Recently, Phelan (2006) and Farhi and Werning (2007) challenge this
result based on the social discount rate exceeding the private one.
12
We have not explicitly considered the growth enhancing effects of public education. However, if average
ability h̄ is Rsufficiently low, then in the steady state the stationary average income in the cross section of the
dynasties, H E(yi,t+1 |h)dΦh (h), is decreasing in µ, and the progressivity increases long-run income, which
implicitly may be capturing this realistic feature of public education.

18

policy relative to the utilitarian optimum. Holding average income potential Q̄ constant, an
increase in the (right) skewness of the distribution of income potentials, leads the majority of
fathers to demand more progressive policies and higher social mobility.
Interestingly, the effects of a higher ex-ante inequality in abilities, Var(ln h), due for instance
to market discrimination against ethnically or racially diverse groups, depend on the political
process p. If p is low, then higher Var(ln h) could be associated with more skewness and hence
a poorer decisive voter which results in more progressive policies. On the other hand, if de facto
political power is ultimately related to income potential and hence p is relatively high, a higher
ex-ante variability could be associated with more powerful elites, less progressivity and lower
social mobility. In Section 5 we offer some suggestive evidence in favor of the second effect. In
the Appendix we discuss in more detail the intuition behind the other comparative statics of
our model.

4.3

Structural Politico-Economic Interpretation of the Galton-BeckerSolon (GBS) Regression

Our theoretical framework offers a structural interpretation for the log-linear intergenerational
earnings model which is estimated in the empirical literature cited in Section 2. The literature
typically focuses on the Galton-Becker-Solon (GBS) regression:
yi,t+1 = a + βyi,t + εi

(25)

where yt+1 and yt denote son’s and father’s life-long log earnings in the population. Previous
models have recognized that β is a function of genetic and cultural inheritance, altruism,
technological parameters and the structure of the asset market. However, we show that this
coefficient also depends on political economy variables which determine the institutions that a
generation puts in place to insure its offspring from adverse shocks.
Proposition 4. Population Slope of the GBS Regression: The slope in the population
regression of son’s on father’s income, β, also known as the intergenerational elasticity of income
is given as follows.13
1. If the economy is in a stationary state with µet+1 = µet = µe , then the intergenerational
elasticity equals the intergenerational correlation of incomes and is given by:
!
µe
ρ 1 µe
2
2 )(1−ρ µe ) σv + 1−µe Var(ln hi )
(1−ρ
1
1
β = Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t ) = µe 1 +
Var(yi,t ; µe )
13

Note that in both cases β is expressed only as a function of the deeper parameters of the model.

19

(26)

where the variance in the denominator refers to the cross sectional variance in (17) and µe
is the equilibrium public policy defined in Proposition 3. The intergenerational elasticity
β increases in µe and in p.
2. If the economy is for a long time in the steady state µet = µet−1 = ..., but in t + 1 an
unexpected structural break in the political institution p happens, then the intergenerational
elasticity is given by:


βt+1 = µet+1 1 +



µe
+ 1−µt e Var(ln hi )
t

Var(yi,t ; µet )

ρ1 µet σv2
(1−ρ21 )(1−ρ1 µet )

(27)

In this case βt+1 /βt = µet+1 /µet and the ratio is increasing in pt+1 /pt .

The first part of the proposition refers to the special case in which the economy is in an
steady state with constant intergenerational mobility (the coefficient β) and cross-sectional
variances. The second part considers instead the case in which a political shock at time t
determines a change of the decisive dynasty such that intergenerational mobility changes with
respect to previous periods (βt+1 6= βt−i for i ≥ 0) and cross-sectional income variances may
differ across generations. In principle, analogous formulas can be obtained for other shocks
affecting the intergenerational elasticity of incomes and cross-sectional variances, but given the
focus of this paper here we study the case of a political shock.
Under the assumption that the advanced economies for which an estimate of β is available
are essentially characterized by a fairly similar set of economic and biological fundamentals,
differences in the estimated β for these countries should correlate with differences in the dynasty
that has decisive power in the political process. To put it differently, if economic and biological
fundamentals are more similar than political equilibria across these advanced economies, we
should observe more mobility in countries in which the position of the decisive dynasty is lower
in the hierarchy of dynastic income potentials. The empirical exercise in the next section should
be interpreted as a suggestive assessment of the extent to which political economy variables
that proxy for the decisive dynasty capture the cross-country variation in β.
However, equations (26) and (27) emphasize also other more traditional determinants that
might explain the cross country variability in β. For example, in steady state and for given
decisive dynasty, social mobility increases (β decreases) with market luck variability (higher
σu2 ), and decreases with ex-ante heterogeneity (higher Var(ln hi )). It decreases with output
costs (higher α), with the ability of the decisive family (higher Qp ), with the long-run family
20

endowment (higher ρ0 ) and with the degree of altruism (higher γ). Greater market variability
increases cross sectional inequality and makes the position of children highly uncertain, thereby
increasing social mobility. For the same reason, the comparative static with respect to σv2 and
ρ1 is theoretically ambiguous. α, p, hp , ρ0 , and γ affect social mobility indirectly, through
the equilibrium level of µ (see Appendix for these comparative statics). Finally, note that our
model predicts that ex-ante heterogeneity Var(ln hi ) affects positively β only conditional on
µ. Higher ex-ante heterogeneity may operate also indirectly through public policy, and it may
increase (if it is associated with smaller p) or decrease (under higher p) social mobility.

5

Empirical Evidence on the Politico-Economic Determinants of Mobility

In this Section we turn to the empirical evidence on the predictions of the model. Specifically,
we present evidence on the relationship between political variables that our model indicates as
important determinants of social mobility and observed measures of mobility across countries
or within country over time. We stress that this evidence needs to be interpreted only as
suggestive and descriptive. The number of countries for which we have data is limited, and the
available data are not sufficiently informative to identify causal relationships. Nevertheless, the
evidence is generally consistent with the predictions of our model and in particular, it supports
a positive cross country and within country correlation between proxies for p and estimates of
β.
We consider first an interesting case study which represents a salient example of a political
shock as described in equation (27). Over the past few decades, the UK has experienced
a tremendous decline in social mobility. In particular, Blanden, Gregg and Macmillan (2007)
document a 50% decline in social mobility between the 1958 and the 1970 cohorts. Such decline
has generated widespread concern among the public and has prompted the government in 2009
to issue a White Book that addresses the causes and implications of the decline in mobility.
Blanden, Gregg and Macmillan (2007) argue that the main cause of the decline is represented
by changes in educational attainment of different income groups.
Their evidence is consistent with our model. However, our model goes further and indicates
that educational policies are likely to be an endogenous outcome. According to our framework,
the ultimate determinant of the decline in social mobility should be a change in societal preferences for redistribution. Indeed, this prediction is consistent with the sharp change in political

21

preferences which led Margaret Thatcher to become Prime Minister in 1979. The Thatcher
revolution was caused by a clear move toward the right by the UK electorate, as indicated by
the fact that public expenditure for education fell, the power of the unions declined, regressive
VAT taxes increased, and more progressive corporate and income taxes declined.14
Turning to cross country evidence, credible estimates of β are available only for a limited
number of countries. We use estimates from Corak’s (2006) meta-analysis conducted for 9
OECD countries and complement these with 3 more observations. In the Appendix we discuss
more in detail the construction of our dataset and the sources.15
In Figure 2, the vertical axis shows estimates of β for a cross section of advanced democratic
OECD countries. Consistent with what has long been documented in the existing literature
on mobility, the UK, US and France are the least mobile, while Northern European countries
appear the most mobile. Canada is the most mobile Anglo-Saxon country, and Sweden is the
least mobile among the Nordic countries. The existing literature has mostly focused on the left
panel of the Figure (for example: Corak, 2006), which shows a positive bivariate association
between β and the private return to schooling. The right panel, which is more novel, depicts a
negative association between β and public expenditure on education. The Figure shows that the
correlation between social mobility and public expenditures for education is at least as strong
as the correlation between the private internal return to education and mobility.16 When we
divide public expenditure in education per student as a percentage of per capita GDP at the
primary, secondary and tertiary level, we find that all are negatively correlated with β. Notably
and consistent with our model, the correlation is stronger at the primary level, where public
expenditures are arguably more redistributive.17
To obtain a direct measure of political preferences (the parameter p in the model), we
14

VAT taxes rose around 15%, and each of the corporate tax rate and the top marginal income tax decreased
by 17%. Public expenditure for education as a percentage of GDP decreased by 25% between 1975 and 1985
and by 30% by the end of the 1980s.
15
In the following Figures we use Corak’s most preferred estimate, but we have verified the robustness of our
results using the median estimate found in the literature. The nine countries are Denmark, Norway, Finland,
Canada, Sweden, Germany, France, US and the UK. We also add Japan, Spain and Australia. Some recent
papers have estimated the intergenerational income elasticity in Italy, but: (i) the estimates are based on heroic
assumptions needed to use intergenerational income data of low quality; (ii) the estimates are especially high
and (iii) even using a more conservative value, Italy is most of the times a major outlier of which we cannot
be really confident. The only variable that seems to explain satisfactory Italy’s low degree of mobility is the
strength of family ties (high ρ1 ).
16
Conditioning on both determinants, the latter turns out to be much more strongly associated with mobility
than the former (correlation of -0.43 versus 0.15).
17
In contrast, the correlation of β with total government spending is -0.05, and the correlation of β with
spending on social expenditures is -0.11. The weakness of these correlations illustrates that it is educational
expenditure, rather than other forms of government spending (e.g. unemployment insurance, assistance to poor
families, welfare benefits, etc.), that may matter for social mobility.

22

use data from the World Value Surveys (WVS).18 We focus on the differential in political
participation between low income voters and middle and upper income voters. The income
classification follows the WVS and is standardized by country. As Table 1 shows, on average,
around 33% of the population is classified as “poor” (low-income). Variation across countries
is not large.19 Political participation can be measured with a variety of variables. In Figure
3 we measure political participation with membership in political parties. The vertical axis
in the Figure measures inequality in party affiliation, defined as the fraction of middle and
upper income voters who are members of political parties divided by the fraction of low income
voters who are members of political parties. A lower value for this index denotes a relatively
more politically active class of low income families and hence a lower p. Note that we are not
interested in the political participation of the poor per se, but in their participation relative
to that one of other income groups in the same country. Our measure of relative participation
therefore holds constant other country-specific factors that may affect political participation.
The correlations in Figure 3 are consistent with the model. The bivariate correlations of the
political inequality index with public spending and intergenerational elasticity are, respectively,
-0.49 and 0.79.20 When we use an alternative measure of the gap in political participation that
compares participation by high income voters to participation by with low income voters (thus
excluding middle income voters), the correlation is even stronger.
The existing literature has argued that one of the most important empirical determinants
of social mobility is the rate of return to human capital (see for example Solon, 1999 and 2004;
Corak, 2006). When we regress β on estimates of the return to schooling, we find that the return
to schooling explains only 8% of the cross country variation. Notably, and consistent with our
model, our measure of inequality between rich and the poor families in political affiliation
explains 42% of the variation in social mobility.21 We have repeated this exercise with four
other measures of political participation: participation in labor unions, interest in politics,
signing petitions and participating in lawful demonstrations. We find that the patterns are
similar to those presented, with the bivariate correlations ranging from 0.43 to 0.63. (Results
available upon request.)
18

In a previous version of the paper we used voter turnout in elections and union density as additional proxies
for p. For all cases we find correlations between p, µ and β that are consistent with our model.
19
Sweden and Germany are the two outliers.
20
This finding is robust to the exclusion of outliers.
21
One of the few studies that attribute cross country differences in mobility to public policies is Corak and
Heitz (1999). The authors conjecture that Canada’s progressivity can explain its higher mobility relative to the
US.

23

In Figure 4 we investigate the relationship between the degree of heterogeneity in a society,
public education and social mobility. Our model predicts that higher ex-ante heterogeneity
(higher Var(ln hi )) should be associated with more public spending and therefore higher social
mobility if p is low. If p is high, more heterogeneity should be associated with higher talent (hp )
for the decisive family, and less progressivity. Our empirical proxy for heterogeneity is an index
of ethnolinguistic fragmentation measured in 1961.22 The upper left panel shows that more
diverse countries are associated with less public spending on education. Our model explains
this positive correlation only if p is relatively high, which as discussed above is consistent with
recent theoretical and empirical literature. The bottom panel shows that the predicted link
between heterogeneity and mobility is also supported by the data. The bivariate correlation is
0.26. Excluding the very heterogeneous and mobile Canada, the correlation increases to 0.67.
Another prediction of the model has to do with the strength of cultural transmission ρ1 . As
a proxy, we use an index of weak family ties.23 Weaker family ties proxy for a lower ρ1 in our
model. In Figure 4, weaker family ties are associated with more public provision of education
and more mobility. This lends support to the view that strong family ties and strong social
policies are substitutes.
We conclude with a final piece of evidence. Becker and Tomes (1979) original contribution
aimed at explaining within a unified economic model the degree of cross sectional inequality,
and its relation with intergenerational inequality. We proxy for cross sectional inequality in
earnings, Var(yi,t ), with the Gini coefficient for gross earnings. The variance in talent or skills,
Var(θi,t ), is proxied by the Gini coefficient for factor income.24 In our sample the bivariate
association between cross sectional gross earnings inequality and intergenerational inequality
is around 0.72. Within the context of our model, market variability, σu2 , explains the lack
of perfect correlation. Higher variability increases cross sectional inequality to a degree that
ultimately raises social mobility.25
Proposition 1 implies that the ratio of gross earnings over factor inequality should decline
when the progressivity of the educational system increases (µ decreases). Figure 5 shows a
strong association between the ratio of the Gini coefficients and public expenditure in educa22

The index is defined as one minus the probability that two random persons in some country belong to the
same ethnic, linguistic or racial group.
23
The index is due to Alesina and Giuliano (2007). We thank the authors for providing us with their data.
24
These statistics come from Milanovic (2000).
25
Björklund and Jäntti (1997) hypothesize that common causes may explain US’s higher intergenerational
and cross sectional inequality relative to Sweden’s. Recently, Hassler, Rodriguez Mora and Zeira (2007) argue
that inequality and mobility may be positively correlated if labor market institutions differ significantly across
countries or negatively correlated if educational subsidies drive the cross country variation.

24

tion. It also shows the direct relationship between the deeper determinant p and the ratio of
inequalities Var(yi,t )/Var(θi,t ) that can rationalize this association. In particular, our model
predicts that in societies where the poor participate more in political parties, redistributive
public education takes place and therefore the ratio of income over talent inequality decreases.
The right panel of the figure is consistent with this prediction.

6

Conclusion

Intergenerational mobility emerges from “nature”, “nurture” and endogenous public policies.
While the previous literature has derived social mobility as a function of the optimizing behavior of utility-maximizing families, in this paper we generalize the structural log-linear social
mobility model and endogenize the political process that aggregates conflicting preferences for
intergenerational mobility.
Our model provides a structural interpretation of the widely-studied Galton-Becker-Solon
reduced-form coefficient β. This is important because it allows a better understanding of the
deeper economic determinants of intergenerational mobility and the role of public policy. We
show that public policies generate a trade-off between insurance and incentives. Our model
adds to this knowledge by pointing out that even if insurance is relatively costless to provide, a
less than perfectly mobile society is possible because of political economy constraints in a world
of heterogeneous interests. In other words, two societies may have the same set of dynastic
fundamentals such as parental altruism, level of GDP, asset markets, ethnic fragmentation and
cultural traits, but different political institutions, in which case social mobility outcomes will
differ.
We conclude with some empirical evidence that lends support to our claim that politicoeconomic variables are likely to be important determinants of cross country differences in social
mobility.

25

References
Aaronson, Daniel and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2008. “Intergenerational Economic Mobility
in the US: 1940 to 2000.” Journal of Human Resources, 43(1): 139–172.
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2007. “The Power of the Family.” NBER Working
Paper, No. 13051.
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2009. “Preferences for Redistribution.” NBER
Working Paper, No. 14825.
Alesina, Alberto, and Edward Glaeser. 2004. Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A
World of Difference. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik. 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109: 465–490.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Robert Lucas. 1992. “On Efficient Distribution with Private
Information.” Review of Economic Studies, 59: 427–453.
Barenboim, Igor, and Loukas Karabarbounis. 2009. “One Dollar, One Vote.” mimeo,
Harvard University.
Becker, Gary, and Nigel Tomes. 1979. “An equilibrium theory of the distribution of
income and intergenerational mobility.” Journal of Political Economy, 87: 1153–1189.
Becker, Gary, and Nigel Tomes. 1986. “Human capital and the rise and fall of families.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 4: S1–S39.
Benabou, Roland. 1996. “Inequality and Growth.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual. ed.
Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, 11–73. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Benabou, Roland. 2000. “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract.”
American Economic Review, 90: 96–129.
Benabou, Roland, and Efe Ok. 2001. “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution:
The POUM Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 447–487.
Bernasconi, Michele, and Paola Profeta. 2007. “Redistribution or Education? The
Political Economy of the Social Race.” CESifo Working Paper No. 1934.
Björklund, Anders, and Markus Jäntti. 1997. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in
Sweden Compared to the United States.” American Economic Review, 87: 1009-1018.
Blanden, Jo, Paul Gregg, and Lindsey Macmillan. 2007. “Accounting for Intergenerational Income Persistence: Noncognitive Skills, Ability and Education.” Economic Journal,
117(1): C43–C60.
Boarini, Romina, and Hubert Strauss. 2007. “The Private Internal Rates of Return to
Tertiary Education: New Estimates for 21 OECD Countries.” OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 591.
Campante, Filipe. 2007. “Redistribution in a Model of Voting and Campaign Contributions.” mimeo, Harvard University.
Checchi, Daniele, Andrea Ichino, and Aldo Rustichini. 1999. “More Equal But Less
Mobile? Education Financing and Intergenerational Mobility in Italy and the US.” Journal
of Public Economics, 74: 351–393.

26

Corak, Miles, and Andrew Heitz. 1999. “The Intergenerational Earnings and Income
Mobility of Canadian Men: Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax Data.” Journal of
Human Resources, 34(3): 504–533.
Corak, Miles. 2006. “Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults? Lessons From a Cross Country
Comparison of Generational Earnings Mobility.” Research on Economic Inequality, 13(1):
143—188.
d’Addio, Anna Christina. 2007. “Intergenerational Transmission of Disadvantage: Mobility
or Immobility Across Generations?” OECD Social Employment and Migration Working
Papers, No. 52.
Davies, James, Jie Zhang, and Jinli Zeng. 2005. “Intergenerational Mobility under
Private vs. Public Education.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 107(3): 399–417.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2007. “Inequality and Social Discounting.” Journal
of Political Economy, 115(3): 365–402.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson. 1998. “Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic Quantitative Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform.” American
Economic Review, 88(4): 813–833.
Glomm, Gerhard, and Balasubrahmanian Ravikumar. 1992. “Public vs. Private
Investment in Human Capital: Endogenous Growth and Income Inequality.” Journal of
Political Economy, 100: 818–834.
Goldberger, Arthur. 1989. “Economic and Mechanical Models of Intergenerational Transmission.” American Economic Review, 79(3): 504–513.
Hassler, John, Jose Vicente Rodriguez Mora, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio
Zilibotti. 2003. “The Survival of the Welfare State.” American Economic Review, 93(1):
87–112.
Hassler, John, Jose Vicente Rodriguez Mora, and Joseph Zeira. 2007. “Inequality
and Mobility.” Journal of Economic Growth, 12: 235–259.
Krusell, Per, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 1997. “Politico-Economic
Equilibrium and Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21:
243–272.
Lee, Chul-In, and Gary Solon. 2006. “Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility.”
NBER Working Paper, No. 12007.
Lefranc, Arnaud, Fumiaki Ojima, and Takashi Yoshida. 2008. “The Intergenerational
Transmission of Income and Education: A Comparison of Japan and France.” Working
Paper, EUI.
Leigh, Andrew. 2007. “Intergenerational Mobility in Australia.” B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis and Policy, 7(2), Article 6.
Lindert, Peter. 2004. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth Since the
Eighteenth Century. Volumes 1 and 2. Cambridge University Press.
Loury, Glenn. 1981. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings.” Econometrica, 49(4): 843–847.
Mayer, Susan, and Leonard Lopoo. 2005. “Has the Intergenerational Transmission of
Economic Status Changed?” Journal of Human Resources, 40(1): 169—185.

27

Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2005. “Fortunate Sons: New Estimates of Intergenerational Mobility
in the U.S. Using Social Security Earnings Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
87(2): 235–255.
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2007. “Trends in Intergenerational Mobility.” Industrial Relations,
46(1): 1–6.
Milanovic, Branco. 2000. “The Median Voter Hypothesis, Income Inequality and Income
Redistribution: An Empirical Test with the Required Data.” European Journal of Political
Economy, 16: 367–410.
Mulligan, Casey. 1997. Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. The University of
Chicago Press.
Pekkarinen, Tuomas, Roope Uusitalo, and Sari Kerr. 2008. “School Tracking and Intergenerational Income Mobility: Evidence from the Finnish Comprehensive School Reform,”
mimeo, Helsinki School of Economics.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 1994. “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?”
American Economic Review, 84(3): 600–621.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2003. The Economic Effects of Constitutions,
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Phelan, Christopher. 2006. “Opportunity and Social Mobility.” Review of Economic Studies, 73: 487–504.
Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(3): 551–584.
Piketty, Thomas. 2000. “Theories of Persistent Inequality and Intergenerational Mobility.”
In Handbook of Income Distribution. ed. Antony B. Atkinson and Francois Bourguignon,
Volume 1: 429-476. North-Holland.
Saint-Paul, Gilles, and Thierry Verdier. 1993. “Education, Democracy and Growth.”
Journal of Development Economics, 42, 399–407.
Solon, Gary. 1992. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States.” American
Economic Review, 82: 393–408.
Solon, Gary. 1999. “Intergenerational mobility in the Labor Market.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics. ed. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, Volume 3B: 1762–1796. New York,
NY: Elsevier Science Press.
Solon, Gary. 2002. “Cross-Country Differences in Intergenerational Earnings Mobility.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(3): 59–66.
Solon, Gary. 2004. “A Model of Intergenerational Mobility Variation over Time and Place.”
In Generational Income mobility in North America and Europe. ed. Miles Corak, 38–47.
Cambridge University Press.
Zimmerman, David. 1992. “Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature.” American
Economic Review, 82: 409–429.

28

Table 1: Classification in Poor, Middle and Rich Per Country: WVS Data
Australia
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Japan
Norway
Spain
Sweden
UK
US
Average

% Poor
29
31
31
33
33
39
32
35
30
26
35
35
33

% Middle
34
36
41
33
37
33
36
40
44
44
35
36
37

% Rich
37
33
28
34
30
28
32
25
26
31
30
29
30

Notes: Percentages are rounded to sum to 100. The numbers refer to the full sample from the Four
Wave WVS Data. Actual percentages used in the empirical results may differ slightly depending on
the political variable used.

29

Figure 1: The Production Function Yi,t = µαt (Ui,t Θi,t )µt
α=1

µ=0.6

1

1
µ=0.1
µ=0.5
µ=1

0.9

0.9
0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

Y

30

Y

0.8

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0.2

α=0
α=1
α=2
µ=1

0.4

Notes: Market luck is set to Ui,t = 1.

Θ

0.6

0.8

1

0

0

0.2

0.4

Θ

0.6

0.8

1

UK

Corr=0.540

.5

.5

Figure 2: Private Return to Education vs. Public Expenditure in Education
UK

US

US

Spain

Spain

beta
.3

Germany

beta
.3

France

.4

.4

France

Corr = −0.542

Australia

Sweden

Japan
Australia

Sweden

.2

.2

31
Canada
Finland

Finland
Norway

.1

Denmark

.1

Denmark

4

6

8
Return to Private Education

10

12

15

20
25
30
35
Public Exp. Education per Student (% of GDPpc)

40

Notes: The left panel shows the relationship between the intergenerational earnings elasticity β and the private rate of return to tertiary
education. The right panel shows the relationship between the intergenerational earnings elasticity β and the public expenditure in education
per student as a percentage of per capita GDP. See Appendix 2 for the data sources.

.5
Denmark

UK
US

Corr = 0.79

France

.4

Corr = − 0.49
Sweden

Finland

Sweden

France
US

UK

.2

Spain

Japan

Spain

Germany
Japan

beta
.3

Norway

Canada
Norway

Finland
Denmark

.1

15

32

Public Exp. Education per Student (% GDPpc)
20
25
30
35
40

Figure 3: Mobility, Public Education, and Inequality in Political Participation

1

1.5

2
2.5
Inequality Parties

3

3.5

1

1.5

2
2.5
Inequality Parties

3

3.5

Notes: The left panel shows the relationship between the public expenditure in education per student as a percentage of per capita GDP and
the variable “Inequality Parties”. The right panel shows the relationship between the intergenerational earnings elasticity β and the variable
“Inequality Parties”. The variable “Inequality Parties” (proxy for p) is defined as the political party participation rate of the non-poor (middle
and high income) citizens divided by the political party participation rate of the poor citizens. See Appendix 2 for the data sources.

Public Exp. Education per Student (% GDPpc)
20
25
30
35

Public Exp. Education per Student (% GDPpc)
20
25
30
35
40

40

Figure 4: Mobility, Public Education, Heterogeneity and Family Ties

Corr = − 0.58

Denmark

Sweden
Norway
Finland
France
US

UK
Spain

Japan

Sweden
Norway
Finland
France
US

UK

Spain

Japan

Australia

15

15

Australia

Corr = 0.61

.2
.3
.4
Ethnolinguistic Fractonalization

.5

0

US

Canada

Germany
Japan
Australia

Canada

Sweden

Finland
Norway

.1

Finland

.2

beta
.3

Spain

Australia

.2

Norway
Denmark

France

beta
.3

Spain

Sweden

Corr = − 0.34

.4

.4

France

1

UK
US

.1

33

UK

Corr = 0.26

Germany
Japan

.5
Weak Family Ties

.5

.1

.5

0

0

.2

.4
.6
Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization

.8

0

.5
Weak Family Ties

1

Notes: The left panels show the relationship between the ethnolinguistic fractionalization index, the public expenditure in education per student
as a percentage of per capita GDP (upper left), and the intergenerational earnings elasticity β (lower left). The right panels show the relationship
between the weakness of family ties, the public expenditure in education per student as a percentage of per capita GDP (upper right), and the
intergenerational earnings elasticity β (lower right). See Appendix 2 for the data sources.

Figure 5: Income and Talent Cross Sectional Inequality

.85

US

.85

US

France
Spain
UK

Finland

Norway

France
Finland

Spain
UK

Norway
Germany

Denmark

.65

Denmark

.65

34

Gini Gross / Gini Factor
.7
.75
.8

Corr = − 0.71

Gini Gross / Gini Factor
.7
.75
.8

Corr = 0.40

Canada

Australia

Sweden

15

20
25
30
35
Public Exp. Education per Student (% GDPpc)

Sweden

40

1

1.5

2
2.5
Inequality Parties

3

3.5

Notes: The left panel shows the relationship between the ratio of Gini coefficients measured at the gross and the factor level and the public
expenditure in education per student as a percentage of per capita GDP. The right panel shows the relationship between the ratio of Gini
coefficients measured at the gross and the factor level and the variable “Inequality Parties”. The variable “Inequality Parties” (proxy for p) is
defined as the political party participation rate of the non-poor (middle and high income) citizens divided by the political party participation
rate of the poor citizens. See Appendix 2 for the data sources.

Appendix 1: Derivations and Proofs
A1. Derivation of Income and Talent Transmission Equations
First, forward the production function for output, equation (2), one period and solve for Θi,t+1 :
−µ α

Θi,t+1 = (µt+1 )

1

t+1

(Ui,t+1 )−1 (Yi,t+1 ) µt+1

(A.1)

Substitute (A.1) into the production function for talent, (6), and solve for investment:
h
i
1
− α
Ii,t = (hi Vi,t+1 )−1 (Yi,t+1 ) µt+1 (Ui,t+1 )−1 (µt+1 ) µt+1

(A.2)

If we insert this equation into the budget constraint, Ci,t = Yi,t − Ii,t , we see that the
budget is concave for µt+1 ≤ 1, strictly when µt+1 < 1. Since the utility function (4) is strictly
concave, the solution to the problem is unique and interior and is characterized by the first
order condition:
1
1
Ci,t
−1
− α
=
(µt+1 ) µt+1 (Yi,t+1 ) µt+1
γYi,t+1
µt+1 (hi Vi,t+1 )Ui,t+1

(A.3)

Substituting Ci,t back in the budget constraint, we take the solution for children’s income:

µt+1
µt+1
Yi,t+1 =
(hi Vi,t+1 Ui,t+1 )µt+1 (µt+1 )α (Yi,t )µt+1
(A.4)
µt+1 + γ
Taking logs and letting µt+1 = µ in (A.4) yields the income transition equation (7) in the
text, for the coefficients defined in (8)-(13). From (A.2) and the budget constraint we can also
take the solution for investment and consumption:


µt+1
Yi,t
Ii,t =
µt+1 + γ
Ci,t =



γ
µt+1 + γ



Yi,t

(A.5)

(A.6)

To derive the intergenerational transmission equation for talent, we first substitute the
production function (2) into the solution (A.4). This yields a relationship between sons’ income
and fathers’ talent:
Yi,t+1 =



µt+1
µt+1 + γ

µt+1



µt µt+1
(hi Vi,t+1 Ui,t+1 )µt+1 (µt+1 )α µαt Θµi,tt Ui,t

Next, substitute (A.7) into (A.1) to obtain the solution for talent:


µt+1
µt µ t
Θi,t
(hi Vi,t+1 )(µt )α Ui,t
Θi,t+1 =
µt+1 + γ
35

(A.7)

(A.8)

Taking logs and setting µt+1 = µt = µ gives the transmission equation for talent:
θi,t+1 = λ0,i + λ1 θi,t + λ2 vi,t+1 + λ3 ui,t

(A.9)

λ0,i = λ0 + λi

(A.10)

where:

λ0 = ln



µ
µ+γ



+ α ln µ

(A.11)

λi = ln hi

(A.12)

λ1 = µ

(A.13)

λ2 = 1

(A.14)

λ3 = µ

(A.15)

The talent transmission equation differs from the income transmission equation due to the
coefficients λ2 and λi (as opposed to the coefficients δ2 and δi in the text). These coefficients
measure the effects of cultural and genetic endowment on talent and output, respectively. For
the case of talent, these effects do not depend on µ, since public policies are imposed on final
output.

A2. Expected Income and Talent
First we show that given a stationary µ, income and talent are stationary processes. Subtracting ρ1 yi,t from both sides of the income transmission equation (7), using the definition
for vi,t+1 in (3), and substituting in the resulting expression the fact that ρ1 (δ2 vi,t − yi,t ) =
−ρ1 (δ0,i + δ1 yi,t−1 + δ3 ui,t ), we can express the income process in (7) as the sum of an ARMA(2,1)
process plus an independent white noise:
yi,t+1 = (1 − ρ1 ) (δ0,i + δ2 ρ0 ) + (δ1 + ρ1 )yi,t + (−δ1 ρ1 )yi,t−1 + δ3 ui,t+1 − δ3 ρ1 ui,t + δ2 ǫi,t+1 (A.16)
The process is stationary if the roots of the characteristic equation, 1 − (δ1 + ρ1 )x −
(−δ1 ρ1 )x2 = 0, lie outside the unit circle.

The two roots are given by φ1 = − ρ11 and
36

φ2 = − δ11 = − µ1 . Therefore, the log income process is stationary for every family i, if ρ < 1
and µ < 1. A similar reasoning applies for the talent process.
The unconditional expectation of log income for family i in equation (14) in the text is easy
to compute by setting E(yi,t+1 ) = E(yi,t ) = E(yi,t−1 ) in (A.16) or (7). All comparative statics
for this expectation follow from inspection. From the talent transmission equation (A.9), we
take the unconditional expectation of log talent for family i:


µ
ρ0 + ln hi µ+γ
+ α ln µ
E(θi,t+1 |hi ) =
1−µ

(A.17)

From the income transmission equation (7) we can compute the conditional expectation of
income:
Et (yi,t+1 |hi ) = E(yi,t+1 |hi ) + µ (yi,t − E(yi,t+1 |hi )) + µρ1 (vi,t − ρ0 )

(A.18)

where the state of the system includes {yi,t , θi,t , vi,t , ui,t }, and E(yi,t+1 |hi ) is the unconditional
expectation given in (14). Similarly for talent we have:
Et (θi,t+1 |hi ) = E(θi,t+1 |hi ) + µ (θi,t − E(θi,t+1 |hi )) + ρ1 (vi,t − ρ0 )

(A.19)

A3. Variance of Income and Talent
To derive the unconditional, stationary variance Var(yi,t+1 |hi ) for dynasty i, we impose stationarity in (7) and recall that ui,t+1 is independent from vi,t+1 and yi,t :
(1 − µ2 )Var(yi,t+1 |hi ) = µ2 Var(vi,t+1 ) + 2µ2 Cov(yi,t , vi,t+1 |hi ) + µ2 Var(ui,t+1 )

(A.20)

To compute the covariance term, we use the stationarity of the process, the properties of
ǫi,t+1 and the properties of the covariance to take:
Cov(yi,t , vi,t+1 |hi ) =

ρ1 µσv2
(1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )

(A.21)

Substituting (A.21) into (A.20), using the definitions of the variances for vi,t+1 and ui,t+1
and rearranging we obtain the expression given in the text, (16). The same reasoning yields
the variance of talent for family i:
Var(θi,t+1 |hi ) =

1 1 + ρ1 µ σv2
µ2
σu2
+
2
2
2
1 − µ 1 − ρ1 µ 1 − ρ1 1 − µ

(A.22)

which is also increasing in µ. Taking the ratio of income’s over talent’s variance we obtain:
κ + σu2
Var(yi,t |hi )
= κ
Var(θi,t |hi )
+ σu2
µ2
37

(A.23)

where we define:

1 + ρ1 µ σv2
1 − ρ1 µ 1 − ρ21
Because µ < 1, the denominator exceeds the numerator in (A.23), and the ratio is smaller
κ(µ, ρ1 ) =

than unity as claimed in Proposition 1. Next we prove the claim in Proposition 1 that this
ratio is increasing in µ. The derivative of the ratio with respect to µ is proportional to:


1
κ2
κ
2
σu κ1 (1 − 2 ) + 2 3 + 2 3
(A.24)
µ
µ
µ
where κ1 is the derivative of κ with respect to µ. If the first term in (A.24) is positive, then
our claim is proven. After some algebra, the sufficient condition reads as:
g(µ, ρ1 ) = µ(µ2 − 1 − µρ21 ) > −1

(A.25)

Because the function g has minimum at -1, (ρ1 = 1 and µ = 1), the sufficient condition holds
and the claim is proven.
Finally, we consider the inequality in the cross section of families. From (16) it is obvious
that Var(yi,t+1 ) increases in µ. For talent we have:
1
Var(ln hi )
(A.26)
(1 − µ)2
where the first term in the right hand side of this equation is given by (A.22), and the last
Var(θi,t+1 ) = Var(θi,t+1 |hi ) +

term equals the variance of the unconditional expectation of talent (the variance of (A.17)). It
is straightforward to see that Var(θi,t+1 ) also increases in µ. From (16) and (A.26), consider
the ratio of income over talent inequality in the cross section of families:
Var(yi,t )
=
Var(θi,t )

κ + σu2 +
κ
µ2

+ σu2 +

1+µ
Var(ln hi )
1−µ
1 1+µ
Var(ln hi )
µ2 1−µ

(A.27)

where κ is defined above. To prove the claim in Proposition 1 that this ratio also increases in
µ, let us define τ =

1+µ
,
1−µ

with τ ′ =

2τ
.
1−µ2

Then after some tedious but straightforward algebra,

the partial derivative of (A.27) with respect to µ is proportional to the following term:



1
κ2
κ
1
τ
2
σu κ1 (1 − 2 ) + 2 3 + 2 3 +τ ′ Var(ln hi )σu2 (1− 2 ) + 2 3 Var(ln hi ) σu2 + 2κ + τ Var(ln hi )
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
(A.28)
The first two terms of this expression are positive, as shown in (A.24) and (A.25). The
term 2τ Var(ln hi )(2κ + τ Var(ln hi ))/µ3 is also positive. Therefore, after factoring out the term
σu2 Var(ln hi ), it suffices to show that:
τ
1
)+2 3 >0
(A.29)
2
µ
µ
Plugging in the definitions of τ and τ ′ and using the fact that µ < 1, we can verify the
τ ′ (1 −

above inequality.
38

A4. Intergenerational Correlation of Income and Talent
In this part we consider the intergenerational correlation within one dynasty i and treat hi as a
time invariant fixed effect. Because the variance is stationary, the stationary intergenerational
correlation in income is equal to:
Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi ) =

Cov(yi,t , vi,t+1 |hi )
Cov(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi )
=µ+µ
Var(yi,t |hi )
Var(yi,t |hi )

(A.30)

where we have used (7) and the properties of ui,t+1 . To obtain the expression (19) in the text,
we insert in (A.30) the variance from (16) and the covariance in (A.21). We can differentiate
(19):
∂Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi )
∝ σv4 (1 − ρ21 ) + σu4 (1 − ρ21 )2 (1 − ρ1 µ)2 + σv2 σu2 (1 − ρ21 )(2(1 − ρ1 µ) + ρ1 (1 − µ2 ))
∂µ
(A.31)
Because all terms are positive, the correlation is increasing in µ and the claim in Proposition
1 is proven. A similar reasoning shows that the stationary intergenerational correlation of talent
is:
Corr(θi,t+1 , θi,t |hi ) =

(µ + ρ1 )σv2 + µ3 (1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )σu2
(1 + ρ1 µ)σv2 + µ2t (1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )σu2

(A.32)

Differently from income, the intergenerational correlation of talent has ambiguous comparative static in µ. A more progressive policy decreases both the covariance and the variance of
income and talent. For income, the rate of decrease in the variance is smaller than that of the
covariance and the comparative static is unambiguous. But in the case of talent, the covariance
is not sufficiently decreasing because talent is not directly affected by µ. We can show that
the intergenerational correlation in talent is increasing in µ provided that σu2 is not too large
relative to σv2 .
Finally, we prove the claim in Proposition 1 that the ratio of intergenerational correlations
is smaller than one and increasing in µ. First, consider the ratio:
Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi )/Corr(θi,t+1 , θi,t |hi ) =
(µ + ρ1 )(1 + ρ1 µ)σv4 + µ3 (1 − ρ1 µ)2 (1 − ρ21 )2 σu4 + σv2 σu2 (1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )(µ2 (µ + ρ1 ) + µ + µ2 ρ1 )
(µ + ρ1 )(1 + ρ1 µ)σv4 + µ3 (1 − ρ1 µ)2 (1 − ρ21 )2 σu4 + σv2 σu2 (1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )(µ3 (1 + ρ1 µ) + µ + ρ1 )
(A.33)
The difference between the last term in the denominator and the numerator is σv2 σu2 (1 −
ρ21 )(1 − ρ1 µ)ρ1 (µ − 1)2 . This difference is positive because σv2 > 0, σu2 > 0 and ρ1 < 1. As
a result, the expression in (A.33) is smaller than unity, strictly when µ < 1, as claimed in
Proposition 1. In addition, the ratio is increasing in µ. To see this, rewrite the ratio as:
39

Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t |hi )/Corr(θi,t+1 , θi,t |hi ) =
1−ρ2

1+ρ1 µ
4
3
2 2 4
2 2
2
2
1
(µ + ρ1 ) (1−ρ
2 σv + µ (1 − ρ1 ) σu + σv σu 1−ρ µ (µ (µ + ρ1 ) + µ + µ ρ1 )
1 µ)
1
1−ρ2

1+ρ1 µ
2 2 4
1
4
3
2 2
3
(µ + ρ1 ) (1−ρ
2 σv + µ (1 − ρ1 ) σu + σv σu 1−ρ µ (µ (1 + ρ1 µ) + µ + ρ1 )
1 µ)
1

(A.34)

Denote by N the numerator and by D the denominator of this expression. The ratio
of correlations increases in µ if and only if the derivate N ′ D − D′ N is positive. Since the
denominator exceeds the numerator, D > N , it suffices to show that N ′ > D′ > 0. From
1−ρ2

(A.34) it is evident that both terms increase in µ. From N − D = −σv2 σu2 1−ρ11µ ρ1 (µ − 1)2 , we
take N ′ − D′ = −σv2 σu2 (1 − ρ21 )ρ1 (µ−1)(2−ρµ−ρ)
> 0, which proves the claim.
(1−ρ1 µ)2

A5. Proof of Proposition 2
Using the consumption function in equation (21) and the conditional expectation of income in
equation (15), we can express the indirect utility function as:
W (µt+1 ; hi , yi,t , vi,t ) =
γ
1
= yi,t + ln
+
γ + µt+1 γ



 


µt+1
µt+1
α ln µt+1 + µt+1 ln
+ ρ0 (1 − ρ1 )
+
Qi,t (A.35)
γ + µt+1
γ

where Qi,t = yi,t + ρ1 vi,t + ln hi is family i’s income potential at time t. Differentiating W with
respect to µt+1 we take:
1
∂W
= W1 + [W2 + W3 + W4 + W5 + Qi,t ]
∂µt+1
γ

(A.36)

In this expression, the term W1 = − µt+11 +γ < 0 captures the intertemporal trade-off, W2 =


µt+1
< 0 measures the beneficial insurance effects of public policy, W3 = µt+1γ +γ > 0 is
ln µt+1
+γ

the term associated with the distortions in investment, W4 =

α
µt+1

> 0 is the direct output cost,

W5 = ρ0 (1 − ρ1 ) > 0 shows that insurance is less beneficial the higher is the long-run level of
the endowment vi,t , and Qi,t is defined above. Differentiating (A.36) with respect to µt+1 we
have:

1
α
∂W 2
∝
−
(A.37)
2
∂µt+1
γ + µt+1 µt+1 γ
A sufficient condition for single-peaked preferences is the strict concavity of the indirect

utility. This requires that

µt+1 γ
µt+1 +γ

< α. Since the left hand side of this inequality is bounded

above by 1, the first part of the claim in Proposition 2 follows. For the second part of the
Proposition, set ∂W/∂µt+1 equal to zero, and use the Implicit Function Theorem and the
concavity of W in an interior optimum:
∂W 2
1
∂µt+1
∝
= >0
∂Qi,t
∂µt+1 ∂Qi,t
γ
40

(A.38)

A6. Proof of Proposition 3
If 0 < µi,t+1 < 1 is the most preferred public policy for a dynasty with parameter Qi,t , then it
necessarily satisfies the first order condition, ∂W/∂µt+1 = 0, where the derivative is given by
(A.36). In addition, if α > 1, then W is globally concave, and hence any solution to the first
order condition will be the unique optimum. Since the Implicit Function Theorem applies, the
comparative static ∂µt+1 /∂z has the same sign as the cross partial ∂ 2 W (µt+1 (hi ))/∂(µt+1 )∂z.
Therefore,
∂ 2 W (µ

t+1 )
∂µt+1 ∂Qi,t

∂ 2 W (µt+1 )
∂µt+1 ∂α

∝ 1/µi,t+1 > 0,

∂ 2 W (µt+1 )
∂µt+1 ∂ρ0

∝ 1 − ρ1 > 0,

∂ 2 W (µt+1 )
∂µt+1 ∂ρ1

∝ vi,t − ρ0 , and

= 1/γ > 0. Since the most preferred policy µt+1 of low Qi,t families is lower, it follows

that when the position of the decisive agent p decreases, µt+1 also decreases. For the parameter
that expresses the degree of parental altruism, after some algebra and using the first order
condition at optimum, we have:
∂ 2 W (µt+1 )
1
=− <0
∂µt+1 ∂γ
γ

(A.39)

We briefly discuss the remaining comparative statics. First, social mobility is lower in societies with higher long-run income (higher ρ0 ). At a first glance, this may appear counterfactual,
since the conjecture is that in less developed economies, social mobility is lower (Solon, 2002).
However, this could be because less developed economies have poorer tax collection technologies
(high α) and limited expansion of voting rights (high p).
Second, in the original Becker and Tomes (1979) model, altruistic parents invest more
in the human capital of their children which strengthens the intergenerational transmission
and lowers social mobility. This result also holds in our model, but it takes place through a
different mechanism.26 Because a lower µ distorts fathers’ investment decisions, a higher µ (less
progressivity) redistributes resources in favor of the future generation. Hence, more altruistic
fathers transfer more resources to the next generation by choosing a higher µ.
Third, if the decisive voter is temporarily well-endowed in family ability (vi,t > ρ0 ), then
cultural persistence decreases the progressivity of the public policy. This result is consistent
with the hypothesis that stronger family ties offer insurance and therefore “crowd out” the
scope for social insurance.
Fourth, given the income potential Qp,t , the parameters σv2 and σu2 do not affect the optimal
µ. Because of the assumed log-log specification, substitution and income effects cancel off, and
26
In our model, altruistic fathers invest more in their children human capital, holding constant µ. However,
because of the log linear specification, altruism does not enter directly in the intergenerational transmission
equation. See Solon (2004) for a similar result.

41

consumption and investment are constant fractions of output, independently of the properties
of the shocks. In a more general specification of preferences, the scope for insurance will increase
when endowment and market luck become more variable. Nevertheless, the properties of the
two shocks can matter indirectly for µ, through the evolution of the income potential in the
next period Qp,t+1 . Therefore, the persistence and volatility of the equilibrium µ are affected
by cultural, genetic and market randomness.

A7. Proof of Proposition 4
First, we examine a stationary state with µt+1 = µt . The population coefficient vector is defined
as the argument that minimizes the least squares problem in the population:


(a, β) = arg min E (yi,t+1 − a − βyi,t )2

(A.40)

a,β

The well known formula for the population slope is given by:
β=

Cov(δ0 + µt+1 (ln hi + yi,t + vi,t+1 + ui,t+1 ) , yi,t )
Cov(yi,t+1 , yi,t )
= Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t ) =
Var(yi,t )
Var(yi,t )
(A.41)

which, from the imposed stationarity Var(yi,t+1 ) = Var(yi,t ), also equals the cross sectional
intergenerational correlation, Corr(yi,t+1 , yi,t ). Recalling the properties of ui,t+1 and ǫi,t+1 , we
have:
β = µt+1



Cov(vi,t+1 , yi,t ) + Cov(ln hi , yi,t )
1+
Var(yi,t )



(A.42)

The first covariance in the numerator is given by (A.21), because the fixed effect hi is
orthogonal to the ǫi,t+1 and hence the vi,t+1 process. The stationary covariance between the
family fixed effect and income is given by:
Cov(ln hi , yi,t ) =

µt+1
Var(ln hi )
1 − µt+1

(A.43)

Putting all pieces together and setting µt+1 = µt = µ, yields the expression for β in Proposition 4.
Next, we show that β is increasing in µ. Using the variances in equations (16)-(18) yields:


µ2
µ+ρ1 σv2
µ
1
2
+
Var(E(y
|h
))
σ
+
2
i,t+1
i
2
2
u
1−µ 1−ρ1 µ 1−ρ
1−µ
µ

(A.44)
β = µ  µ2 1+ρ µ σ21
µ2
1
v
2
+
σ
+
Var(E(y
|h
))
i,t+1 i
1−µ2 1−ρ1 µ 1−ρ2
1−µ2 u
1

or

β=

1µ
(µ + ρ1 )σv2 + µ(1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )σu2 + (1 − ρ21 )(1 + µ) 1−ρ
Var(ln hi )
1−µ
1µ
(1 + ρ1 µ)σv2 + (1 − ρ1 µ)(1 − ρ21 )σu2 + (1 − ρ21 )(1 + µ) 1−ρ
Var(ln hi )
1−µ

42

(A.45)

Consider the last term in the numerator and the denominator. Because

1−ρ1 µ
1−µ

is increasing in

µ, this term also increases in µ. So, adding the same, increasing in µ, term both in the numerator
and the denominator, tends, holding constant all other terms, to produce an increasing β,
because the numerator is smaller than the denominator. Furthermore, β will increase more in
µ due to this last term, when Var(ln hi ) is higher. Hence, consider Var(ln hi ) = 0. In this case
(A.45) collapses to the dynastic correlation in (19). Previously in this Appendix, we showed
that this correlation is increasing in µ, which completes the proof of the claim that β increases
in µ.
Differentiating (A.45) with respect to σu , we can show that:


1 − ρ1 µ
∂β
2
2
2
∝ (µ − 1) ρ1 σv + (1 − ρ1 )(1 + µ)
Var(ln hi ) ≤ 0
∂σu2
1−µ

(A.46)

as claimed in Proposition 4. Differentiating (A.45) with respect to Var(ln hi ), we obtain

∂β
∝ (1 − µ2 ) (1 − ρ1 )σv2 + (1 − ρ21 )(1 − ρ1 )σu2 ≥ 0
∂Var(ln hi )

(A.47)

The comparative statics of β with respect to α, p, Qp,t , ρ1 and γ follow from Proposition 3
and the result ∂β/∂µ > 0. Finally, we have verified numerically that µ is non monotonic in ρ1
and σv2 for various combinations of parameters.
Finally, for the second part of the Proposition we use the new equilibrium µt+1 in the AR(1)
process for income in (7). Var(yi,t ) is given by (17) in the text for policy µt . The formulas for
Cov(ln hi , yi,t ) and Cov(vi,t+1 , yi,t ) are taken by assuming that before the structural break the
economy is in a steady state with µt = µs for all s < t + 1.

43

Appendix 2: Data
Social Mobility: Data for the intergenerational earnings elasticity is taken from Corak’s
(2006) meta-analysis. For Australia we use estimates from Leigh (2007). For Japan we use
estimates from Lefranc, Ojima and Yoshida (2008). For Spain we use estimates from d’Addio
(2007).
Private Return to Education: Taken from Boarini and Strauss (2007), Table 3. Calculated
as the simple average in every country for the years available (males and females).
Total Government Spending and Social Welfare Spending: Government spending denotes central government consumption and investment. Social Welfare denotes consolidated
government spending on social services as percentage of GDP. This data is taken from from
Persson and Tabellini (2003). The variables are averaged over the 1960-1998 period.
Public Education: Data taken from OECD’s Online Education Database. The series extracted are Public education expenditure as % of GDP, Public education expenditure per
student (% of p.c. GDP), at all levels, and Public education expenditure per student (% of
p.c.GDP), at the primary, secondary and tertiary level. For every country we average the series
for all available years in periods 1970-2007.
Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization (ELF): Taken from Roeder (2001). The ELF index
is defined as one minus the probability that two randomly chosen persons from a population
belong to the same ethnic, linguistic or racial group. A higher ELF index denotes a more
heterogeneous population. The value taken refers to the year 1961.
Gini Coefficient: The Gini coefficients at the factor and the gross earnings level are taken
from Milanovic (2000) and are averaged across all available periods for any given country.
Weak Family Ties: Taken from Alesina and Giuliano (2007).
Political Inequality Variables: Taken from the Four Wave World Values Survey. The political participation variables that we use are recoded in binary form as follows: Interested in
Politics (WVS code: E023; recoded as 1 for responders that answered 1 or 2, and 0 otherwise);
Belong to Political Party (A068; already binary); Sign Petitions (E025; 1 if the responder answered yes and 0 otherwise); Participation in Lawful Demonstration (E027; 1 if the responder
answered 1 or 2, 0 otherwise); Belong to Labor Union (A067; already binary). The income
classification follows the variable X047R; see also Table 1.

44

