NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THEORY, GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM AND POLITICAL ECONOMY IN DEVELOPMENT
ECONOMICS
Daron Acemoglu
Working Paper 15944
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15944

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Daron Acemoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Theory, General Equilibrium and Political Economy in Development Economics
Daron Acemoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 15944
April 2010
JEL No. B41,D50,O10,O12,P48
ABSTRACT
I discuss the role of economic theory in empirical work in development economics with special emphasis
on general equilibrium and political economy considerations. I argue that economic theory plays (should
play) a central role in formulating models, estimates of which can be used for counterfactual and policy
analysis. I discuss why counterfactual analysis based on microdata that ignores general equilibrium
and political economy issues may lead to misleading conclusions. I illustrate the main arguments using
examples from recent work in development economics and political economy.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

Development economics investigates the causes of poverty and low incomes around the
world and seeks to make progress in designing policies that could help individuals, regions,
and countries to achieve greater economic prosperity. Economic theory plays a crucial role in
this endeavor, not only because it helps us focus on the most important economic mechanisms,
but also because it provides guidance on the external validity of econometric estimates, meaning
that it clari…es how we can learn from speci…c empirical exercises about the e¤ects of similar
shocks and policies in di¤erent circumstances and when implemented on di¤erent scales.
General equilibrium and political economy issues often create challenges for this type of
external validity. General equilibrium refers to factors that become important when we conduct (or ask questions involving) counterfactuals in which large changes are contemplated.
The di¢ culty lies in the fact that such counterfactuals will induce changes in factor prices and
technology which we hold …xed in partial equilibrium analysis and create di¤erent composition
e¤ects than in partial equilibrium. Political economy refers to the fact that the feasible set
of interventions is often determined by political factors and large counterfactuals will induce
political responses from various actors and interest groups. General equilibrium and political economy considerations are important because partial equilibrium estimates that ignore
responses from both sources will not give the appropriate answer to counterfactual exercises.
In this essay, I …rst explain why it is important to think of external validity in policy analysis, particularly in development economics, and the role of economic theory in this exercise.
I then illustrate the importance of general equilibrium reasoning in several major problems
in development economics. Finally, I argue that political economy considerations have to be
central to any investigation of development problems and that inferences that ignore political
economy can go wrong. The online appendix includes a discussion of some additional issues
that arise in the context of using theory in guiding estimation.

Why Development Economics Needs Theory
There is no general agreement on whether we should use economic theory for formulating and
then subsequently attempting to estimate “structural parameters”. I argue that the answer is
largely “yes” because otherwise econometric estimates would lack external validity, in which
case they can neither inform us about whether a particular model or theory is a useful approximation to reality, nor would they be useful in providing us guidance on what the e¤ects of
similar shocks and policies would be in di¤erent circumstances or if implemented in di¤erent
scales. I therefore de…ne structural parameters as those that provide external validity and

1

would thus be useful in testing theories or in policy analysis beyond the speci…c environment
and sample from which they are derived.1 External validity becomes a particularly challenging
task in the presence of general equilibrium and political economy considerations, and a major
role of economic theory is in helping us overcome these problems or at the very least alerting
us to their importance.
To illustrate these points, consider the relationship between the cost of schooling and
schooling decisions. We can describe this relationship purely as a descriptive one, focusing
on a sample and looking at the correlation or the ordinary least squares relationship between
these two variables. For example, we could specify the following “reduced-form” relationship:
log (si ) = X0i

log (ci ) + "i ;

where i denotes an individual in the sample, si is years of schooling, ci denotes the cost of
schooling to the individual resulting, for example, from forgone earnings and actual costs of
attending schools, Xi is a vector of characteristics of this individual for which we may wish
to control, and

is a vector of parameters. The parameter of interest is . We can then use

ordinary least squares to estimate

and .

Alternatively, we could start with an economic model. In fact, some simple theories will
lead to exactly this equation. Suppose, for example, that the human capital of an individual is
a function of her level of schooling. In particular, suppose that the human capital of individual
i is given by hi = s1i

, for some parameter

2 (0; 1) and si denotes her level of schooling. She

can then earn income equal to yi = whi , where w is the market wage per unit of human capital.
In addition, individual i has a cost of schooling given by

i ci si ,

where

i

is an unobserved

non-monetary cost component and ci is the monetary cost of schooling for this individual.
Suppose that individuals maximize net income, so that individual i will choose schooling to
maximize income net of the cost of schooling, that is wsi1

i ci si .

After working through the

maximization problem, this model implies a relationship identical to the reduced-form equation
we started with, but now the parameter

corresponds to 1= .2 Once this equation is derived,

estimation is also straightforward and can be performed again by ordinary least squares.
1

See Shadish, Cook and Campbell (2002) on internal and external validity. The notion of external validity,
in particular the emphasis on counterfactual exercises, as the de…ning characteristic of a structural parameter is
closely related to Marschak’s (1953) de…nition, which distinguishes between structural parameters that provide
“useful knowledge” for understanding the e¤ects of policy within a given sample and/or in new environments.
It also clearly presupposes that the empirical strategy has been successful in estimating “causal” e¤ects (for
example, as de…ned in Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996).
2
Speci…cally, the optimal choice of individual i is si = K ( i ci ) 1= , where in this case K = ((1
) w)1= .
After taking logs and de…ning "i
log i = and = 1= , this gives the reduced-form equation above.

2

Next comes the harder part. We have seen that the same equation can be posited as a
reduced-form relationship, or it can be derived from an economic model. But at the end it is
the same equation, and it can be estimated in the same manner. So in what sense can we think
of it as a “structural relationship”? The answer is related to the notion of external validity
introduced above. Suppose we now ask the question: what would be the e¤ects of subsidies
to reduce the cost of schooling, ci , for a set of individuals? This counterfactual experiment
could be motivated by a potential policy that is being contemplated or it may be used for
understanding and testing the implications of our theory. The question might be for the same
sample on which the initial estimation was performed or it could be for an entirely di¤erent
sample or population. In either case, one answer to the above question readily follows from
using the estimates of

to compute the increase in the years of schooling for individuals whose

cost of schooling has declined. But can we trust this answer?
If

is indeed a structural parameter, then we should trust this answer (obviously, subject

to standard errors), but not otherwise.3 To illustrate what might go wrong when

does

not correspond to a structural parameter, imagine, for example, that years of schooling are
constrained by school enrollments, which are in turn constrained by the sizes of schools. In this
setting, let us further assume that individuals with low cost of schooling get proportionately
more of the available school resources (for instance, due to some type of e¢ cient rationing).4
In this example, we can still estimate the relationship between s and c, and we will obtain a
meaningful-looking estimate of . However, the estimate will lack external validity. Consider a
policy of expanding the subsidy for schooling to individuals that does not change the constraint
that total years of schooling are determined by the sizes of schools. Then the estimate of
from the pre-subsidy regime will not necessarily inform us about the post-subsidy relationship
between cost of schooling and years of schooling and will not give us accurate predictions about
the impact of the policy.
3
Many empirical equations that do not correspond to structural relationships may nonetheless contain useful
information; they just cannot be used for counterfactual policy analysis. We might simply be interested in
uncovering correlations, which may help us distinguish between theories, since many relevant theories will have
implications about what these correlations should look like. This suggests that it is often useful to estimate
reduced-form relationships that do not have structural interpretations, but when doing so, we should be explicit
about how they should be (and not be) interpreted.
4
More speci…cally,Pthe constraint on school enrollments might imply that total years of schooling should be
1=
equal to S, that is,
still holds at the
i si = S. Suppose that the economic relationship si = K ( i ci )
individual level (i.e., individuals with low cost of schooling get proportionately more of the available school
resources). But it must do so with a di¤erent value of K than in footnote 2. In particular, the constraint on
1
P
1=
total schooling implies K = S
. When the cost of schooling is subsidized, the underlyi2I ( i ci )
ing economic relationship with the new de…nition of K given here remains unchanged, but the reduced-form
relationship captured by our estimating equation above changes (exactly as shown by the above formula for K).

3

The problem described here is of course a version of the Lucas critique (Lucas, 1976) that
reduced-form form relationships will not be stable in the face of policy interventions. However,
the discussion also highlights that this problem is not simply circumvented by deriving the
relationship of interest from an economic model, unless this model incorporates the relevant
constraints and margins of choice. In the above example, no model that fails to incorporate the
constraint on total enrollments will be informative about counterfactuals involving large-scale
interventions. Thus, our con…dence in the implied answers to policy experiments crucially
depends on our con…dence in having captured the appropriate structural relationship with the
model we are estimating.
How do we convince others and ourselves that our estimates have external validity and can
be used for policy analysis or for testing theories? This is where economic theory becomes
particularly useful. As a …rst step, we have to defend, using economic theory, common sense
and evidence, that key factors potentially a¤ecting the response to the relevant counterfactual
are accounted for, and the model and the functional form we chose indeed capture the salient
aspects of the reality (“are a good approximation to reality”). This in turn involves arguing
that the functional form is stable over time and across relevant samples, that variation across
individuals not captured by the covariates and the cost of schooling can be incorporated into
the error term "i , and that this error term can be modeled as additive and orthogonal to
(uncorrelated with) the other variables included in the equation. Using economic theory is
often the best way of clarifying whether key factors have been omitted, and whether the
underlying assumptions can be defended and provide a good approximation to reality.
However, the previous discussion also highlights that specifying a model that justi…es a
speci…c estimating equation is typically not di¢ cult, and may not solve the underlying problem.
For example, we saw how we could derive exactly the same estimating equation from a model
of individual schooling choice; but if in reality years of schooling are constrained by the sizes
of schools, the estimates of

will still not be useful for understanding the implications of a

large-scale subsidy for schooling. The problem of course is that for studying the implications
of this type of policy, the constraints resulting from the sizes of schools are central, and any
model that does not recognize these constraints will not be helpful in such a study. This
emphasizes that the proper use of economic theory does not mean writing down of a speci…c
model; instead, it requires that we incorporate the appropriate constraints and margins of
adjustments, that we develop the case that economic theory robustly leads to the estimating
equation in question, and that we clarify which important economic mechanisms and e¤ects

4

are being excluded from the model.5
Another advantage of the structural reasoning based on theory is that once we go through
the process of explicitly justifying the equation we are estimating, either using economic theory
or other theoretical or empirical arguments, we may realize that such an equation cannot easily
be defended. In such cases, it has to be interpreted with greater caution, or perhaps it has to
be modi…ed or abandoned. This advantage becomes particularly important in contexts where
general equilibrium and political economy e¤ects are present. Finally, economic theory provides
the best way of interpreting what the estimates from an equation, such as the one we started
with, mean. For example, when this equation is derived from the economic model above,
we understand that

= 1=

is a function of the elasticity of the human capital production

function.
The structural approach also faces major challenges, however. First, as already emphasized,
writing down a model like the one described above is clearly not su¢ cient for achieving external
validity. That model itself made several assumptions which are restrictive and may not provide
a good approximation to the economic phenomena in which we are interested. This is again
illustrated by the above example, which showed that one might end up deriving the same
estimating equation from a theoretical model and thus reach the same conclusions about the
implications of a counterfactual policy change as one might have done by just specifying a
reduced-form equation.
Second, we may in fact question whether there is any ground for assuming a constant elasticity

between years of schooling and costs of schooling. After all, we know that all theories

are abstractions and approximations, so there is little reason to believe that a parameter such
as — or the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, or the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, or
the elasticity of substitution between two factors, or any other Marschakian preference or technology parameter— should be really constant. But without such constancy, there are severe
limits to external validity.
Finally, one may even question the existence or usefulness of “structural parameters” altogether. What we take as a structural parameter for one theory will naturally become an
5
The online appendix discusses some issues that arise in thinking of how we could develop such robust
predictions and how we could try to map them to data. This discussion also highlights that in certain cases one
could achieve counterfactual validity without much theory. For example, we need only the most basic theory in
interpreting a controlled experiment designed to evaluate the e¤ectiveness of a drug. In this case, we can say
that common sense and a very limited amount of medical theory are su¢ cient to interpret the results of the
controlled experiment and decide whether they are informative about the e¤ectiveness of the drug in question
beyond the experimental setting. It should also be noted that the evaluation of the e¤ectiveness of a drug in this
example has a clear parallel to “modeling individual behavior” in economics. As further discussed below, the
role of economic theory becomes even more central when our focus shifts to “modeling equilibrium behavior”.

5

endogenous object in another. So a particular model can serve us well as an abstraction for
a series of counterfactual experiments, but there will exist other experiments for which it will
be much less informative. For example, an elasticity of substitution or certain technology
parameters may be constant with respect to certain variations, but would change in response
to others. This is almost by necessity: a precondition for external validity is that key factors
relevant for the outcome of the counterfactual should be included in the model, and models as
abstractions have to exclude several relevant factors, so no single model can include all of the
relevant factors for all possible counterfactual exercises.
These challenges notwithstanding, it is clear that we often have to take a position about
the parameters being estimated corresponding to structural parameters (at least for a wellde…ned though perhaps limited set of variations in environment and policy). Otherwise, we
will have no way of performing counterfactual exercises and making predictions about policy
changes (see Imbens, 2009). But this necessitates a claim to external validity (even if it is
only implicit), and economic theory is our best guide for formulating the appropriate models
and justifying such claims to external validity. These issues become only more central in the
presence of general equilibrium e¤ects and political economy factors, which I turn to next.

The Centrality of General Equilibrium
The bulk of empirical work using microdata, particularly in development economics, engages in
partial equilibrium comparisons. Depending on magnitudes of various e¤ects, general equilibrium interactions can o¤set or even reverse sensible partial equilibrium conclusions. However,
most empirical strategies do not directly estimate general equilibrium e¤ects.6
Economic theory nonetheless provides some guidance in assessing the importance of general
equilibrium e¤ects. Three types of general equilibrium e¤ects, which are usually not estimated
in partial equilibrium comparisons, are potentially important. First, in response to large policy
interventions or shocks, imperfect substitution between factors and diminishing returns imply
that factor productivities and prices will change. Second, the same policy interventions or
shocks can lead to endogenous technology responses. Third, there may be composition e¤ects
resulting from equilibrium substitution of some factors or products for others (whereby the
composition of micro units changes di¤erently in response to di¤erent types of interventions).
6

See also Townsend (2009) for a complementary discussion of the role of general equilibrium analysis in
development economics, with special emphasis on credit market issues; Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998)
for a discussion of general equilibrium issues in the analysis of the e¤ects of technology on wage inequality; and
Du‡o (2004a) for a discussion of other di¢ culties in “scaling up”policy interventions evaluated using microdata.

6

Theory generally implies that the …rst and the third e¤ects will tend to partially o¤set or even
reverse direct partial equilibrium e¤ects, while endogenous technology responses could either
dampen or magnify them (see Acemoglu, 2007, for general theoretical results on endogenous
technology).
As an example of factor price changes, consider the problem of estimating the returns to
schooling. This is typically done by focusing on a small group of individuals who are induced to
remain in school for longer and comparing them to other individuals in the same market (thus
facing the same prices) who have dropped out of school. The implicit assumption here is that
altering schooling decisions will not generate changes in market prices. But for many of the
questions relevant for development economics, we wish to think of counterfactuals in which a
large fraction of the population acquires more schooling. In this case, it is no longer plausible to
assume that prices will necessarily remain constant. Imperfect substitution between di¤erent
skill levels will typically imply that an increase in the schooling level of a signi…cant fraction
of the population may reduce the return to schooling. For example, Angrist (1995) shows that
the large school building programs in the Palestinian territories led to a sharp drop in the skill
premium.
As an example of endogenous technology responses, consider the large increase in the
relative supply of college-educated workers in the United States starting in the late 1960s.
Given technology, this change in relative supply should have reduced the college premium. As
is well known, the opposite happened in practice, and the college premium increased sharply
from the late 1970s onwards. Acemoglu (1998) argues, for example, that this was a consequence
of the endogenous response of technology to the relative abundance of more skilled workers. The
same reasoning implies that in evaluating the e¤ect of trade opening, one could not simply rely
on partial equilibrium estimates derived from …rm-level variation in access to foreign markets,
since trade opening is a general equilibrium change that will also a¤ect technology choices and
the direction of technological change.
As an example of composition e¤ects, consider the problem of estimating the importance of
credit market imperfections. Banerjee and Du‡o (2005) survey a large body of evidence that
small and medium-sized businesses in less-developed economies are credit constrained and an
extension of credit to these businesses will make them increase production. Now consider
the e¤ect of a large-scale policy of credit expansion to small- and medium-sized businesses.
This policy could lead to a di¤erent type of composition e¤ect than the one operating in
partial equilibrium. For example, it may be the case that in partial equilibrium estimation
focusing on …rm-level variation we found that …rms with better access to credit expanded, but
7

this was at the expense of other …rms that did not have access to credit (that is, partly by
“stealing business” from others). And yet, the same response cannot take place in general
equilibrium. As a consequence, when additional credit becomes available to a large fraction of
…rms, total output may not increase by as much or at all. One could thus imagine a situation
in which partial equilibrium estimates of relaxing credit constraints are large, while the general
equilibrium e¤ects would be small.
I now further elaborate the …rst general equilibrium e¤ect, working through endogenous
factor prices and diminishing returns, in the context of the e¤ect of life expectancy (and health)
on economic growth. A large microeconometric literature shows that healthier individuals are
more productive: see, among others, Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004), Schultz (2002), and
Straus and Thomas (1998). On this basis, we would expect an increase in the life expectancy
of the workforce to lead to greater aggregate productivity. But one should take general equilibrium e¤ects into account, since an increase in life expectancy also increases population, and
because of diminishing returns to capital and land, it may decrease labor productivity and
may in fact reduce income per capita. How could one investigate whether these general equilibrium e¤ects are important? One approach is to use information from other sources in order
to “calibrate”the values of the parameters and then combine this with micro estimates of the
e¤ect of health and life expectancy on individual outcomes.7 This approach will be successful
when we can have con…dence in the calibration exercise.
A second approach is to use cross-country variation, even though such variation will be
a¤ected by several potentially omitted factors. Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) adopt this
approach. They derive the following linear relationship between log life expectancy, xit , and
log income per capita, yit , from a neoclassical growth model and the possibility that life
expectancy might have a direct positive e¤ect on technology and on human capital:
yit = xit +

i

+

t

+ "it :

The parameter of interest, , measures the relationship between log income per capita and log
life expectancy. Though this equation can be estimated by ordinary least squares, this is likely
to lead to biased estimates of

, since societies that are successful in solving economic and

7

This is the approach advocated by Banerjee and Du‡o (2005) and used by Weil (2007) in the context of
health and economic development and by Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998) in the context of the relationship
between technology and wage inequality. Another approach not mentioned in the text, perhaps most promising,
is to combine microdata with regional variation to estimate partial and general equilibrium e¤ects simultaneously.
This approach is adopted and developed in Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) to estimate human capital externalities
exploiting individual-level di¤erences in schooling together with state-wide di¤erences in average schooling (see
also Du‡o, 2004b, for an application to Indonesian data) and in Acemoglu, Autor and Lyle (2004) to estimate
the general equilibrium e¤ects of increased female labor supply (on male and female wages).

8

institutional problems to achieve higher growth are also likely to provide better public health
and other measures that improve life expectancy, and also the increase in income per capita is
likely to lead to a mechanical improvement in life expectancy.
To overcome this problem, Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) adopt an instrumental-variables
strategy, exploiting global discoveries and di¤usion of major drugs, chemicals, and public health
technologies. The idea is that these improvements should have raised life expectancy di¤erentially in countries that were subject to di¤erent types of initial disease burdens. To implement
this idea, they construct a “predicted mortality”variable, Mit , based on the 15 most infectious
diseases in 1940. They compute the pre-intervention (1940) mortality from each of these 15
diseases in each country. Then, when a global health intervention (technological breakthrough)
takes place for a given disease, predicted mortality in each country falls to a di¤erent level depending on their pre-intervention mortality from that disease. More speci…cally, the predicted
mortality variable uses a country’s initial mortality rate for each of the 15 diseases until there
is a global intervention, and after the global intervention, the mortality rate for the disease in
question declines to the frontier mortality rate.8 Predicted mortality, Mit , is then used as an
instrument for log life expectancy in the estimation of the relationship between log income per
capita and log life expectancy. With this reasoning, the …rst-stage relationship is
xit = Mit + ~i + ~ t + uit :
For this instrumental-variables approach to be valid, the key exclusion restriction for the
estimation strategy is the covariance between the predicted mortality variable, Mit , and the
error term in the earlier income per capita equation, "it , must be zero (i.e., Cov(Mit ; "it ) = 0).
Note that both the second and the …rst stages (the exclusion restriction) are motivated by
theory. The second stage is derived from the neoclassical growth model. The …rst stage
(and thus the exclusion restriction that Cov(Mit ; "it ) = 0) is predicated on the theory that
global intervention for a particular disease will a¤ect mortality in a country in proportion
with the number of initial deaths from the disease in question in that country, and more
importantly, that baseline levels of mortality from di¤erent diseases do not have a direct
8

Mathematically, predicted mortality is de…ned as
X
Mit =
((1 Idt )Mdit0 + Idt MdF t ) ;
d2D

where Mdit denotes mortality in country i from disease d at time t, Idt is a dummy for intervention for disease
d at time t (it is equal to 1 for all dates after the intervention), D denotes the set of the 15 infectious diseases,
Mdit0 refers to the pre-intervention (1940) mortality from disease d in the same units, and MdF t is the mortality
rate from disease d at the health frontier of the world at time t.

9

e¤ect on future income beyond their e¤ect working through future life expectancy and health
conditions. Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) provide evidence consistent with this exclusion
restriction. For example, prior to 1940 predicted mortality does not predict future income
or population growth, which is consistent with the notion that past levels of life expectancy
do not have a direct e¤ect on future growth. The online appendix discusses why the speci…c
instrumental-variables strategy suggested here is only valid with certain formulations of the
second-stage equation, and di¤erent theories for the relationship between health and growth,
encapsulated in di¤erent second-stage relationships, may not be consistent with the same
exclusion restriction, thus further emphasizing the role of theory in guiding the estimation
strategy.
The surprising …nding in Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) is this that despite the wellestablished positive micro estimates of the e¤ect of health on productivity, in general equilibrium the e¤ect on income per capita appears to be negative. This result probably arises
because the improvements in life expectancy were associated with very large increases in population. While this conclusion comes with several caveats, not least because the negative
estimates are often quite large and come from a speci…c episode (during which mortality rates
may have declined unusually rapidly relative to morbidity rates), it illustrates the possibility
that general equilibrium empirical conclusions can be quite di¤erent from partial equilibrium
ones.9 It reiterates the importance of incorporating general equilibrium considerations for
conducting counterfactual exercises concerning the e¤ects of large changes in variables such
as schooling, health conditions or access to credit on income per capita or other aspects of
economic development.

No Development without Political Economy
There is increasing recognition that institutional and political economy factors are central to
economic development. Many problems of development result from barriers to the adoption of
new technologies, lack of property rights over land, labor and businesses, and policies distorting
prices and incentives. These institutions and policies are not in place exclusively, or even
primarily, because of a lack of understanding of economic principles on the part of policymakers.
Typically, policymakers introduce or maintain such policies to remain in power, or to enrich
themselves, or because politically powerful elites oppose the entry of rivals, the introduction of
9
The conclusions may also depend on the fact that Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) focus on changes in health
largely (though not solely) associated with mortality. Bleakley (2007), focusing on changes related to morbidity,
obtains di¤erent results.

10

new technologies, or improvements in the property rights of their workers or competitors (for
example, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005a). But this perspective implies that theory
again becomes particularly important in evaluating (or framing) possible e¤ects of large-scale
policy interventions; counterfactual analyses that ignore political economy factors, like those
that do not take account of general equilibrium e¤ects, may give misleading answers. In this
case, convincing micro or even macro (general equilibrium) evidence about the e¤ects of a
particular policy change on economic outcomes is not in itself su¢ cient to gauge what the
implications will be when such a policy is encouraged or implemented.
The experience of Ghana with exchange rate policy under Prime Minister Ko… Busia in
1971 provides a sharp illustration. Busia pursued expansionary economic policies after coming
to power in 1969, and maintained various price controls and an overvalued exchange rate. But
Ghana was soon su¤ering from a series of balance of payments crises and foreign exchange shortages. Faced with these crises, Busia signed an agreement with the IMF on December 27, 1971,
which included a massive devaluation of the currency. A few days following the announcement
of the devaluation, Busia was overthrown by the military led by Lt. Col. Acheampong, who
immediately reversed the devaluation (see, for example, Herbst, 1993; Boafo-Arthur, 1999).
There was little doubt that devaluation was good economics in Ghana. But it was not good
politics. State controls over prices, wages, marketing boards and exchange rates were an important part of the patronage network, and any politician who lost the support of this network
was susceptible both at the polls and against the military. Busia su¤ered this fate.
This episode illustrates a general point: When political economy factors are important,
evidence on the economic e¤ects of large-scale policy changes under a given set of political
conditions is not su¢ cient to forecast their e¤ect on the economy and society. This principle
does not just apply to exchange rate policy. For example, the fact that increasing availability of credit to …rms would increase aggregate output given all other policies does not imply
that an actual reform of the credit market will necessarily work. Consistent with this perspective, Haber and Perotti (2008) argue and provide evidence that limiting access to …nance
is a powerful tool in the hands of political and economic elites for restricting entry into lucrative businesses. Thus, reforms of credit markets will often face political opposition from
powerful parties, and even when they are implemented, this implementation may be imperfect
or accompanied by other policies aimed at nullifying the e¤ects of the reform. This type of
endogenous policy response undermining the objectives of a reform is termed the seesaw e¤ ect
in Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson and Querubín (2008), who provide evidence that the reforms
aimed at reducing in‡ation by granting independence to the central bank typically do not work
11

in societies with weak institutions and sometimes trigger other policy responses— for example,
larger government de…cits— to undo the reduction in the ability of the government to provide
favors to politically powerful groups.
There are many parallels between the implications of general equilibrium e¤ects for the
interpretation (and extrapolation) of partial equilibrium estimates discussed in the previous
section and the implications of political economy factors. Even though in general we have less of
an understanding of the channels of in‡uence of political economy, a general principle provides
a useful starting point: large-scale shocks and policy interventions will create political economy
responses from those who see their economic or political rents threatened or from those that
see new options to increase these rents. Such responses are the basis of all three examples
mentioned so far: the overthrow of Busia, potential obstacles to credit market reform, and the
seesaw e¤ect. The di¢ culty lies in the fact that which groups and individuals will be able to
mobilize and respond to these changes will vary across di¤erent applications.
How should empirical research in economic development take political economy into account? A …rst step would be to use empirical work to understand better the role of political
economy factors in development. This type of research on empirical political economy of development is relatively new. The …rst generation of work focused on cross-country variation
(see the overview in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005a). Although research in this
area is expanding, given the importance of political economy for the problems of development,
it remains surprising how few papers investigate important political economy channels using
microdata and careful empirical strategies. I now discuss a few of these papers to give a sense
of what approaches are available.
Low agricultural productivity throughout the developing world is a major problem, and
also a puzzle. In many instances, “fallowing,” plowing the land but leaving it unseeded for
a period of time so as to reduce weed growth and conserve soil moisture, would increase
productivity considerably. Goldstein and Udry (2008) document that in southern Ghana the
amount of fallowing is massively insu¢ cient. A non-political economy answer would be to
encourage fallowing. But in reality, this recommendation (or policy) would be incorrect or at
least seriously incomplete, because Goldstein and Udry show that fallowing increases the risk
of con…scation of land by powerful chiefs and other connected individuals. In fact, those with
su¢ cient political power, who presumably face a lower risk of con…scation, choose signi…cantly
higher levels of fallowing. This …nding illustrates both the importance of secure property rights
and the role of political economy constraints on productive investments. It also highlights the
role of local power structures in villages in shaping the security of property rights and incentives
12

for investment.
More work is needed on understanding how the political economy context is shaped. An
emerging literature investigates these issues using microdata. As one example, Ferraz and
Finan (2008) use audit reports from an anti-corruption program in Brazil to estimate the
e¤ect of electoral accountability on corruption and misappropriation of funds by politicians.
They …nd that mayors who cannot get reelected because of term limits are signi…cantly more
corrupt and misappropriate 27 percent more resources than mayors with reelection incentives.
They also show that, consistent with theory, these e¤ects are stronger when voters have access
to less information and when judicial punishment against corruption is weaker. In a related
paper, Ferraz and Finan (2009) study the e¤ects of politician salaries on politician behavior
and quality of public services. They exploit a discontinuity in the salaries of local politicians
across Brazilian municipalities resulting from a constitutional amendment imposing salary caps
depending on the size of municipal population. Using regression discontinuity techniques, they
…nd that greater salaries are associated with greater competition among potential candidates,
and moreover that the quality of the elected legislatures measured by education or experience
improves. Higher salaries are also associated with improvements in various dimensions of
politician performance.10
Another approach is to assess the extent to which past historical institutions have long-run
e¤ects. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005a) summarize several cross-country studies
suggesting that certain major events such as the foundation of colonial institutions or the
separation of the Koreas can have persistent e¤ects. However, controlling for confounding
factors is often di¢ cult in cross-country studies and the exact mechanism leading to persistent
e¤ects is often di¢ cult or impossible to pinpoint. Recent work by Dell (2009) focuses on
the potential e¤ects of the forced labor system used by the Spanish colonial government in
Peru and Bolivia. This system, which forced a large fraction of the adult male population of
villages near the Potosi silver and Huancavelica mercury mines to work in these mines, was
used extensively in the sixteenth century, and was abolished in 1812. Those inside and outside
the boundary of the catchment area of the forced labor program were subject to di¤erent labor
regulations. In a regression discontinuity design, Dell …nds that areas subjected to forced labor
more than 200 years ago now have about one-third lower household equivalent consumption.
The available data also allow an investigation of some potential mechanisms for this very large
10

Returning to the contrast between di¤erent counterfactual exercises, one might question, for example,
whether this regression discontinuity estimate would be informative about the e¤ects of a large-scale increase in
politician salaries, which might cause di¤erent composition e¤ects than cross-municipality variation in salaries
induced by salary caps.

13

and persistent e¤ect, which appears to be related to lack of public goods in areas subject to
forced labor. This lack of public goods in turn may be related to the policies of the Spanish
governments to limit competition for labor in the catchment areas from private landholders
and businesses.
Finally, again related to the issue of coercion, Naidu and Yuchtman (2009) investigate
how the ability of employers to imprison or …ne an employee for breach of contract under
the Master and Servant Acts, which remained in e¤ect in Britain until 1875, a¤ected labor
market relations. They provide evidence that employers made extensive use of their coercive
ability under the law, and as a consequence, labor demand shocks were largely met by using
increased persecutions for contract breach rather than higher wages. This …nding is consistent
with theoretical predictions of recent models of labor coercion such as Acemoglu and Wolitzky
(2009).
Overall, the above-mentioned papers, though distinct in methodology and scope, show how
microdata and regional variation in institutions and laws can shed light on the role of political
economy factors in development. Empirical work in development economics should pay more
attention to, and build a more systematic understanding of, political economy. It must also
study how di¤erent counterfactual and policy experiments will interact with or be resisted by
political factors.

Concluding Remarks
A key objective of empirical work in development economics is to discriminate between theories about the causes of economic growth and to conduct counterfactual analysis to build
a systematic understanding of how an economy will respond to large changes in factor supplies, technology or policy. Economic theory is central in this endeavor. In fact, economic
theory becomes more important in the presence of general equilibrium and political economy
considerations.
General equilibrium and political economy e¤ects are often di¢ cult to estimate or to quantify. However, they are pervasive and essential for important questions in development economics. Most research in economics has (and should have) a narrow focus and tries to investigate a particular set of factors in a speci…c context. But in development economics where the
agenda ought to be broad, we should also not lose sight of the bigger picture of the problem of
economic development. This implies that we should strive to incorporate general equilibrium
and political economy e¤ects when we can, and we should be cognizant of their importance

14

when we cannot.
It is also useful to note that general equilibrium and political economy considerations are not
only a constraint in policy analysis, even though I focused on cases in which these considerations
tend to o¤set or reverse partial equilibrium e¤ects. For example, the endogeneity of political
economy responses also implies that certain economic policies and shocks might have more
bene…cial e¤ects than what the pure economic analysis would suggest, because they can lead
to a bene…cial change in the political equilibrium. One such example, discussed in Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2005b), is the possibility that Atlantic trade may have had long-run
bene…cial e¤ects in Europe mainly by changing the political equilibrium in several countries
towards more participatory regimes.

Acknowledgments
I thank Joshua Angrist, David Autor, Abhijit Banerjee, Timothy Besley, Angus Deaton,
Melissa Dell, Esther Du‡o, Fred Finan, Chad Jones, Guido Imbens, Ariel Pakes, James Robinson, Timothy Taylor, Robert Townsend, Chris Udry, and Eric Weese for useful comments and
suggestions.

References
Acemoglu, Daron (2002). “Directed Technical Change” Review of Economic Studies, 69
(October): 781-810.
Acemoglu, Daron (2007). “Equilibrium Bias of Technology”Econometrica, 75 (September):
1371-1410.
Acemoglu, Daron (2009). Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Acemoglu, Daron and Josh D. Angrist (2000). “How Large are Human Capital Externalities? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws.”NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000. MIT
Press, Cambridge: 9-59.
Acemoglu, Daron, David H. Autor and David Lyle (2004). “Women, War and Wages: The
E¤ect of Female Labor Supply on Labor Market Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy,
112 (June): 497-551.
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson (2007). “Disease and Development: The E¤ect of
Life Expectancy on Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy, 115 (December): 925985.
15

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005a). “Institutions as a
Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth.” In Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (editors)
Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland, Amsterdam: 384-473.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James Robinson (2005b). “The Rise of Europe:
Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Growth.” American Economic Review, 95, pp. 546579.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pablo Querubín (2008). “When
Does Policy Reform Work? The Case of Central Bank Independence.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity.
Acemoglu, Daron and Alex Wolitzky (2009). “The Economics of Labor Coercion.” MIT
mimeo.
Angrist, Joshua D. (1995). “The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and
Gaza Strip.” American Economic Review, 85 (December): 1065-1087.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin (1996). “Identi…cation of
Causal E¤ects Using Instrumental Variables.”Journal of the American Statistical Association,
91 (June): 444-455.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Du‡o (2005) “Economic Growth through the Lenses of
Development Economics.” In Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (editors) Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland, Amsterdam: 384-473.
Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig (2004). “The Returns to Birthweight.”Review
of Economics and Statistics 86 (May): 586-601.
Bleakley, Hoyt (2007). “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication
in the American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (February): 73-117.
Boafo-Arthur, K. (1999). “Ghana: Structural Adjustment, Democratization and the Politics of Continuity.” African Studies Review, 42 (2): 41-72.
Dell, Melissa (2009). “The Persistent E¤ects of Peru’s Mining Mita.” MIT mimeo.
Du‡o, Esther (2004a). “Scaling up and Evaluation.” MIT mimeo.
Du‡o, Esther (2004b) “Medium Run E¤ects of Educational Expansion: Evidence from a
Large School Construction Program in Indonesia.” Journal of Development Economics, 74:
163-197.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan (2008). “Electoral Accountability and Corruption:
Evidence from the Audits of Local Governments.” UCLA mimeo.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan (2009). “Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of
Monetary Incentives on Quality and Performance.” NBER Working Paper.
16

Goldstein, Markus and Christopher Udry (2008). “The Pro…ts of Power: Land Rights and
Agricultural Investment in Ghana.”Journal of Political Economy, 116 (December): 981-1022.
Haber, Steve and Enrico Perotti (2008). “Political Economy of Finance.” Forthcoming
Journal of Economic Literature.
Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber (1998). “Explaining Rising
Wage Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings
with Heterogeneous Agents.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1 (January): 1-58.
Herbst, Je¤rey (1993). The Politics of Reform in Ghana, 1982-1991. University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.
Imbens, Guido (2009). “Better LATE Than Nothing: some comments on Deaton (2009)
and Heckman and Urzua (2009).” Harvard, mimeo.
Lucas, Robert E. (1976). “Economic Policy Evaluation: A Critique.”in Karl Brunner and
Alan H. Meltzer (editors) The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets press F4, North Holland,
Amsterdam, 19-46.
Marschak, Jacob (1953). “Economic Measurement for Policy and Prediction.”In W. Hood
and T. J. Koopmans (editors) Studies in Econometric Method, Wiley, New York: 1-26.
Naidu, Suresh and Noam Yuchtman (2009). “How Green Was My Valley? Coercive Contract Enforcement in 19th Century Industrial Britain,” Harvard University mimeo.
Schultz, T. Paul (2002). “Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health Human
Capital.” American Economic Review, 92 (May): 349-353.
Shadish, William H., Thomas D. Cook and Donald T. Campbell (2002). Experimental and
Quasi-Experimental Designs for Generalized Causal Inference, Houghton Mi- in, Boston.
Soares, Rodrigo R. (2005). “Mortality Reductions, Educational Attainment and Fertility
Choice.” American Economic Review, 95 (July): 780-795.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas (1998). “Health, Nutrition and Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Literature, 36 (June): 766-817.
Townsend, Robert (1994). “Risk and Insurance in Village India.”Econometrica, 62 (May):
539-591.
Townsend, Robert (2009). “Financial Structure and Economic Welfare: Applied General
Equilibrium Development Economics.” MIT mimeo.
Weil, David N. (2007). “Accounting for the E¤ect of Health on Growth.”Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 122 (August): 1265-1306.

17

Appendix (Not for Publication)
The Role of Theory in Instrumental-Variables Strategies
In this appendix, I illustrate the role of theory further using the same example from Acemoglu
and Johnson (2007) used in the text. The estimating equation for income per capita can be
alternatively written as
yi =
where

xi +

+

"i ;

denotes the di¤erence between dates t0 and t1 (for example, in Acemoglu and John-

son’s estimation 1940 and 1980 or 2000). Estimating this di¤erenced equation would (mechanically) lead to identical results to those obtained from the estimation of the level equation
for income per capita presented in the text. However, the literature on the cross-country
relationship between health and income sometimes estimates equations of the form
yi = yit0 + xit0 +

xi +

+

"i ;

where xit0 is the initial (1940) level of log life expectancy and yit0 is the initial (1940) level of
income per capita. It may then be tempting to estimate this modi…ed model using a similar
IV strategy, in particular, using the same predicted mortality variable (either by treating the
initial levels xit0 and yit0 as exogenous or by instrumenting for them using their lagged values or
geographic controls). The reasoning would be that if predicted mortality is a good instrument
for our original estimation exercise, then it must be a good instrument for estimating this
modi…ed model. But this reasoning is incorrect.
As already noted in the text, we need both the second and the …rst stages to be derived
from appropriate (and logically consistent) economic models. The second stage in Acemoglu
and Johnson was derived from the neoclassical growth model. A second stage equation such as
the one in this modi…ed model, with initial life expectancy on the right-hand side, could also
be derived from theory, for example, from one where life expectancy in 1940 would have had a
direct e¤ect on productivity in 1980 or 2000 (40 or 60 years thereafter). However, the estimation
strategy additionally requires a theoretical justi…cation for the …rst stage, or the exclusion
restriction (embedded in the assumption above that Cov(Mit ; "it ) = 0). As highlighted above,
this exclusion restriction could only make sense if the baseline level of mortality does not have
a direct e¤ect on future growth. If it did, the assumption that Cov(Mit ; "it ) = 0 would be
directly violated.11 But this implies that the theoretical argument underlying the exclusion
11
This may or may not be a valid assumption in general. As noted in the text, Acemoglu and Johnson provide
evidence to substantiate this assumption and increase the plausibility of this exclusion restriction.

18

restriction cannot be logically combined with a model that takes the form of this modi…ed
equation, even though it is entirely consistent with the original model we started with. We
thus have a simple example where one needs to consider the theoretical foundations of the
entire set of economic relations (or more explicitly, the …rst and second stages) together in
order not to make logical errors.
The broader point is that one cannot think of “instruments”without theory. What makes
a particular variable a valid instrument is a robust theoretical justi…cation for the entire set
of economic relationships being estimated, that is, both the speci…cation of the structural parameters and the corresponding …rst stages and exclusion restrictions. When either of these
changes, the validity of the instrument may be jeopardized. This, of course, should not be surprising in view of the discussion we started with: the plausibility of structural parameters, and
thus their estimation, crucially depends on using economic theory to derive an “appropriate”
model as the building block for estimation. In this light, it should be clear that there cannot
be “instruments” without theory.

Conversation Between Theory and Econometrics
The text emphasized the importance of economic theory in helping us specify empirical models
with some degree of counterfactual validity. In this Appendix, I brie‡y discuss some issues that
arise in attempts to implement this. Economic theory is based on mathematical models that are
abstractions of reality. Our models involve several assumptions, many of which are adopted for
convenience or as “simplifying”assumptions. With all of its assumptions, a model implies a set
of relationships between di¤erent variables. But we may not necessarily wish to take all of these
relationships as empirical predictions to be tested or used for counterfactual analysis. I now
suggest that we ought to distinguish between the key implications and auxiliary implications
of models, though in practice we often fail to do so.
Let us think of a model as a mapping from assumptions into empirical relationships. For
concreteness, let us think of these empirical relationships as moments in the data (e.g., the
conditional covariance of one variable with another), and focus on a speci…c problem: the
relationship between income distribution, credit markets and occupational choice, for example,
studied by Banerjee and Newman (1993). Let A denote the set of assumptions that one could
make in modeling this problem. An element A 2 A corresponds to a set of assumptions, that is,
such things as the exact speci…cation of production functions, the parameterization of the joint
distribution of talent and initial wealth, the intertemporal preferences of agents, assumptions

19

concerning how the credit market works, and assumptions on conjectures, expectations and the
equilibrium concept. Since A is an instance of a complete set of assumptions for the problem
at hand, we can think of this as a “model”. This model A then generates some empirical
implications. I will summarize these by a set of moments, denoted by M 2 M, which could
include the correlations between the interest rate, the occupational distribution, productivity
and initial wealth. Economic theory then amounts to using these assumptions in order to
derive empirical relationships, or sets of moment conditions. Thus we can think of economic
theory as a mapping (correspondence) f : A

M, specifying which set of moments we should

expect in the data for a set of assumptions.
The di¢ culty here is twofold. First, in writing down a model A 2 A, most theorists, rightly,
will go for a minimalist structure. In many instances, A will not even contain any stochastic
elements. For example, Banerjee and Newman’s model leads to a unique nonstochastic equilibrium for most parameter values, where the initial distribution of wealth together with an
individual’s wealth determines his and his dynasty’s occupational choices. To generate moment
conditions that would correspond to correlations in the data, one would then have to add an
unmodeled error term. Although one could interpret this error term as coming from “measurement error,” this is clearly not a satisfactory interpretation, since there are many other
factors relevant for occupational choices not captured by the model at hand, and they will all
be subsumed into this error term, though they are not in reality related to measurement error.
Yet this is not a shortcoming, but rather a strength of the model. Banerjee and Newman’s
model is successful largely because it abstracts from several features of the world. Second, for
the same reasons of parsimony and simplicity, a model typically involves assumptions that are
“auxiliary,” meaning that they are made for convenience, and in the hope that they are not
the source of its “main”conclusions. Naturally, what these main conclusions are is not always
a simple matter to determine.
This issue notwithstanding, the central di¢ culty here is that the set of moment implications
M depends on the entire set of assumptions, A. Suppose, for example, that A = A0 [ A00 ,

where A0 and A00 are two disjoint sets of assumptions, and those in the set A0 correspond to the

“key”assumptions, while A00 contains the auxiliary and simplifying assumptions. For example,
in Banerjee and Newman, the assumption that all individuals have the same ability in all
occupations, that there is no intensive margin of production, and that dynastic saving decisions
are “myopic” are auxiliary assumptions. These assumptions, taken together, lead to a set of
predictions. For example, taken naïvely, the model implies that there will exist a threshold level
of wealth, such that all dynasties with initial wealth below this level will remain in subsistence
20

or become workers, whereas those just above this threshold will become entrepreneurs. If
we were to take such an assumption seriously, it would lead to the rejection of the model,
but this would not be an insightful rejection. Instead, the Banerjee and Newman model is
insightful because it highlights how the credit market problems create a link between wealth
and occupational choice, and how this link depends on factor prices, which are themselves
endogenously determined by the entire distribution of income.
This discussion highlights two problems. First, the insights from certain models may be
“conceptual” and thus di¢ cult to translate into moment conditions. For example, the insight
that income distribution matters for occupational choices of an individual (with a given income level) is a conceptual point, even though one could devise tests by comparing di¤erent
economies or the same economy over time in order to investigate the degree to which such a
link is present. Second, not all of the implications of the model should be taken seriously. The
second problem suggests that we may wish to separate the set of moment conditions, M , into
two disjoint sets, M = M 0 [ M 00 , so that M 0 corresponds to the set of “robust”moment predic-

tions, which we should test or use as guidance for empirical work, whereas M 00 corresponds to
the moment conditions generated by the “auxiliary”assumptions. However, such a separation
is not typically possible, since each moment implication of the model is potentially generated
by all of the assumptions taken together. In the Banerjee and Newman model, for example,
we cannot simply remove the assumptions regarding the form of the production function and
still obtain moment conditions about the relationship between occupation and wealth.
This discussion suggests that in formulating economic theories which we wish to apply to
data (either by ourselves or by others), we should pay special attention to which dimensions
of the model are introduced just for achieving tractability and parsimony (the so-called “auxiliary”) assumptions, and which assumptions and implications of the model are “robust” and
should be relied upon and used empirically (or conceptually). Unfortunately, we do not have
the theoretical and econometric tools to achieve this,12 and developing such tools, or at the
very least, trying to emphasize in speci…c instances which predictions are more robust, would
be a useful direction for future research. In addition, even though such tools are not currently
available, in speci…c instances, considerable progress is possible. I will now illustrate this using
a recent paper by Weese (2009).
Weese (2009) studies the mergers across Japanese municipalities. Changes in Japanese
12
On the theory side, the literature on robust comparative statics, which provides qualitative predictions
for a range of models, might be one useful direction. Such robust comparative statics can be obtained for
environments that can be represented as supermodular games (Milgrom and Roberts, 1994, Vives, 1990) or for
those that can be represented as aggregative games (Acemoglu and Jensen, 2009).

21

government policy on municipality …nance in 1995 led to major changes in municipality structure. Many small Japanese municipalities that did not previously have incentives to merge,
because this would have reduced the transfers they received from the central government, were
induced to merge after this change in policy and the number of municipalities declined from
3232 to 1800. Mergers across municipalities are important for public …nance (because they
determine the type and amount of local public goods), for development economics (since there
are marked inequalities across municipalities in terms of income and provision of public goods,
e.g., Acemoglu and Dell, 2010), and for political economy (as they are a major example of endogenous coalition formation). Weese is interested in estimating the “preferences”of di¤erent
municipalities concerning mergers, and whether given these preferences, a better policy could
have been devised. This type of counterfactual exercise clearly requires structural parameters
in which we can have some con…dence. Thus this exercise must start with a theoretical model,
which will then be estimated to obtain structural parameters to use for the counterfactual and
policy analysis.
One line of attack would be to specify a dynamic or static game of coalition formation,
with speci…c assumptions on the game form. But these speci…c assumptions will translate into
di¤erent predictions on which coalitions will form (which mergers will take place). Thus using a
speci…c model, one could typically obtain signi…cantly di¤erent predictions then using another
related model, and structural estimation of each of these models is likely to lead to very di¤erent
conclusions because auxiliary assumptions, such as those related to the order in which o¤ers
are made and how di¤erent equilibria are selected, will impact implications and inference.13
Instead, Weese adopts a di¤erent approach, more in line with the type of conversation between
theory and empirics suggested here: he speci…es a general hedonic coalitional game, where
municipality preferences depend on a few characteristics (average income, distance, etc.), and
given these preferences he focuses on the Von Neumann-Morgenstern stable set.14 This set
is not a singleton, thus the model, equipped with this equilibrium/solution concept, does not
make a unique prediction. Nevertheless, it rules out a large set of mergers given underlying
preferences, and thus speci…es a set of moment conditions that can be used for estimation.
Crucially, these are not all of the moment conditions that will follow from a model that would
make additional auxiliary assumptions to specify, say, a unique equilibrium merger structure
13
Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2009) consider a class of dynamic coalition formation games, where “auxiliary”
assumptions, for example, those concerning the order in which o¤ers are made and acceptance and voting
procedures, do not a¤ect the set of predictions. This provides another example of a strategy to obtain “robust
implications,” even though such results can only be obtained under certain, somewhat restrictive, assumptions.
14
See, among others, Pakes (2008) and Tamer (2003), for di¤erent approaches to the estimation of models
with multiple equilibria.

22

for every value of the underlying parameter vector. Interestingly, in this case, Weese is able to
estimate the underlying preferences and conduct counterfactual policy analysis.15 His estimates
show that a di¤erent government policy would have led to better (merger) outcomes, and that,
somewhat surprisingly, allowing side transfers would have disadvantaged poor municipalities
(because their willingness to merge with richer municipalities would have given the latter
signi…cant bargaining power).
Overall, one important direction for applied theory work (in economics in general and in
development economics) would be to carefully delineate which sets of predictions are more
robust, and thus (policy) invariant to auxiliary assumptions, and develop empirical strategies
and methods of conducting counterfactual experiments that exploit these more robust implications. In the meantime, this discussion also highlights that if structural estimation relies on
all of the moment conditions implied by a (simple) model, this may lead to misleading results.
Making good use of theory does not mean taking all of the predictions of a model seriously,
but to make use of the key and robust implications from theoretical models to specify and
estimate structural parameters. It thus also requires us to be cognizant of which dimensions
of a model are adopted just for simplicity, tractability and convenience.

Additional References
Acemoglu, Daron and Melissa Dell (2010). “Productivity Di¤erences between and within
Countries.” Forthcoming American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin (2009). “Dynamics and Stability
of Constitutions, Coalitions and Clubs.” NBER working paper # 14239.
Acemoglu, Daron and Martin Kaee Jensen (2009). “Aggregate Comparative Statics,”MIT,
working paper.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Andrew Newman (1993). “Occupational Choice and the Process
of Development.” Journal of Political Economy, 101 (February): 274-298.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1994). “Comparing Equilibria.” American Economic
Review, 84 (March): 441-459.
Tamer, Elie (2003). “Incomplete Simultaneous Discrete Response Model with Multiple
Equilibria.” Review of Economic Studies, 70 (January): 147-165.
Townsend, Robert (1994). “Risk and Insurance in Village India.”Econometrica, 62 (May):
15
For example, one estimation strategy is to assign uniform probabilities to all coalition structures in the Von
Neumann-Morgenstern set and then to estimate the underlying parameters by quasi-maximum likelihood.

23

539-591.
Townsend, Robert (2009). “Financial Structure and Economic Welfare: Applied General
Equilibrium Development Economics.” MIT mimeo.
Weese, Eric (2009). “Political Mergers As Coalition Formation: Evidence from Japanese
Municipal Mergers.” Yale University mimeo.
Vives, Xavier (1990). “Nash Equilibrium with Strategic Complementarities” Journal of
Mathematical Economics, 19: 305-321.

24

