                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 SHORT CRIMINALS:
                        STATURE AND CRIME IN EARLY AMERICA

                                        Howard Bodenhorn
                                        Carolyn Moehling
                                         Gregory N. Price

                                       Working Paper 15945
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15945


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




The authors thank Veronica Hart for excellent research assistance. Bodenhorn thanks the Irish American
Cultural Institute, Lafayette College, and the National Science Foundation (SES-0109165) for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Howard Bodenhorn, Carolyn Moehling, and Gregory N. Price. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Short Criminals: Stature and Crime in Early America
Howard Bodenhorn, Carolyn Moehling, and Gregory N. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 15945
April 2010
JEL No. J24,K14,N31

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper considers the extent to which crime in early America was conditioned on height. With data
on inmates incarcerated in Pennsylvania state penitentiaries between 1826 and 1876, we estimate the
parameters of Wiebull proportional hazard specifications of the individual crime hazard. Our results
reveal that, consistent with a theory in which height can be a source of labor market disadvantage,
criminals in early America were shorter than the average American, and individual crime hazards decreased
in height.


Howard Bodenhorn                                    Gregory N. Price
John E. Walker Department of Economics              Department of Economics
College of Business and Behavioral Science          Morehouse College
201-B Sirrine Hall                                  Atlanta, GA 30314
Clemson University                                  gprice@morehouse.edu
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com

Carolyn Moehling
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
cmoehling@econ.rutgers.edu
1. Introduction

        Does an individual’s genetic inheritance influence his or her propensity toward

criminality? Nineteenth-century biological determinism, whose practitioners believed in

genetic predisposition, is now scientifically discredited because there is no evidence that

criminals are genetically disposed to criminal behavior. Yet, the absence of genetic

predispositions does not mean that human biology and physiology have no bearing on

criminal activity (Gottfredson and Hirschi 1990). Economists recognize that heritable

physical attributes, such as attractiveness or obesity, translate into differential labor market

opportunities (Hammermesh and Biddle 1984; Averett and Korenman 1996). Once

differential legitimate job prospects are linked with criminal propensities, as in Becker

(1968), economics offers a theoretical link between human physiology and participation in

criminal activity. One test of the hypothesis, in fact, finds a statistical association between

attractiveness and criminality (Mocan and Tekin 2006).

      Instead of attractiveness per se, we investigate whether an individual’s height is

associated with criminality. Recent economic studies have uncovered positive associations

between height and labor market outcomes, which suggest that taller individuals experience

labor market advantages and, therefore, have fewer incentives to turn to crime (Persico et al

2005; Case and Paxson 2008). Bodenhorn and Price (2010) found an association between

body mass index and criminality using records from 19th century prisons. This paper finds,

consistent with several labor market studies, an inverse relationship between crime and adult

stature, even after controlling for several features likely to influence an individual’s decision

to select into criminal activity.



                                                                                               2
       Using data from nineteenth-century Pennsylvania penitentiaries and a continuous-

time hazard approach, we find that tall nineteenth-century individuals had a lower hazard of

entry into prison. So long as age at entry into prison and age at entry into criminal activity are

highly correlated, our study provides evidence on the connection between an individual’s

physical characteristics and a particular, and perhaps unexpected, labor market realization.

Specifically, we find that the hazard of prison entry for individuals in the fifth quintile of

stature was 20 to 30 percent lower than for individuals in the first quintile. The lesser hazard

for taller individuals holds regardless of the set of included individual controls, and even

when we restrict the analysis to violent or property crimes, to rural or urban residence, and to

whites and African Americans. Nineteenth-century criminals were short.

       We remain agnostic about the mechanism at work. Shorter stature may have been an

indicator of lesser cognitive ability then as now (Case and Paxson 2008a), but when we

include additional controls designed to capture (albeit imperfectly) cognitive capabilities,

namely literacy and pre-incarceration occupation, the independent effect of height is not

diminished. If anything, the incarceration hazard is further reduced for the tallest quintile

after the inclusion of measures of cognitive abilities. A second possible mechanism may be

that nineteenth-century Americans discriminated against short people generally, and that

discrimination manifested itself as poorer labor market outcomes that led to a greater hazard

of criminal activity. Discrimination is difficult to measure and differentiate from other factors

even with data well suited to the purpose. What evidence we have, however, points against

generalized discrimination in the criminal justice system. Taller prisoners received longer

sentences, all else constant, than shorter criminals. Such evidence, of course, does not and

cannot address whether shorter people were more likely to be selected into the criminal




                                                                                                3
justice system, contingent on having been arrested and tried for criminal activity. The

evidence, when viewed in conjunction with a growing literature concerning the modern

connection between stature and labor market outcomes, suggests that we are identifying an

instance in which height has meaningful functional consequences.


2. Height and Labor Market Outcomes

     Physical height has been used for many years by economic historians, development

economists and anthropologists as a marker of economic prosperity (Steckel 2009; Thomas et

al 1990; Thomas and Strauss 1992). Even though genes control about 80% of individual

variation in height, environmental factors have a known role and account for the other 20%

(Silventoinen 2003; Batty et al 2009). The extent to which a person reaches his or her genetic

height potential is correlated to the socio-economic and epidemiological environment in

which an individual is raised. Such factors as medical technology, access to health care,

attitudes toward preventive medicine, the virulence of the disease environment, pollution,

and the availability of nutrients all influence the 20% of individual height not accounted for

by an individual’s genetic inheritance (Komlos and Baur 2004).

     Broadly speaking, poor nutrition and greater disease incidence slow growth velocity

during a person’s formative years and typically reduce attained adult height. Recent evidence

suggests real long-term health consequences associated with lesser stature that follow from

nutritional deficiencies and greater disease load in youth that carry over into lower adult

productivity (Fogel 1994). Further, Waaler (1984) reported an inverted U-shaped pattern of

life expectancy in height and Batty et al (2009) reviewed the evidence and reported that

height is negatively associated with all-cause mortality, especially with mortality due to




                                                                                            4
coronary heart disease. The relevant physiological explanations include increased pulmonary

function, greater lung capacity and wider coronary vessel diameter in taller people.

      Because adult height results from a complex interaction of genetic, hormonal,

biochemical, disease and nutritional factors during youth and adolescence and because the

family has some control over the last two factors, Schultz (2002) contended that height may

be appropriately viewed as a consequence of investments in health human capital. His

contention is certainly consistent with the recent literature that correlates body size, typically

height and/or body mass index, and wages (Schultz 2002; Hübler 2009; Kortt and Leigh

2009; Averett and Korenman 1996). In general, in modern economies taller individuals and

those within the normal BMI range receive a wage premium relative to shorter and fatter

individuals. Moreover, the body size-market premium relationship has deep historical roots

in that Pritchett (1997) found that taller pre-adult slaves were positively selected into the 19th

century interstate slave trade.

       The empirical association between body size and wages raises the question: what is

the mechanism through which height affects wages? It might be that taller or more muscular

individuals have a direct productivity advantage in certain occupations. Greater pulmonary

function and lung capacity provide an advantage in physically demanding occupations, which

was almost certainly the driving factor for the positive selection on height in slave markets.

But there might also be indirect wage effects. There is some evidence that taller people are

happier and more self-confident and that happiness or self-confidence may improve the

productivity of coworkers or it may explain why customers respond favorably to taller

employees (Deaton and Arora 2009; Rees et al 2009). Alternatively, customers, coworkers

and employers may discriminate against short, fat people.




                                                                                                5
       Two dominant hypotheses currently exist to explain the positive association between

height and wages. Persico et al (2004) contend that boys who are taller in adolescence engage

in more human capital building activities, and it is the accumulation of human capital in

adolescence that is responsible for higher earnings as adults. Specifically, they find that

height at age 16 is more positively associated with adult wages than is adult height. Thus,

taller teens have different social experiences and developmental trajectories than shorter

teens, experiences that include greater participation in athletics and clubs which contributes

to the taller teens’ social and human capital.

       Alternatively, Case and Paxson (2008a) contend that taller people earn more not

because of height per se, but because height is a marker for cognitive ability. It is cognitive

ability, not height that is rewarded in labor markets. Just as with physiological development,

poor nutrition and environmental insults during the developmental years impair cognitive

development. When they include measures of cognitive ability in childhood in a wage

regression that also includes height, the coefficient on height is reduced by half compared to

the coefficient in a regression without a measure of childhood cognitive ability. Further Case

and Paxson (2008b) find that the cognitive advantage apparent in childhood persists into old

age.

       Case and Paxson (2008a; 2008b) do not argue that height is an unimportant determinant

of labor market outcomes. Rather, they argue that because height and cognition develop

together, the inclusion of height by itself in a Mincer-style wage regression captures a

separate cognitive effect. Height remains associated with outcomes even after controlling for

cognitive ability, but the size of the association declines. Thus, care must be taken in




                                                                                             6
interpreting the effect of height on labor market outcomes when independent measures of

cognitive abilities are unavailable.

      In this paper, we consider the consequences of stature on a particular labor market

outcome, namely the decision to eschew legitimate employment in favor of criminal activity.

We first offer a highly stylized theory of how height can influence the transition into criminal

activity. We then test it against data from mid-nineteenth century Pennsylvania state

penitentiaries.



3. Theory and Method

         We follow the approach of Kiefer (1988), Gyimah-Brempong and Price (2006),

Price (2009), and Bodenhorn and Price (2009) and adopt a continuous-time approach to

criminal activity. We assume that over their life-cycle, individuals are presented with

opportunities for criminal activity, and opt into crime if doing so implies an expected utility

greater than the expected utility from engaging only in legitimate activities. Individual

transitions into crime are viewed as a hazard that consists of the product of two probabilities

or h(t) = ηπ where η is the probability that an individual faces an opportunity for criminal

activity, and π is the probability that the opportunity for crime is acceptable.

       Because height has been found to be positively correlated with earnings, and varies

across individuals as a function of income and occupation, the attractiveness of criminal

activity for an individual may be a function of his or her height (Case and Paxson 2008a;

Deaton and Arora 2009; Hübler 2009; Maloney and Carson 2008). Suppose the probability

                                                           
that criminal activity is acceptable is given by π =      y*( )
                                                                    f ( y )dy , where f(y) is the probability


of earning y from criminal activity,  is a monotonic measure of an individual’s height, and



                                                                                                           7
y*(  ) is an individual’s reservation earnings from criminal activity defined as the minimum

level of earnings from crime at which he would engage in criminal activity. If labor market

success, measured by earnings, increases with respect to height then y *( ) /  > 0. In

general, the effect of height on the individual transition into crime is  /  =

 / y *( )  y *( ) /  . If the probability that a crime is acceptable decreases with respect

to the reservation earnings from crime, then                    / y *( ) > 0, and it follows that the

probability that crime is acceptable decreases with respect to height, or  /  < 0.

      In examining the effect of height on individual transitions into crime, we use a Weibull

proportional hazard regression specification of the form h(t) = h(o)exp(∑iβkXk), where h(o) =

pt p – 1exp(βo), p is a shape parameter, t is time, and exp(βo) is the scale parameter.1 For a

given explanatory variable Xk , its effect on the individual transition into crime is given by βk.

Given that we observe an individual making a transition into criminal activity at time t, our

econometric specification of individual crime hazards allows us to determine the impact that

height has on the probability of making a transition into criminal activity, controlling for

other factors.



1
  Let T be a non-negative random variable measuring the time to an event. Then the survivor function—the
reverse cumulative distribution function of T―is S(t) = 1 – F(T) – Pr(T > t), where F(T) = Pr(T ≤ t). If survival
probabilities have a Weibull distribution, then S(t) = exp(-λtp),where λ is a scale parameter, and p is a shape
parameter. If we let λ = exp(βo), The unconditional hazard function is:

           h(t) = [∂S(t)/∂t)]/S(t) =[ exp(βo) ptp-1exp(-exp(βot p)]/exp(-λtp) = exp(βo)ptp-1

conditioning h(t) on a vector explanatory variables ∑iβkXk results in a Wiebull proportional hazards regression
model (Cleves, Gould, and Gutierrez, 2004):

       h(t| X) = [∂S(t)/∂t)]/S(t) =[ exp(βo) ptp-1exp(-exp(βot p)]/exp(-λtp) = exp(βo +∑iβkXk )ptp-1

where X is a vector of explanatory variables.. A Weibull specification of crime assumes that individual crime
hazards are a monotone function of time ( Gottfredson and Herschi, 1990), which is a plausible assumption if
individuals are less or more likely to engage in crime over time.



                                                                                                                8
        Because our simple Wiebull specifications may omit covariates that explain

individual transitions into criminal activity, we control for possible biases in the parameter

estimates by estimating the Weibull hazard specification with unobserved shared frailty.

Frailty is defined as an unobservable and random risk factor measuring unobservable

individual predisposition toward crime shared by groups of individuals that modifies the

individual’s crime hazard function.2 Viewed as a random effect, introducing individual frailty

into a Weibull proportional hazard specification identifies causal effects because it is

assumed that within and across shared groups the unobserved frailties account for the

unobserved covariates that may condition the hazard, thus eliminating any omitted variable

bias. If shared frailty also accounts for the unobserved and unmeasured covariates that are

potentially important determinants of success or failure in criminal activity, parameter

estimates of a Weibull individual crime hazard specification with individual frailty will also

mitigate ― perhaps even eliminate ― any sample selection bias.




4. Data

      The data come from ledgers maintained by clerks at Pennsylvania’s Eastern State

Penitentiary (1829-1869) in Philadelphia and the Western State Penitentiary (1826-1876) in

Pittsburgh. At intake the clerks recorded basic information about the prisoners, including

2
  For an overview of proportional hazard models with unobserved frailty , see Cleves, Gould and Guitierrez
(2004, Chapter 9), and Wienke (2003). For specific applications of proportional hazard models with unobserved
frailty see Price (2009) and Price, Darity, and Headen (2008) In general, a Weibull proportional hazard
specification with individual frailty is:

                           h(t| X) = αi h(t| X) = αi exp(βo +∑iβkXk )ptp-1

where αi is the frailty individual i―some unobserved individual specific effect—assumed to have a mean of
unity, and a variance of θ > 0.



                                                                                                            9
their names, ages, nativities (country or state), pre-incarceration occupation, the crime for

which they were incarcerated, sentence length, prior convictions if any, and the county (and

sometimes the specific court) of conviction.

     Two Descriptive Registers, one each from the Eastern and Western penitentiaries, also

included identifying information such as complexion and race. African Americans were

identified as either black or mulatto. Clerks also included sundry white complexions such as

dark, ruddy, or pale. The registers also included hair and eye color, as well as brief

descriptions of unique marks, scars, tattoos or deformities. Clerks also recorded each

prisoner’s height and at the Eastern State Penitentiary, they even recorded foot length,

probably to facilitate the provision of clothing and shoes. The Eastern State records also

included a notation indicating whether the prisoner abused alcohol (intemperance) and,

beginning in the early 1840s, whether he was married. In short, the registers provide a wealth

of information about the prisoners and open windows into their pre-incarceration lives.

                      // Table 1 about here //

     The state prison data do not measure criminal activity per se, but rather criminal

activity that has been reported, investigated, prosecuted, and resulted in a state prison

sentence.   All measures of crime, however, suffer from some type of filtering by the

decisions of agents other than the individual committing the crime, whether it be the victim,

the police or the courts. The state prison data have some important advantages over other

commonly used crime measures, however. Arrests are generally noisy measures of criminal

activity. The decision to make an arrest is often left to the discretion of individual police

officers, and many arrests do not even result in prosecutions let alone convictions. Arrest

records, moreover, contain only limited information on the characteristics of the suspected




                                                                                           10
criminals. Commitments to jails are dominated by minor offenses, like disorderly conduct,

the prosecution of which varies greatly over time and across jurisdictions. In contrast, state

prison commitments capture the commission of more serious crimes, those that are more

consistently prosecuted across time and space and that perhaps are more compatible with the

model of criminal behavior described above.

     Table 1 provides names, definitions and summary statistics for the variables used in the

empirical analysis. Age at first entry into the penitentiary is the dependent variable. We

exclude subsequent convictions and incarcerations for recidivists because we are interested in

determining how an individual’s characteristics, principally his height, influence his initial

transition into criminal activity. The personal characteristics and post-incarceration labor

market opportunities of recidivists differ sufficiently from those of first-time offenders that it

is reasonable to exclude them (Witte 1980). The average age at first admission was 28.5

years, and ages ranged from 16 to 89 years. The prison accepted a small number of youth,

one as young as 11 years, but they are excluded because the factors that influence youth entry

into crime may differ systematically from the factors that influence more mature criminal

behavior (Thornberry 2005). Modern moderate to chronic offenders demonstrate a tendency

to enter into criminal activity between ages 15 and 19. Given the lag between criminal onset

and incarceration, we chose age 16 as the relevant cutoff. The results are not materially

affected by including the prisoners less than 16 years, or by excluding all prisoners under 18

years.

                       // Table 2 about here //

     Our hypothesis is that an individual’s height influences his transition into crime, so

height is the independent variable of principal interest. The average prisoner was 66.3 inches




                                                                                               11
tall at initial incarceration, which is considerably below the modern US average of about 70.1

inches and below the 68.5 inch average of white males in 1860 (Komlos and Baur 2004).

Line 3 of Table 1 reports an alternative measure of height -- the z-score of height-at-age

using standards reported in Steckel (1996). This statistic, too, suggests that nineteenth

century prisoners were relatively short.3 Nineteenth-century Americans were understandably

shorter than modern Americans, but were nineteenth century prisoners shorter than the

general contemporary population? Table 2 reports age specific height comparisons of men

incarcerated in the Pennsylvania prisons and two comparison groups. The first compares

white prisoners with enlistees in the Union Army. At every age, prisoners were notably (and

statistically significantly) shorter. The second compares black prisoners with a sample of free

blacks whose heights were registered with authorities in antebellum Virginia (Bodenhorn

1999). Like whites, black prisoners were shorter at every age than their noninstitutionalized

counterparts, and the differences are statistically significant for age groups for which there

are a sizeable number of observations. These simple comparisons of sample means are

suggestive of an increased hazard of entry into criminal behavior that is correlated with lower

stature. Our Weibull hazard specifications control for other individual characteristics to

further explore the extent to which stature influenced the transition into crime.

      Control variables include an individual’s race, ethnicity, and place and time of

conviction. If the entering prisoner was African American, the clerks recorded whether the

individual was black or mulatto. Whether the clerk inquired into the prisoner’s ancestry is

unknown, so the mulatto variable may be capturing individuals of mixed race or simply those

of lighter than average complexions. We sometimes aggregate both categories into an


3
  We estimated all the regressions reported in Tables 3 through 5 using the z-score instead of the individual’s
height. The results were comparable in the magnitude of the estimated effect and in statistical significance.


                                                                                                              12
African American variable, but we keep them separate when possible to control for possible

complexion effects found elsewhere (Bodenhorn 2006; Bodenhorn and Ruebeck 2007;

Goldsmith et al 2006, 2007; Gyimah-Brempong and Price 2006).

     We control for ethnicity with indicator variables for Irish, German or other non-US

descent. The last category includes individuals from several countries, but most are

Canadian, British and Scottish, which is consistent with early to mid-nineteenth century

immigration patterns. Because the remaining groups represent a small proportion of

incarcerations and were predominantly English-speaking, we include them in a single

category.

     We include two indicator variables for Pennsylvania’s two mid-nineteenth century

urban places – Philadelphia and Pittsburgh. In the late twentieth century, cities experienced

disproportionate crime rates (Glaeser and Sacerdote 1999). The evidence for the nineteenth

century is mixed. Between 1850 and 1870, Philadelphia’s population represented between

17.7 and 19.5 percent of the state’s population, yet only 15 percent of prisoners were

sentenced by Philadelphia courts. Pittsburgh, however, did send a disproportionate share of

prisoners to the Western State Penitentiary. Between 1850 and 1870, Pittsburgh accounted

for 6.0 to 7.4 percent of the state’s population, yet it accounted for 16 percent of

incarcerations at Western State. We include these indicator variables to capture any

systematic urban influence on crime hazards, such as greater urban anonymity, more

opportunities for criminal activity, or greater expected profit following from it.

     Finally, we include indicator variables for relevant time periods. If nineteenth-century

recessions were associated with higher than average unemployment rates, they may be

associated with earlier transitions into crime. Three recessions are included: the back-to-back




                                                                                            13
recessions of 1837 and 1839 are combined because the 1838 recovery between the 1837 and

1839 financial panics was short-lived and the recession is dated by the NBER to have

persisted through 1843. The second is the panic and brief recession of 1857/58; and the third

is the prolonged and relatively deep recession of 1873.

     We also control for three other events or eras that were likely to have influenced

employment or crime rates. The crush of Irish immigrants between 1845 and 1849 is known

to have taxed municipal administrative capacities, private charities and immigrant aid groups

and surely represented a substantial increase in local labor supplies, especially in and around

Philadelphia (McCaffrey 1976, Clark 1973). Whether the wave of Irish immigration

increased or decreased criminal hazards depends on the net wage effect of the immigration.

As Goldin (1994) showed, substantial immigration can have offsetting wage effects. The

labor supply curve shifts right, which tends to drive wages down and, potentially, make

crime more attractive. It is also possible that the influx of immigrants increases the demand

for locally-produced goods, which will simultaneously shift the labor demand curve to the

right. Thus, the wage effect is ambiguous a priori. The Civil War, on the other hand, is

expected to unambiguously increase wages because the war pulled able-bodied men out of

labor markets, which would have driven wages up and made crime relatively less attractive.

Finally, we include an indicator variable for the post-Civil War period, which we label

Emancipation, to capture the effect of returning soldiers (likely to be a short-term

phenomenon) and the effect of former slaves migrating northward and toward Pennsylvania’s

major urban places, which was part of a longer-term movement of blacks out of the Upper

South and into Mid-Atlantic cities (DuBois 1899).




                                                                                            14
5. Results



5.1 Linear height specifications
         Table 3 reports hazard ratios estimated for the full sample of 8,558 usable

observations and for several subgroups, including only those prisoners incarcerated for

committing theft in its various manifestations (larceny, burglary, horse theft and receiving

stolen goods) and violent crimes (assault, manslaughter, murder, rape and robbery), for

criminals sentenced in urban (Philadelphia and Pittsburgh) and rural counties, and for whites

and African Americans. The full specifications include controls for race, ethnicity, urban

conviction (and, presumably, residence) and the recessions and eras discussed above. We

estimate the regressions with shared frailty conditioned on the type of crime committed by

individuals.4 Conditioning the shared frailty on type of crime controls for any potential

unobserved heterogeneity that can condition the individual crime hazard arising from (1)

differential treatment of criminals across crime types; (2) differential costs and benefits

across crime types; and (3) differential selection of individuals into particular criminal

activities5

          From a diagnostic standpoint, the regressions appear well specified. The chi-square

statistics for the log-likelihood ratio tests are all large and statistically significant (p < 0.001),

as are the z-tests for the appropriateness of the Weibull specification [ln(p)] and the shared

frailty assumptions [ln(θ)]. Moreover, most of the estimated hazards on the control variables

are significant and consistent with expectations. African Americans, for example, were at

4
  Our data allow us to identify and measure the type of crime according to the following categories: larceny,
burglary, horse theft, receiving stolen goods, assault, manslaughter, murder, rape, and robbery.
5
  In our crime type shared frailty specification, we also report in Table 3, 4 and 6 on specification for Theft only
and Violent (crime) only.. Because there are five types of violent crimes (assault, manslaughter, murder, rape
and robbery) and four types of theft (larceny, burglary, horse theft and receiving stolen goods), there is
sufficient variation by type of crime to identify the parameters conditional on the shared frailty.


                                                                                                                 15
about a 10 to 30 percent higher risk for criminal incarceration than whites. Studies of free

African American households in antebellum Philadelphia and other Mid-Atlantic cities reveal

that they were less wealthy on average than whites and African American heads of

households were employed in less lucrative occupations (Hershberg 1973; Bodenhorn and

Rubeck 2007). Both features of African American life point toward the attractiveness of

crime relative to legitimate labor market opportunities, and explain recurring complaints by

contemporaries about disproportionate African American criminality (Curry and Klump

2009; Quillian and Pager 2002 ).6 Lower hazards for immigrants appear counterintuitive, but

likely follow the fact that many arrived in the U.S. in their mid-twenties and so were not at

risk to commit crimes and be sentenced to prison until later ages than were natives.

        Estimated hazard ratios on Philadelphia and Pittsburgh are consistent with studies of

twentieth century offending. According to Glaeser and Sacerdote (1999), there is more crime

in cities because cities offer levels of anonymity not found in rural areas. Relative anonymity

reduced the probability of detection, arrest and conviction, which increased the expected

returns to crime. Moreover, urban locales often offer more profitable crime opportunities

than rural places. Combined, these factors made urban crime potentially more lucrative,

which increased the risk of entry into crime.

        The effects of recessions on crime hazards are not easily summarized. The recession

between 1837 and 1843 witnessed reduced crime hazards. Whereas, the major and persistent

1873 recession increased crime hazards, especially in urban areas and more so for whites

than blacks, the short-lived 1857/58 recession had a small and statistically insignificant

effect. Crime hazards declined during the massive wave of Irish and German immigration in


6
  Even DuBois (1899) who was sympathetic to the plight of poor African Americans in late-nineteenth century
Philadelphia decried their greater criminal propensities.


                                                                                                         16
the 1840s, which suggests that the immigrants increased the demand for locally produced

goods sufficiently to have increased the demand for labor and, with it, wages. Crime actually

became less lucrative during the post-recession recovery and with the influx of immigrants.

During the Civil War, on the other hand, the supply of labor declined as war mobilization

siphoned young white males from Pennsylvania’s labor markets. Wages increased and crime

became less attractive. In the post-war period, however, rapid demobilization and, quite

possibly, the migration of former slaves from neighboring Maryland and Virginia drove

wages down, made crime more attractive and the era witnessed increased crime hazards.

       As for the effects of height on individual crime hazard― our primary interest ―

greater stature was associated with significantly reduced crime hazards. Across the entire

sample and the sub-groups, an inch of additional height reduced the hazard of entering the

penitentiary by between 2.2 and 4.7 percent. The result is remarkably consistent for property

and violent crimes, for urban and rural places, and for whites and African Americans. The

results from the linear height specification imply that greater stature, after controlling for a

number of individual characteristics as well as environmental factors, was associated with a

lower criminal hazard. This result is fully consistent with existing studies that report a

correlation between greater stature and more favorable labor market outcomes (Persico et al

2004; Case and Paxson 2008a). It is also consistent with our hypothesis that greater stature is

correlated with lesser criminality. Crime is less lucrative for taller people because they had

more attractive legitimate labor market opportunities.



5.2 Quintile height specifications with shared frailty




                                                                                             17
     Hosmer and Lemeshow (1999) contend that it is important with any hazard model to

test the linearity assumption for any continuous variable of interest. We estimated the effect

by including height, its square and its cube to check for nonlinearities (regressions not

reported). Only the linear term was statistically significant. Instead of higher orders of the

linear variable, Hosmer and Lemeshow’s (1999) preferred method is to categorize continuous

variables into sets of mutually exclusive dummy variables. They argue that if the researcher

has a prior about how best to categorize the data, he or she should make use of that prior,

otherwise start with quartiles or quintiles. Our analysis suggests that quintiles are adequate

and we report those results here with shared frailty on the type of crime. Table 4 reports the

estimated hazard rates on the height quintiles, excluding the first quintile as the reference

group. To save space we do not report the estimated hazard rates on the other control

variables because they are not substantively different from those reported in Table 3.

     The estimated hazard rates in Table 4 suggest a modestly reduced hazard around the

median height, compared to individuals in the first height quintile, which might suggest a

labor market return to normality. However, the hazard for criminals in the fifth height

quintile is about 20 percent below the hazard for criminals in the first height quintile. Not

unexpectedly, crime hazards among the tallest were lower for theft than for violent crimes,

probably because violence may have been motivated more by passion rather than rational

maximizing calculation. Still, the reduced fifth quintile hazard for violent crime suggests that

height was sufficiently well rewarded in legitimate labor markets to make violence appear

less rewarding. The height effect is consistent across urban and rural places. It is notable that

the height effect was more pronounced among African Americans than whites. The crime




                                                                                              18
hazard for the tallest African Americans was about 35 percent lower than for the shortest,

while the crime hazard for the tallest whites was reduced by about 20 percent.

     There might be reason to believe that instead of heterogeneity on crime, that there was

some heterogeneity across counties, either because of differential treatment of prisoners by

courts, or because of differential cost and benefits of crime across counties. In Table 5, we

report the results of the quintile height specification with shared frailty conditioned on the

county of conviction rather than the type of crime. Conditioning shared frailty on county of

conviction rather than type of crime does not appear to substantially change the parameter

estimates. There is a modest reduction in crime hazards for individuals in the third quintile

and a large and statistically significant reduction in crime hazards for the tallest fifth of

individuals. The tall hazard remains lower for theft than for violence and for blacks than

whites.



5.3 Decile height specification with shared frailty

     As a check for sensitivity to alternative nonlinear specification of height, and because

we have no well formed prior concerning the appropriate number of height categories, Table

6 reports parameter estimates when heights are divided into deciles. Because the parameter

estimates seemingly are not sensitive to conditioning shared frailty on type of crime or

county, we report only type of crime shared frailty estimates for sake of brevity. The full set

of controls reported in Table 3 are included here, but not reported. The results are consistent

with those reported earlier. There is some evidence of reduced hazards around the middle of

the height distribution, but they are small and sometimes not statistically significant. Reduced

hazards among the tallest individuals persist, however, and are somewhat more pronounced




                                                                                             19
for those in the tenth rather than the ninth decile. In the full sample estimates, for example,

the hazard for individuals in the tenth height decile was about 24 percent lower than that for

the shortest individuals. The hazard for individuals in the ninth decile was about 22 percent

lower.

     The difference between the ninth and tenth deciles for prisoners convicted of theft was

about 7 percentage points, whereas the reduced hazards for violent offenders found when

using quintiles disappears for the tallest individuals when the heights enter as deciles. On the

other hand, the height hazard for the tallest blacks becomes even more pronounced.



5.3 Controlling for cognitive abilities

      Last but not least, we attempt to control for the possibility that the effects of stature on

the crime hazard are biased due to height being positively correlated with cognitive ability

(Case and Paxson, 2008a).The first two columns of Table 7 reports parameters estimates for

a subsample of the Eastern State Penitentiary for the period during which clerks recorded

whether an entering prisoner was literate. We report results for models including height

quintiles and conditioning on shared frailty by county of conviction. Literacy, which was not

a well defined characteristic, is an imperfect measure of cognitive ability, but it does capture

whether an individual had a very basic contemporary education. In addition to literacy, the

third and fourth columns of Table 7 report the height hazards when dummy variables for

broad occupational categories are included in the regressions. Again, occupation is an

imperfect measure of cognition, but it is not unreasonable to assume that attorneys, doctors

and other professionals or shopkeepers and merchants had greater cognitive abilities than

common laborers (the excluded group).




                                                                                               20
      The hazards estimated from the Weibull regression reported in the first column include

all crimes. The literacy hazard itself is not significantly different from 1, meaning that

literacy per se had no influence on entry into criminal behavior. The consequence of

including literacy in the regression is to decrease the hazard for the second through fifth

height quintiles, all of which are now statistically significant. The size and significance of the

fifth height quintile is larger than the other quintiles, however. A test of coefficient equality

rejects the null hypothesis of equality of quintiles 2 through 4 with quintile 5 at p<0.005 or

better. Thus, once we control for literacy alone as a measure of cognition, the height effect

does not become smaller and less significant (as in Case and Paxson 2008a) for the tallest

individuals. If anything, controlling for cognitive abilities modestly reduces the criminal

hazard slightly, which may be interpreted that, after controlling for cognitive ability, the

attractiveness of legitimate labor market activities increased for the tallest individuals.

Interestingly, the effect also occurs at lesser heights (above the shortest) when we control for

literacy.

      The second column of Table 7 reports estimated hazard ratios for entry into crime for a

sample of prisoners incarcerated for theft. The results are comparable to those for the all-

crime sample and the hazard for the tallest quintile is again significantly lower than for all

other quintiles (p<0.0007 or less).

      Columns 3 and 4 report estimated hazards when we include dummy variables for

occupational categories, in addition to literacy, as an alternative signifier of cognitive

abilities. Again, the results are comparable to earlier estimates. Individuals in the fifth height

quintile were at a reduced hazard for entry into crime than those in all other quintiles (p<0.02

or less).




                                                                                               21
6. Conclusions

        In this paper we consider the extent to which criminal activity in the nineteenth

century was conditioned on an individual’s height. With data on convicts incarcerated in

Pennyslvania penitentiaries between 1826 and 1876, we estimate the parameters of a Wiebull

proportional hazard specifications of individual crime, in which the transition into criminal

activity is a function of labor market disadvantage that is conditioned on height.. Our results

suggest early America criminals were short as crime appears to have been conditioned on

height ― taller individuals had a lower probability of making a transition into criminal

activity.

   Our parameter estimates of the effects of height are identified if the assumption that all

individual heterogeneity is an unobserved frailty. Because our parameter estimates of the

individual crime hazard support this assumption, our results suggest that being short in early

America had a causal effect on an individual’s decision to engage in criminal behavior.

While we remain agnostic about the mechanism and refrain from speculating about why

being short translated into higher crime hazards, specific mechanisms posited elsewhere are

consistent with labor market disadvantage being conditioned on height. If in early America,

short individuals faced labor market disadvantage because of either lower productivity due to

lesser physical capacity for heavy work, lesser productivity due to lower cognitive ability, or

because they faced discrimination, the relative opportunity costs of crime would be lower

which would increase the likelihood of transitioning into criminal activity




                                                                                                22
References

Averett, Susan and Sanders Korenman. 1996. “The Economic Reality of the Beauty Myth.”
       Journal of Human Resources 31(2), 304-30.

Batty, G.D., Shipley, M.J., Gunnell, D., Huxley, R., Kivimaki, M, Woodward, M. Lee, C.M.,
       and Smith, G.D. 2009. “Height, Wealth, and Health: An Overview with New Data
       from Three Longitudinal Studies.” Economics & Human Biology 7; pp. 137-152.

Becker, Gary. 1968. “Crime and punishment: An economic approach.” Journal of Political
       Economy 76, 169-217.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 1999. “A Troublesome Caste: Height and Nutrition of Antebellum
      Virginia’s Rural Free Blacks.” Journal of Economic History 59(4), 972-996.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2006. “Colorism, Complexion Homogamy, and Household Wealth:
      Some Historical Evidence.” American Economic Review 96(2), 256-60.

Bodenhorn, Howard and Christopher S. Ruebeck. 2007. “Colourism and African American
      Wealth: Evidence from the Nineteenth-Century South.” Journal of Population
      Economics

Bodenhorn, Howard and Gregory N. Price. 2009. ``Crime and Body Weight In the
      Nineteenth Century: Was There a Relationship Between Brawn, Employment
      Opportunities and Crime?”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
      No. 15099, Cambridge, MA.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson, 2008a. “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor
       Market Outcomes”, Journal of Political Economy, 116: pp. 499 532.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. 2008b. “Height, Health, and Cognitive Function at Older
       Ages.” American Economic Review 90: pp. 463-647.

Clark, Dennis J. 1973. “The Philadelphia Irish: Persistent Presence.” In The Peoples of
       Philadelphia: A History of Ethnic Groups and Lower_Class Life, 1790-1940, 135-
       154. Edited by Allen F. Davis and Mark H. Haller. Philadelphia: Temple University
       Press.

Cleves, Mario A., William V. Gould, and Roberto G. Gutierrez. 2004. An Introduction To
       Survival Analysis Using Stata, Revised Edition, STATA Corporation, College Station
       TX.

Curry, Philip A. and Tilman Klump. 2009. ``Crime, Punishment, and Prejudice”, Journal of
       Public Economics, 93: pp. 73 – 84.


                                                                                      23
DuBois, W.E. B. 1899. The Philadelphia Negro., Lippincott, New York, NY

Deaton, Angus S., and Raksha Arora. 2009. “Life At The Top: The Benefits of Height”,
      Economics and Human Biology, 7: pp. 133. 136..

Figlio, David N., 2005.” Names, Expectations, and the Black-White Test Score Gap.”
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 11195, Cambridge, MA.

Fogel, Robert W. 1994. “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The
       Bearing of Long-Term Consequences on the Making of Economic Policy.” American
       Economic Review 84(3), 369-395.

Glaeser, Edward and Bruce Sacerdote. 1999. “Why Is There More Crime in Cities.” Journal
       of Political Economy 107(6),

Goldin, Claudia. 1994. “The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United
       States, 1890-1921.” In The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political
       Economy, 223-258. Edited by Claudia Goldin and Gary D. Libecap. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.

Goldsmith, Arthur, Darrick Hamilton and William Darity, Jr. 2006. “Shades of
      Discrimination: Skin Tone and Wages.” American Economic Review 96(2), 242-245.

Goldsmith, Arthur, Darrick Hamilton and William Darity, Jr. 2007. “From Dark to Light:
      Skin Color and Wages among African Americans.” Journal of Human Resources
      42(4), 701-738.

Gottfredson, Michael and Travis Hirschi. 1990 A General Theory of Crime, Stanford
       University Press, Stanford, CA

Gyimah-Brempong, Kwabena and Gregory N. Price. 2006. “Crime and Punishment: And
      Skin Hue Too?” American Economic Review,, 96: pp. 246 – 250.

Hammermesh, Daniel and Jeff E. Biddle. 1994. “Beauty and the Labor Market.” American
     Economic Review 84, 1174-1194.

Hershberg, Theodore. 1973. “Free Blacks in Antebellum Philadelphia.” In The Peoples of
      Philadelphia: A History of Ethnic Groups and Lower_Class Life, 1790-1940, 111-
      134. Edited by Allen F. Davis and Mark H. Haller. Philadelphia: Temple University
      Press.

Hosmer, D. W. and Lemeshow, S. 1999. Applied Survival Analysis: Regression Modeling of
      Time to Event Data. New York: John Wiley & Sons.




                                                                                    24
Hübler, Olaf. 2009. ‘The Nonlinear Link Between Height and Wages in Germany, 1985 –
       2004. Economics and Human Biology, 7: pp. 191 – 199.

Kiefer, Nicholas M., 1988. “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions”, Journal of
       Economic Literature, 26: pp. 646–679.

Komlos, John and Marieluise Baur. 2004. “From the Tallest to (One of) the Fattest: The
      Enigmatic Fate of the American Population in the 20th Century.” Economics &
      Human Biology 2: pp. 57-74.

Kortt, Michael and Andrew Leigh. 2009. “Does Size Matter in Australia?” Working paper,
       ANU. Available at http://econrsss.anu.edu.au/~aleigh/pdf/BodySize.pdf.

Maloney, Thomas N. and Scott A. Carson. 2008. ``Living Standards in Black and White:
      Evidence From the Heights of Ohio Prison Inmates 1829 - 1913”, Economics and
      Human Biology, 6: pp. 237. – 251.

McCaffrey, Lawrence J. 1976. The Irish Diaspora in America. Bloomington: Indiana
      University Press.

McEvoy, Brian P. and Peter M. Visscher. 2009. “Genetics of Human Height.” Economics &
     Human Biology 7: pp. 294-306.

Mocan, Naci and Erdal Tekin. 2006. “Ugly criminals.” National Bureau of Economic
      Research working paper No. 12019.

Molinari, Nicholas., Duares Jean-Pierre, and Jean-Francois Durand. 2001. ``Regression
      Splines for Threshold Selection in Survival Data Analysis”, Statistics In Medicine,
      20: pp. 237 – 247.

Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman. 2005. “The Effect of Adolescent
       Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height.” Journal of Political
       Economy 112, 1019-1053.

Price, Gregory N., William A. Darity Jr., and Alvin E. Headen Jr. 2008. ``Does the Stigma of
        Slavery Explain the Maltreatment of Blacks by Whites?: The Case of Lynching”,
        Journal of Socio-Economics, 37: pp. 167 - 193

Price, Gregory N. 2009. ``Obesity and Crime: Is There a Relationship?”, Economics Letters,
        103: pp. 149 – 152.

Pritchett, Jonathan. 1997. “The Interregional Slave Trade and the Selection of Slaves for the
        New Orleans Market.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 28: 57-85.




                                                                                          25
Quillian, Lincoln and Devah Pager. 2002. ``Black Neighbors, Higher Crime? The Role of
       Racial Stereotypes in Evaluations of Neighborhood Crime” American Journal of
       Sociology, 107: pp. 717 – 767.

Rees, Daniel I., Jospeh J. Sabia, and Laura M. Argys. 2009. “A Head above the Rest: Height
       and Adolescent Psychological Well-being.” Economics & Human Biology 7: pp. 217-
       228.

Schultz, T. Paul. 2002. ``Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health”,
       American Economic Review, 92: pp. 349 – 353.

Silventoinen, Karri. 2003. ``Determinants of Variation in Adult Body Height”, Journal of
       Biosocial Science, 35: pp. 263 – 285.

Steckel. Richard. 1996. “Percentiles of Modern Height Standards for Use in Historical
       Research.” Historical Methods 29(4), 157-166.

Steckel, Richard. 2009. “Heights and human welfare: Recent developments and new
       directions.” Explorations in Economic History 46, 1-23.

Thomas, Duncan and John Strauss. 1992. “Prices, infrastructure, household characteristics
     and child height.” Journal of Development Economics 39, 301-331.

Thomas, Duncan; John Strauss, and Maria- Helena Henriques. 1990. “Child survival, height
     for age, and household characteristics in Brazil.” Journal of Development Economics
     33, 197-234.

Thornberry, Terence P. 2005. “Explaining Multiple Patterns of Offending across the Life
      Course and across Generations.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and
      Social Science 602, 156-195.

Waaler, H. 1984. “Height, weight and mortality: The Norwegian experience.” Acta. Med.
      Scand., 1-51.

Wienke, Adreas. 2003. ''Frailty Models", MPIDR Working Paper WP 2003-032, Max Planck
      Institute for Demographic Research,, Rostock,Germany.

Witte, Ann Dryden. 1980. “Estimating the Economic Model of Crime with Individual Data.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 94(1), 57-84.

DATA SOURCES

Data on free African American heights used in Bodenhorn, Howard. 2002. “The Mulatto
      Advantage: The Biological Consequences of Complexion in Rural Antebellum
      Virginia.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 33(1), 21-46. Available at
      http://people.clemson.edu/~bodnhrn/DataFiles.htm



                                                                                       26
Center for Population Economics. 2010. University of Chicago. Union Army Data.
      http://www.cpe.uchicago.edu/unionarmy/unionarmy.html

Eastern State Penitentiary. 1829-1857. Population Records, Descriptive Registers. Record
       Group 15. Records of the Department of Justice (Pennsylvania). Harrisburg:
       Pennsylvania State Library.

Eastern State Penitentiary. 1842-1869. Convict Reception Register. Record Group 15.
       Records of the Department of Justice (Pennsylvania). Harrisburg: Pennsylvania State
       Library.

Western State Penitentiary. 1826-1876. Convict Docket & Descriptive Register. Record
      Group 15. Records of the Department of Justice (Pennsylvania). Harrisburg:
      Pennsylvania State Library.




                                                                                       27
Table 1: Variable definitions and summary statistics
Variable          Definition                                                              Mean
Age               Age at first entry into penitentiary                                    28.45
                                                                                          (10.13)
Height            Height (in inches)                                                      66.30
                                                                                          (2.61)
Height            Z score of height compared to modern US standard                        -1.29
                                                                                          (1.01)
Theft              =1 if convicted of larceny, burglary, horse theft, receiving stolen goods
                                                                                          0.61
Violent            =1 if convicted of assault, manslaughter, murder, rape, robbery        0.18
Black              =1 if prisoner was black                                               0.08
Mulatto            =1 if prisoner was mulatto                                             0.06
Irish              =1 if prisoner was Irish immigrant                                     0.11
German             =1 if prisoner was German immigrant                                    0.08
Other immigrant =1 if prisoner immigrated from country other than Ireland or Germany      0.07
Professional       =1 if previously employed in profession                                0.01
Proprietor         =1 if previously employed as shopkeeper                                0.02
Sales              =1 if previously employed in sales                                     0.01
Service            =1 if previously employed in services                                  0.04
Operative          =1 if previously employed as semi-skilled factory operative            0.18
Craftsman          =1 if previously employed in skilled trade                             0.26
Clerical           =1 if previously employed as clerk / accountant                        0.02
Farmer             =1 if previously employed as farmer                                    0.06
Laborer            =1 if previously employed as common laborer                            0.37
No occupation      =1 if no previous occupation reported                                  0.02
Philadelphia       =1 if convicted in Philadelphia court                                  0.15
Pittsburgh         =1 if convicted in Pittsburgh court                                    0.16
1830s              =1 if convicted between 1830 and 1839                                  0.14
1840s              =1 if convicted between 1840 and 1849                                  0.18
1850s              =1 if convicted between 1850 and 1859                                  0.23
1860s              =1 if convicted between 1860 and 1869                                  0.30
1870s              =1 if convicted between 1870 and 1879                                  0.13
Recession 1837 =1 if convicted between 1837 and 1843                                      0.13
Recession 1857 =1 if convicted in 1857 or 1858                                            0.06
Recession 1873 =1 if convicted between 1873 and 1880                                      0.07
Irish immigration =1 if convicted during peak Irish immigration years (1845-1849)         0.08
Civil War          =1 between 1861 and 1865                                               0.08
Emancipation       =1 if convicted after 1865                                             0.32
Notes: N= 8641. Standard deviations of continuous variables in parentheses.
Sources: Eastern State Penitentiary (1829-1857; 1842-1869), Western State Penitentiary (1826-1876).




                                                                                                      28
Table 2: Average heights of males Pennsylvania prisoners and comparison groups
Age group           White        Union Army          Height             Black          Virginia free      Height
                 Pennsylvania      enlistees      difference      Pennsylvania             blacks       difference
                   prisoners                                         prisoners
 16 years            63.77           65.34         -1.57***             63.49               63.82          -0.33
                    (2.26)          (2.96)           {4.06}            (3.36)              (3.38)         {0.47}
                    [n=75]         [n=156]                             [n=33]              [n=80]
 17 years            65.32           66.15         -0.83***             64.58               64.48          0.10
                    (2.11)          (2.62)           {3.37}            (2.77)              (3.18)         {0.19}
                     [150]           [300]                               [48]               [107]
 18 years            65.66           66.65         -0.99***             65.37               66.32        -0.95***
                    (2.56)          (2.51)           {6.78}            (2.48)              (2.74)         {2.58}
                     [322]          [3679]                               [83]               [137]
 19 years            66.05           67.32         -1.27***             65.64               67.49        -1.85***
                    (2.45)          (2.66)           {8.71}            (2.66)              (2.59)         {5.38}
                     [388]          [1975]                               [92]               [156]
 20 years            65.98           67.81         -1.83***             65.62               67.16        -1.54***
                    (2.33)          (2.64)          {12.59}            (2.41)              (2.73)         {4.42}
                     [392]          [1623]                               [77]               [237]
 21 years            66.45           67.84         -1.39***             65.94               67.20        -1.26***
                    (2.49)          (2.70)          {10.85}            (2.65)              (2.80)         {4.42}
                     [555]          [1892]                              [106]               [966]
 22 years            66.50           67.90         -1.40***             66.15               67.37        -1.22***
                    (2.39)          (2.63)          {10.58}            (2.59)              (2.98)         {3.39}
                     [508]          [1470]                               [76]               [532]
 23 years            66.46           67.93         -1.47***             66.09               67.79        -1.70***
                    (2.57)          (1.69)          {10.05}            (2.43)              (2.81)         {5.03}
                     [441]          [1323]                               [80]               [384]
 24 years            66.38           68.10         -1.72***             66.60               67.58        -0.98***
                    (2.54)          (2.66)          {11.55}            (2.62)              (2.90)         {2.65}
                     [425]          [1166]                               [75]               [281]
 25 years            66.54           67.95         -1.41***             66.17               67.52        -1.35***
  and up            (2.63)          (2.65)          {29.38}            (2.74)              (2.79)         {9.88}
                    [4198]         [10981]                              [490]              [2705]
Sources: Pennsylvania prisoners: see Table 1; Union Army enlistees: Center for Population Economics (2010);
Virginia free blacks (Bodenhorn 2002).
Notes: standard deviations in parentheses; sample sizes in brackets; t-statistics for test of difference in sample
means in braces.




                                                                                                              29
Table 3: Weibull hazard estimates: Linear height specification with shared frailty on crime
                 Full       Theft         Violent        Urban         Rural         African        White
                 sample     only          only           only          only          American       Only
                                                                                     only
Height           0.975c     0.973c        0.976b         0.972c        0.977c        0.953c         0.978c
                 (6.20)     (5.38)        (2.35)         (3.72)        (4.75)        (4.54)         (4.93)
Black            1.109b     1.128b        1.147          0.999         1.169c        ---            ---
                 (2.42)     (2.36)        (1.41)         (0.01)        (2.97)
Mulatto          1.207c     1.192c        1.331c         1.045         1.285c        1.087          ---
                 (3.92)     (3.02)        (2.76)         (0.53)        (4.22)        (1.36)
Irish            0.695c     0.598c        0.846b         0.567c        0.766c        ---            0.693c
                 (10.13)    (10.32)       (2.37)         (9.64)        (5.85)                       (10.14)
German           0.577c     0.592c        0.468c         0.539c        0.589c        ---            0.583c
                 (13.03)    (10.36)       (6.49)         (8.46)        (10.11)                      (12.74)
Other            0.714c     0.683c        0.842a         0.605c        0.772c        ---            0.707c
immigrant        (7.83)     (7.18)        (1.67)         (7.17)        (4.71)                       (7.88)
Philadelphia     1.231c     1.215c        1.238c         1.179c        ---           1.199b         1.235c
                 (5.97)     (4.33)        (2.62)         (3.52)                      (2.25)         (5.45)
Pittsburgh       1.165c     1.139c        1.313c          ---          ---           1.017          1.182c
                 (4.51)     (3.05)        (3.55)                                     (0.15)         (4.67)
Recess 37        0.911c     0.925a        0.877          0.861b        0.948         1.007          0.892c
                 (2.61)     (1.85)        (1.3)          (2.24)        (1.27)        (0.08)         (2.87)
Recess 57        0.990      1.070         0.933          0.955         1.001         1.130          0.969
                 (0.20)     (1.13)        (0.58)         (0.54)        (0.02)        (0.82)         (0.62)
Recess 73        1.087a     1.072         1.055          1.231b        1.045         0.914          1.100a
                 (1.71)     (1.05)        (0.47)         (2.17)        (0.77)        (0.48)         (1.89)
Irish            0.888c     0.931         0.843          0.829b        0.922         1.146          0.861c
Immigration      (2.80)     (1.36)        (1.60)         (2.48)        (1.59)        (1.20)         (3.26)
Civil War        0.884c     0.870b        0.987          0.810c        0.926         1.178          0.851c
                 (2.87)     (2.51)        (0.13)         (2.56)        (1.51)        (1.30)         (3.52)
Emancipation     1.142c     1.133c        1.279c         1.024         1.199c        1.230b         1.121c
                 (4.40)     (3.23)        (3.51)         (0.42)        (5.04)        (2.24)         (3.57)

Observations     8558       5248          1526           2621          5937          1157           7401

Χ2: Σ(βX)=0      491.29     365.88        111.60         230.11        266.34        47.86          390.47
Z: ln(p) =0      149.23     118.89        62.15          86.70         122.05        56.66          137.98
Z: ln(θ) =0      -2.045     -5.06         -4.57          -4.49         -7.25         -4.80          -6.34

Notes: ^a implies p≤0.10; ^b implies p≤0.05; ^c implies p≤0.01. Values in parentheses are absolute values of z-
statistics

Sources: See Table 1.




                                                                                                              30
Table 4: Weibull hazard estimates: Quintile height specification with shared frailty on crime
                 Full        Theft        Violent        Urban         Rural         African        White
                 sample      only         only           only          only          American       Only
                                                                                     only
1st quintile     Reference   Reference    Reference      Reference     Reference     Reference      Reference
2nd quintile     0.960       0.959        0.996          0.947         0.955         0.916          0.968
                 (1.34)      (1.08)       (0.05)         (1.05)        (1.21)        (1.11)         (0.98)
3rd quintile     0.899c      0.886c       1.043          0.884a        0.912b        0.904          0.899c
                 (2.94)      (2.60)       (0.50)         (1.87)        (2.08)        (0.99)         (2.71)
4th quintile     0.942       0.961        0.879          0.902         0.954         0.795b         0.961
                 (1.56)      (0.82)       (1.43)         (1.49)        (1.02)        (2.27)         (0.96)
5th quintile     0.795c      0.769c       0.851a         0.791c        0.802c        0.673c         0.812c
                 (6.68)      (6.03)       (1.95)         (3.59)        (5.37)        (4.13)         (5.62)

Race             Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Ethnicity        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Urban            Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Recessions       Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Periods          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes




Observations     8558        5248         1526           2621          5937          1157           7401

Χ2: Σ(βX)=0      506.35      382.33       114.18         230.78        279.01        47.50          406.66
Z: ln(p) =0      149.45      119.21       62.22          86.74         122.27        56.69          138.22
Z: ln(θ) =0      -6.80       -5.06        -4.52          -4.49         -7.24         -4.77          -6.33

Notes: ^a implies p≤0.10; ^b implies p≤0.05; ^c implies p≤0.01. Values in parentheses are absolute values of z-
statistics

Sources: see Table 1.




                                                                                                             31
Table 5: Weibull hazard estimates: Quintile height specification with shared frailty on county
                 Full        Theft        Violent        Urban         Rural         African        White
                 sample      Only         only           only          only          American       Only
                                                                                     only
1st quintile     Reference   Reference    Reference                    Reference     Reference      Reference
2nd quintile     0.954       0.964        0.960                        0.952         0.874a         0.966
                 (1.53)      (0.96)       (0.56)                       (1.28)        (1.71)         (1.05)
3rd quintile     0.880c      0.888b       1.012                        0.897b        0.877          0.878c
                 (3.54)      (2.54)       (0.13)                       (2.47)        (1.29)         (3.33)
4th quintile     0.926b      0.977        0.871                        0.950         0.765c         0.945
                 (2.02)      (0.47)       (1.50)                       (1.12)        (2.63)         (1.37)
5th quintile     0.775c      0.772c       0.826b                       0.800c        0.654c         0.792c
                 (7.42)      (5.90)       (2.26)                       (5.43)        (4.43)         (6.32)

Race             Yes         Yes          Yes                          Yes           Yes            Yes
Ethnicity        Yes         Yes          Yes                          Yes           Yes            Yes
Urban            Yes         Yes          Yes                          Yes           Yes            Yes
Recessions       Yes         Yes          Yes                          Yes           Yes            Yes
Periods          Yes         Yes          Yes                          Yes           Yes            Yes




Observations     8611        5246         1526                         5987          1160           7451

Χ2: Σ(βX)=0      487.14      354.38       115.39                       277.12        38.92          374.47
Z: ln(p) =0      146.61      117.93       59.87                        120.24        54.12          135.20
Z: ln(θ) =0      -12.59      -11.29       -6.98                        -12.44        -3.34          -12.03

Notes: ^a implies p≤0.10; ^b implies p≤0.05; ^c implies p≤0.01. Values in parentheses are absolute values of z-
statistics

Sources: See Table 1.




                                                                                                             32
Table 6: Weibull hazard estimates: Decile height specification with shared frailty on crime
                 Full       Theft         Violent        Urban         Rural         African        White
                 sample     Only          only           only          only          American       Only
                                                                                     only
1st decile      Reference   Reference     Reference      Reference     Reference     Reference      Reference
2nd decile      0.923a      0.906a        0.951          0.826c        1.002         0.894          0.932
                (1.73)      (1.72)        (0.46)         (2.47)        (0.02)        (0.98)         (1.39)
3rd decile      0.932       0.918         1.028          0.884a        0.963         0.969          0.930
                (1.64)      (1.60)        (0.27)         (1.73)        (0.69)        (0.29)         (1.54)
4th decile      0.920b      0.917a        0.936          0.859b        0.949         0.797b         0.942
                (2.02)      (1.67)        (0.68)         (2.19)        (1.01)        (2.12)         (1.31)
5th decile      ---         ---           ---            ---           ---           ---            ---
6th decile      0.866c      0.847c        1.022          0.811c        0.913a        0.863          0.870c
                (3.43)      (3.13)        (0.22)         (2.84)        (1.76)        (1.31)         (3.05)
7th decile      0.901b      0.914         0.852          0.822b        0.947         0.749b         0.923a
                (2.38)      (1.62)        (1.56)         (2.54)        (1.00)        (2.53)         (1.67)
8th decile      1.108       1.039         1.196          1.211         1.114         0.955          1.129
                (0.70)      (0.21)        (0.46)         (0.53)        (0.67)        (0.14)         (0.74)
9th decile      0.773c      0.772c        0.813a         0.733c        0.810c        0.716b         0.781c
                (5.46)      (4.33)        (1.82)         (3.57)        (3.67)        (2.46)         (4.88)
10th decile     0.759c      0.703c        0.853          0.716c        0.795c        0.585c         0.791c
                (5.85)      (5.93)        (1.41)         (3.59)        (4.07)        (4.15)         (4.60)


Race             Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Ethnicity        Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Urban            Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Recessions       Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Periods          Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes


Observations     8558       5248          1526           2621          5937          1157           7401

Χ2: Σ(βX)=0      511.47     387.90        116.14         238.17        280.19        53.73          410.18
Z: ln(p) =0      149.53     119.32        62.29          86.91         122.30        59.61          138.29
Z: ln(θ) =0      -6.83      -5.08         -4.55          -4.51         -7.26         -4.76          -6.34

Notes: ^a implies p≤0.10; ^b implies p≤0.05; ^c implies p≤0.01. Values in parentheses are absolute values of z-
statistics

Sources: See Table 1.




                                                                                                             33
      Table 7: Weibull hazard estimates: Quintile height specification with shared frailty on county controlling
for cognitive abilities
                     Literacy    Theft       Literacy     Theft
                     sample      Only        sample       Only
      1st quintile   Reference   Reference   Reference    Reference
      2nd quintile   0.888c      0.826c      0.894c       0.817c
                     (2.73)      (3.51)      (2.58)       (3.69)
      3rd quintile   0.880b      0.884a      0.887b       0.870b
                     (2.48)      (1.86)      (2.33)       (2.10)
      4th quintile   0.896b      0.879a      0.907a       0.873b
                     (2.08)      (1.89)      (1.80)       (1.99)
      5th quintile   0.756c      0.674c      0.781c       0.678c
                     (5.62)      (6.21)      (4.95)       (6.08)
      Literacy       0.973       1.004       1.006        1.030
                     (0.64)      (0.07)      (0.15)       (0.57)

      Occupations    No          No          Yes          Yes
      Race           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Ethnicity      Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Urban          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Recessions     Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Periods        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes




      Observations   4219        2587        4219         2587

      Χ2: Σ(βX)=0    270.93      237.90      376.89       299.21
      Z: ln(p) =0    105.52      85.49       107.70       87.26
      Z: ln(θ) =0    6.16        4.56        -5.88        -4.69




                                                                                                          34
