                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE ECONOMICS OF INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN EDUCATIONAL
                             ACHIEVEMENT

                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                         Ludger Woessmann

                                        Working Paper 15949
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15949


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




We are grateful to participants at the Handbook of the Economics of Education conference at CESifo
in Munich in September 2009 for valuable discussion and comments. Woessmann gratefully acknowledges
the support and hospitality provided by the W. Glenn Campbell and Rita Ricardo-Campbell National
Fellowship of the Hoover Institution, Stanford University, as well as support by the Pact for Research
and Innovation of the Leibniz Association. Lukas Haffert provided capable research assistance. Hanushek
has been supported by the Packard Humanities Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Eric A. Hanushek and Ludger Woessmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of International Differences in Educational Achievement
Eric A. Hanushek and Ludger Woessmann
NBER Working Paper No. 15949
April 2010
JEL No. H4,H5,I20,J24,J31,O15,O4,P5

                                               ABSTRACT

An emerging economic literature over the past decade has made use of international tests of educational
achievement to analyze the determinants and impacts of cognitive skills. The cross-country comparative
approach provides a number of unique advantages over national studies: It can exploit institutional
variation that does not exist within countries; draw on much larger variation than usually available
within any country; reveal whether any result is country-specific or more general; test whether effects
are systematically heterogeneous in different settings; circumvent selection issues that plague within-country
identification by using system-level aggregated measures; and uncover general-equilibrium effects
that often elude studies in a single country. The advantages come at the price of concerns about the
limited number of country observations, the mostly cross-sectional character of available achievement
data, and possible bias from unobserved country factors such as culture.

This chapter reviews the economic literature on international differences in educational achievement,
restricting itself to comparative analyses that are not possible within single countries and placing particular
emphasis on studies trying to address key issues of empirical identification. While quantitative input
measures show little impact, several measures of institutional structures and of the quality of the teaching
force can account for significant portions of the immense international differences in the level and
equity of student achievement. Variations in skills measured by the international achievement tests
are in turn strongly related to individual labor-market outcomes and, perhaps more importantly, to
cross-country variations in economic growth.


Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu

Ludger Woessmann
University of Munich
Ifo Institute for Economic Research and CESifo
Poschingerstr. 5
81679 Munich, Germany
woessmann@ifo.de
     The Economics of International Differences in Educational Achievement
                                           Eric A. Hanushek, Ludger Woessmann

                                                             April 23, 2010


1. Introduction ...............................................................................................................................1
   1.1 Unique Advantages of Cross-Country Data on Cognitive Skills.........................................3
   1.2 Concerns with the Use of Cross-Country Data on Cognitive Skills....................................4
   1.3 Scope of this Analysis..........................................................................................................5
2. Economic Motivation ................................................................................................................6
3. International Tests of Educational Achievement ...................................................................7
   3.1 Overview of Available International Testing and Participation ..........................................7
   3.2 Validity of International Sampling and Testing...................................................................9
4. Determinants of International Educational Achievement ..................................................11
   4.1 International Evidence on Education Production Functions..............................................11
   4.2 Student and Family Background........................................................................................14
   4.3 School Inputs .....................................................................................................................17
       4.3.1 Evidence across Countries .......................................................................................17
       4.3.2 Evidence within Different Countries ........................................................................19
   4.4 Institutions..........................................................................................................................24
       4.4.1 Accountability...........................................................................................................25
       4.4.2 Autonomy..................................................................................................................26
       4.4.3 Competition from Private Schools ...........................................................................27
       4.4.4 Tracking ...................................................................................................................31
       4.4.5 Pre-primary Education System ................................................................................33
       4.4.6 Additional Results ....................................................................................................34
   4.5 Conclusions on the Determinants of International Educational Achievement ..................34
5. Economic Consequences of International Educational Achievement ................................35
   5.1 Cognitive Skills and Individual Labor-Market Outcomes.................................................35
   5.2 Cognitive Skills and the Distribution of Economic Outcomes..........................................40
   5.3 Cognitive Skills and Macroeconomic Growth...................................................................41
       5.3.1 Aggregate Measures of Cognitive Skills ..................................................................42
       5.3.2 Evidence on the Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic Growth ...............................44
       5.3.3 Causation in a Cross-Country Framework..............................................................47
       5.3.4 Expanding Country Samples by Regional Tests from Developing Countries ..........49
       5.3.5 Basic Skills, Top Performance, and Growth ............................................................51
       5.3.6 IQ Models.................................................................................................................51
   5.4 Conclusions on the Economic Impact of Differences in Cognitive Skills.........................53
6. Conclusion and Outlook .........................................................................................................53
References.....................................................................................................................................55
                        “If custom and law define what is educationally allowable within a nation,
                                        the educational systems beyond one’s national boundaries
                                                          suggest what is educationally possible.”
                                                   Arthur W. Foshay (1962) on the first pilot study
                                                             of international student achievement


1. Introduction
     Virtually all nations of the world today realize the research and policy value of student
performance data that come from testing the cognitive skills of students. While there is wide
variation across nations in testing – differing by subject matter, grade level, purpose, and quality
of testing – the idea of assessing what students know as opposed to how long they have been in
school has diffused around the world, in part at the instigation of international development and
aid agencies. Somewhat less known is that comparative cross-national testing has been going on
for a long time. Nations participated in common international assessments of mathematics and
science long before they instituted national testing programs. These common international
assessments provide unique data for understanding both the importance of various factors
determining achievement and the impact of skills on economic and social outcomes.
     International consortia were formed in the mid-1960s to develop and implement
comparisons of educational achievement across nations. Since then, the math, science, and
reading performance of students in many countries have been tested on multiple occasions using
(at each occasion) a common set of test questions in all participating countries. By 2010, three
major international testing programs are surveying student performance on a regular basis: the
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) testing math, science, and reading
performance of 15-year-olds on a three-year cycle since 2000, the Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) testing math and science performance (mostly) of
eighth-graders on a four-year cycle since 1995, and the Progress in International Reading
Literacy Study (PIRLS) testing primary-school reading performance on a five-year cycle since
2001. In addition, regional testing programs have produced comparable performance
information for many countries in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa, and international adult
literacy surveys have produced internationally comparable data on the educational achievement
of adults.
     In a variety of cases, these international assessments actually substitute for national testing.
The international testing provides information on educational outcomes where otherwise only
small, unrepresentative samples of outcome data are available. Indeed, the simplest of
international comparisons has spurred not only governmental attention but also immense public
interest as is vividly documented by the regular vigorous news coverage and public debate of the
outcomes of the international achievement tests in many of the participating countries. For
example, the results of the first PISA study made headlines on the front pages of tabloids and
more serious newspapers alike: the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (Dec. 4, 2001) in Germany
titled “Abysmal marks for German students”, Le Monde (Dec. 5, 2001) in France titled “France,
the mediocre student of the OECD class”, and The Times (Dec. 6, 2001) in England titled “Are
we not such dunces after all?”



                                                    1
     These international assessments, which are generally embedded within a larger survey of
individual and school attributes, are ultimately valuable in providing direct measures of human
capital. The idea that individual skills are important in a wide variety of economic and social
circumstances is generally captured under the blanket term of human capital. Since the
influential work of Schultz (1961), Becker (1964), and Mincer (1970), the concept of human
capital has pervaded many economic analyses.1 But the challenge has consistently been to find
explicit measures that could be used in empirical analysis. Simply identifying, for example,
differences in the labor-market outcomes for individuals as human capital does not provide a
useful empirical structure. The invention of Mincer (1970, 1974) was to pursue the empirical
power of defining human capital in terms of school attainment, an easily measured factor that
almost certainly related to skill development and human capital. This idea has subsequently
dominated most thinking about human capital such that school attainment is often taken virtually
as a synonym for human capital.
     The fundamental problem with this development is that it very frequently ignores other
elements of skill development that will generally be related to school attainment. For example, a
large body of work, generally under the rubric of educational production functions, focuses on
the concomitant influence of families in the skill development of children. Moreover, much of
the concern about governmental investments in schooling, particularly in developed countries,
focuses on issues of differential quality. Both of these factors and other omitted elements are
very likely to be related to the school attainment of individuals.2 While there has been
considerable research aimed at getting consistent estimates of the rate of return to school
attainment, little of this has addressed issues of systematic omitted determinants of human
capital.3
     Much of our motivation for the analysis described in this paper comes from the conclusion
that cognitive skills, identified by test scores such as those incorporated into the international
assessments, are good measures of relevant skills for human capital. Thus, in looking at the
impacts of human capital on economic outcomes, instead of attempting to identify all of the
relevant determinants of differences in individual or aggregate skills, we simply begin with
measures of cognitive skills as our indication of human capital. Along the way, however, we
also discuss the alternatives to this along with providing evidence about the appropriateness of
different measures.
    The research based on the international assessments goes in two different directions:
research designed to understand the underlying determinants of cognitive skills and research
focused on the consequences of skill differences. Our purpose here is to review and evaluate
both lines of research employing international assessments.


1
  As traced by Kiker (1968), the antecedents of human capital analysis go much farther back including Petty (1676
[1899]) and Smith (1979), but the idea went dormant with the arguments against it at the beginning of the 20th
Century by Alfred Marshall (1898).
2
  For general discussions of these issues, see Hanushek (2002) and Hanushek and Woessmann (2008). For the
quality-attainment relationship, see Hanushek, Lavy, and Hitomi (2008).
3
  For an evaluation of alternative approaches to estimation of returns to schooling, see Card (1999, 2001). The
interpretation of such estimates as an internal rate of return is discussed in Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006,
2008). The more general interpretation of the determinants of human capital is found in Hanushek and Woessmann
(2008) and Hanushek and Zhang (2009) along with the discussion below.


                                                          2
1.1 Unique Advantages of Cross-Country Data on Cognitive Skills
     International achievement data, developed and refined over the past half century, were not
collected to support any specific economic research agenda. But, as we shall discuss below,
there are a number of research and policy agendas that are uniquely amenable to analysis
because of the existence of such data. Indeed, it is somewhat peculiar to have a handbook
chapter focus on specific data as opposed to issues of economic methodology or substantive
research and policy areas. We argue, however, that such data have made it possible for
economists to address a range of fundamental questions that previously resisted satisfactory
analysis. And, because the extent and nature of international achievement data still remain
largely unknown, it is important to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of these data in
understanding a variety of significant research and policy questions.
     In terms of understanding the determinants of educational achievement, the international
data have at least six unique advantages over research restricted to single countries or states.
First, the data permit exploitation of variation that only exists across countries. For example,
systematic institutional variation between countries as found with differences in the
competitiveness and flexibility of teacher labor markets, forms of accountability systems, the
extent of a private school sector, or the structure of student tracking simply does not exist within
most countries. Or, the existence of central exit exams is a national characteristic in nearly all
countries, so that the effect of central exams cannot be estimated using national data in these
countries unless their status changes over time. The lack of within-country institutional variation
makes an empirical identification of the impact of many institutional features of school systems
impossible when using national datasets.
     Second, even where within-country variation exists, variations across countries in key
institutional factors and in characteristics of the schools and population are frequently much
larger than those found within any country. From an analytical viewpoint, using such
international variation generally implies increased statistical power to detect the impact of
specific factors on student outcomes.
    Third, the international achievement data based on the same data collection process provides
an opportunity to examine comparable estimates of the determinants and consequences of
educational achievement for a diverse set of countries. Such research can thus throw light on
whether a result is truly country-specific, applies more generally, or is simply a spurious result
from a particular within-country sample.
     Fourth, and related to the previous point, international evidence can identify systematic
heterogeneity in effects that differ across countries. For example, such comparative research can
delve into why class-size effects on achievement are heterogeneous across countries, perhaps
leading to deeper insights about, say, the interaction between curriculum or teacher training and
classroom processes.
    Fifth, even where within-country variation exists, for example, in the case of public and
private schools operating within the same system, comparisons of student achievement are often
subject to severe selection problems. Students who choose to attend a private school may differ
along both observable and unobservable dimensions from students taught in neighborhood public
schools. While it is possible to control for some differences in student, family, and school
characteristics when estimating the effects of institutional structures, thereby comparing students
who are observationally equivalent, such estimates may still suffer from selection on unobserved


                                                   3
characteristics. By aggregating the institutional variables to the country level, it is possible to
circumvent these selection problems – in effect measuring the impact of, for example, the share
of students in a country attending private schools on student achievement in the country as a
whole. Such cross-country evidence will not be biased by standard issues of selection at the
individual level.
     Sixth, uncovering general equilibrium effects is often impossible in a single country but
sometimes feasible across countries. For example, the presence of private schools may influence
the behavior of nearby public schools with which they compete for students. As a result, simple
comparisons of private and public schools may miss an important part of the effects of greater
private involvement in education. Aggregated measures of the institutional feature can solve the
problem: By comparing the average performance of systems with larger and smaller shares of
private schools, the cross-country approach captures any systemic effect of competition from
private schools.
     Research into the consequences of differences in cognitive skills has similar advantages.
For example, while the implications of human capital development for macroeconomic outcomes
– including, importantly, economic growth – can potentially be investigated with time-series data
for individual countries, historical data are effectively limited to school attainment with no
information on the cognitive skills that we emphasize here. On the other hand, variations in
cognitive skills across different economies can, as we describe below, effectively get at such
fundamental questions. Similarly, investigating whether features of the structure of economic
activity affect the individual returns to skills is very difficult within a single economy with
interlocking labor and product markets.

1.2 Concerns with the Use of Cross-Country Data on Cognitive Skills
     With these research advantages also come concerns and disadvantages. Three stand out.
First, the relevant variations are frequently limited by the number of countries with both
assessment and other common data. Second, even though each of the assessments collects
substantial amounts of ancillary survey information at the individual level, virtually all are single
cross-sectional designs with no ability to track individuals.4 Third, there is frequently a concern
that unmeasured “cultural” factors are important in various processes of interest. Each of these
make the identification and estimation of cross-country models difficult and limit the range of
analyses currently possible.
     Further, while not specific to this cross-country work, some inherently difficult data and
modeling problems also remain. The focus of this chapter is measures of educational
achievement – skills that are expressed in test scores – rather than quantitative measures of
educational attainment. For reasons of availability, the focus of our skill measurement is just on
cognitive skills, opening up possible concerns about other skills such as non-cognitive skills.
The systematic measurement of such skills has yet to be possible in international comparisons.
Furthermore, the research covered refers to basic general skills that are generally learned through
the end of secondary school, leaving aside programs of higher education and specific vocational
skills. Apart from data availability, this focus is also dictated by a need for international


4
    Recent work in a few countries has built within-country follow-ups into the PISA testing; see Section 5.1 below.


                                                              4
comparability where measures of any quality aspects of higher education are generally
unavailable.5

1.3 Scope of this Analysis
     The standards of evidence throughout empirical economics have changed in recent years,
sometimes dramatically. The character of change also enters directly into our consideration of
cross-country analyses. The analytical designs employed in the cross-country analyses we
discuss have developed over time in a way that parallels much of the related micro-econometric
work within individual countries. The initial publications of comparative tests across nations by
the organizations that conducted the different studies tended to report bivariate associations.
Subsequent analyses performed multiple regressions in the form of educational production
functions and cross-country growth regressions that tried to address the most obvious perils of
bias from intervening factors by adding corresponding control variables. While initial studies
estimated international educational production functions at the aggregate country level,
subsequent studies exploited the full variation of the international micro data.
     More recently, several studies have started to employ econometric techniques such as
instrumental-variable, regression-discontinuity, differences-in-differences, and different sorts of
fixed-effects specifications in order to come closer to identification of causal relationships in the
international data on educational achievement. This applies both to the identification of causal
effects within countries and to the challenge of overcoming possible bias from unobserved
country heterogeneity – e.g., in terms of cultural differences – in cross-country estimation.
While these developments are far from complete at this time, we emphasize the issues of
identification and interpretation in much of the discussion below.
     We limit the coverage of this chapter to studies that make cross-country comparisons.
Based on this criterion, we cover only studies that estimate the same specification for different
countries or estimate a cross-country specification. Studies that use the international survey data
for analysis within a single country will be referenced only insofar as they are directly relevant
for the internationally comparative approach.
     The next section provides a brief economic motivation to frame the subsequent discussions.
Section 3 gives an overview and critical assessment of the different available international
datasets on educational achievement. Section 4 surveys the literature on the determinants of
international educational achievement, covering both evidence within different countries and
evidence across countries and covering family background, school resources, and institutional
structures as three groups of possible determinants. Section 5 surveys the literature on the
economic consequences of international educational achievement, covering both individual



5
  A couple of attempts have been made to analyze differences among universities, but these are generally limited.
There are academic rankings of the world’s research universities by the Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, based on measures of university research (for 2007, see
http://ed.sjtu.edu.cn/rank/2007/ARWU2007TOP500list.htm accessed January 12, 2008). A 2007 professional
ranking by the Ecole des mines de Paris considered graduates who were CEOs at Global Fortune 500 countries (see
http://www.ensmp.fr/Actualites/PR/EMP-ranking.html accessed January 12, 2008). Neither would appear to
provide very general measures of higher education outcomes in different countries, and each also is subject to the
same concerns that human capital is developed in more places than just schools.


                                                            5
labor-market outcomes and macroeconomic growth. The final section presents some overall
conclusions along with a discussion of how the data and research could be improved.


2. Economic Motivation
    A wide variety of analyses motivate the discussions here. They are most easily described as
models falling under the rubric of human capital, although that nomenclature has become so
widely used that it does not provide any clear description.
    In general terms, the literature reviewed in Section 5 thinks of economic outcomes as
determined by human capital – or relevant skills – and a variety of other factors. The canonical
case, which we deal with extensively here, is where the economic outcome is individual labor-
market earnings. (More generally, relying on some underlying models of markets, earnings
might reflect the productivity of individuals in that labor market). This simple view is expressed
by:

(1)                                     O = γ H + Xβ +ε
where O is the outcome of interest, H is human capital, X is a vector of other determinants of the
outcome, and ε is a stochastic term. In the standard labor-market view of earnings determination,
everything is measured at the individual worker level, O is simply individual earnings, and X
includes such things as labor-market experience of the worker, gender, and health status.
    The empirical issue is how to measure human capital, or H. Almost without comment, it is
now commonplace simply to substitute school attainment, S, for human capital and to proceed
with estimation of the underlying model. This approach is reinforced by the ubiquitous
availability of measures of school attainment, a common addition to population censuses,
household surveys, and other specialized data collections in nations around the world.
     Assuming that school attainment is a measure of human capital, however, requires a series
of strong assumptions, ones that conflict with other well-developed lines of research. Most
relevant, analyses of educational production functions have considered the outcomes of schools
within a broader model of production. Specifically, these models identify skills as being affected
by a range of factors including family inputs (F), the quality and quantity of inputs provided by
schools (qS), individual ability (A), and other relevant factors (Z) which include labor-market
experience, health, and so forth as in:

(2)                               H = λ F + φ (qS ) + η A + α Z +ν
The schooling term combines both school attainment (S) and its quality (q).
     Human capital is, however, not directly observed. To be verifiable, it is necessary to specify
the measurement of H. Estimating versions of equation (2), the literature reviewed in Section 4
concentrates on the cognitive-skills component of human capital and considers measuring H with
test-score measures of mathematics, science, and reading achievement. The use of measures of
cognitive skills has a number of potential advantages. First, achievement captures variations in
the knowledge and ability that schools strive to produce and thus relate the putative outputs of
schooling to subsequent economic success. Second, by emphasizing total outcomes of
education, these models incorporate skills from any source – families, schools, and ability.


                                                   6
Third, by allowing for differences in performance among students with differing quality of
schooling (but possibly the same quantity of schooling), they open the investigation of the
importance of different policies designed to affect the quality aspects of schools.
     The implications of this perspective for the estimation of equation (1) are immediately
obvious. Estimation that incorporated just school attainment (S) would yield biased estimates of
the impact of human capital except in the most unlikely event that S is actually uncorrelated with
the other determinants of skills.
     The issues are perhaps most relevant when considering aggregate outcomes. In considering
the impact of human capital on aggregate output or on economic growth, comparing a year of
schooling across countries implies assuming that the learning per year is equivalent, say, from
Hong Kong to South Africa. Few people would think that is a reasonable assumption.
     We investigate the value of international measures of achievement for the analysis of both
equations (1) and (2). For some estimation and analysis, international data are clearly not
needed. For example, the extensive study of educational production functions has for the most
part been conducted entirely within countries. Our focus here is very specific. We wish to
consider analyses that are not possible within single countries or that provide extended analytical
possibilities when put in an international framework. For example, as we discuss later, a variety
of educational institutions are constant within individual countries – such as the use of early
tracking systems – and thus are not susceptible to analysis within individual countries.
Alternatively, understanding differences in economic growth across countries requires reliable
cross-country data.


3. International Tests of Educational Achievement
     The beginning of international testing was a series of meetings in the late 1950s and early
1960s when a group of academics met to design an international testing program.6 An
exploratory study in testing mathematics, reading comprehension, geography, science, and non-
verbal ability was conducted in 1959-1962 (cf. Foshay (1962)). This led to the first major
international test in 1964 when twelve countries participated in the First International
Mathematics Study (FIMS). This and a series of subsequent assessments were conducted in a set
of nations voluntarily participating in a cooperative venture developed by the International
Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA). The continuing IEA efforts
have been more recently matched by an on-going testing program from the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).

3.1 Overview of Available International Testing and Participation
     These international testing programs, and related ones that we discuss below, are marked by
some common elements. They involve a group of voluntarily participating countries that each
pay for their participation and administer their own assessments (according to agreed-upon
protocols and sampling schemes). Since they involve individual country policy decisions to
participate, the set of participating countries has differed across time and even across subparts of


6
    See “A Brief History of IEA” at http://www.iea.nl/brief_history_of_iea.html [accessed August 23, 2009].


                                                             7
specific testing occasions. Additionally, the different tests differ somewhat in their focus and
intended subject matter. For example, the IEA tests, of which the most recent version is the
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), are developed by international
panels but are related to common elements of primary and secondary school curriculum, while
the OECD tests (Programme in International Student Assessment, or PISA) are designed to
measure more applied knowledge and skills.7 The range of subject matters tested varies across
time, with assessments in math and science being supplemented by reading tests.8 Third, until
recent testing, little effort has been made to equate scores across time. Finally, the testing has
been almost exclusively cross-sectional in nature, not following individual students’ change in
achievement.9
     Along with the assessments of cognitive skills, extensive contextual information and student
background data have been provided by related surveys. The motivation for this is using the
international databases to address a variety of policy issues relevant to the participating
countries.
     The IEA and OECD tests have the broadest coverage and have also adapted regular testing
cycles. Table 1 provides an account of their major international tests with an indication of age
(or grade level) of testing, subject matter, and participating countries. By 2007, there were 15
testing occasions, most of which include subparts based upon subject and grade level.10
     The major IEA and OECD testing programs have expanded dramatically in terms of
participating countries. While only 29 countries participated in these testing programs through
1990, a total of 96 countries have participated by 2007. Three additional countries participated
in 2009, and another three additional countries plan to participate in 2011, raising the total
number of countries ever participating in one of these international tests to 102. Only the United
States participated in all 15 testing occasions, but an additional 17 countries participated in ten or
more different assessments. Figure 1 shows the histogram of participation on the IEA or OECD
tests between 1964-2007, divided by OECD and other countries. From this figure, it is clear that
the depth of coverage is much greater for developed than for developing countries. Further,
much of the participation in one or two different test administrations occurs after 2000. On the
other hand, those countries participating eight or more times have now accumulated some
information on intertemporal patterns of performance with testing going back to the early 1990s
or before.
    At the same time, a number of more idiosyncratic tests, some on a regional basis, have also
been developed. These tests have been more varied in their focus, development, and quality.
And they have in general been used much less frequently in analytical work. Table 2 provides

7
  A separate analysis of coverage and testing can be found in Neidorf, Binkley, Gattis, and Nohara (2006).
8
  There have also been some other studies of foreign languages, civic education, and information technology. These
have involved smaller samples of countries and in general have not been repeated over time. We do not include
these in our discussions, in part because they have not been analyzed very much.
9
  The Second International Mathematics Study (SIMS) of the IEA did have a one-year follow-up of individual
students that permitted some longitudinal, panel information, but this design was not repeated. Recent innovations
have permitted development of panel data by individual countries.
10
   See Mullis, Martin, Kennedy, and Foy (2007), Mullis, Martin, and Foy (2008), and Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (2007) for details on the most recent cycle of the three major ongoing international
testing cycles.


                                                           8
basic information on these additional assessments, although most of the remaining portion of this
chapter concentrates on the information from tests in Table 1. Of the ten additional testing
occasions, six are regional tests for Latin America (ECIEL, LLECE, SERCE) or Africa
SACMEQ I and II, PASEC). As discussed below, the IEA and OECD tests may be too difficult
for many students in the developing countries of Latin America and Africa, thus providing
unreliable information about performance variations. These regional examinations use tests that
are more appropriate to the countries of the region.
     The remaining assessments and surveys cover a broader set of countries but are somewhat
different in focus from those in Table 1. The International Assessment of Educational Progress
(IAEP) I and II are tests constructed to mirror the National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) that has been used in the United States since 1970 and that aligns to the United States
school curriculum, which may limit international comparability. The International Adult
Literacy Survey (IALS) and the Adult Literacy and Life Skills Survey (ALLS) have a very
different structure involving sampling of adults in the workforce.11 The IALS survey data in
particular have been used in a variety of studies about the consequences of education and
cognitive skills (and will be discussed below in that context).
     Given the different test designs, can results be compared across countries? And can the
different tests be aggregated? Interestingly, the TIMSS tests with their curricular focus and the
PISA tests with their real-world application focus are highly correlated at the country level. For
example, the correlation coefficients between the TIMSS 2003 tests of 8th graders and the PISA
2003 tests of 15-year-olds across the 19 countries participating in both are 0.87 in math and 0.97
in science, and they are 0.86 in both math and science across the 21 countries participating both
in the TIMSS 1999 tests and the PISA 2000/02 tests. There is also a high correlation at the
country level between the curriculum-based student tests of TIMSS and the practical literacy
adult examinations of IALS (Hanushek and Zhang (2009)). Tests with very different foci and
perspectives tend to be highly related, suggesting that they are measuring a common dimension
of skills. As discussed below, the consistency lends support to aggregating different student tests
for each country in order to develop comparable achievement measures. It is also encouraging
when thinking of these tests as identifying fundamental skills included in “human capital.”
    As an example of the different international tests, Table 3 provides comparative information
on country performance on the major worldwide tests of math at the lower secondary level. The
more recent tests have been normed to have a mean of 500 and standard deviation of 100. But,
because the group of countries going into the norm differs and because there is no attempt to
equate scores across time, it is not possible to say that a country with an average of 510 in one
year and 515 in another has improved or not. We return to this issue below.

3.2 Validity of International Sampling and Testing
     The available international tests of educational achievement are not without criticism. In
particular, despite the stringent technical standards and extensive efforts of quality assurance by
the international testing organizations (e.g., Organisation for Economic Co-operation and


11
  The OECD has currently also embarked on a new endeavor, the Programme for the International Assessment of
Adult Competencies (PIAAC), which will update and expand the adult testing, in terms of both the scope of the test
and the number of participating countries. This assessment is scheduled to be administered in 2011.


                                                           9
Development (2009)), in principle differences in sample selectivity across countries clearly have
the potential to undermine the validity of specific country rankings on the tests. While critics of
international educational comparisons argue that results may be influenced by differences in the
extent to which countries adequately sample their entire student populations (e.g., Rotberg
(1995); Prais (2003)), others disagree with the view that sample selection is a major source of
bias in international achievement comparisons (e.g., Baker (1997); Adams (2003)).
     In any case, the extent to which such sample selection affects results of econometric
analyses that use the international test score data (rather than just leading to mismeasurement of
country mean performance) depends on whether it is idiosyncratic or systematic and on the
extent to which it is correlated both with (conditional) outcomes and determinants of the
analyses. If sample selectivity is idiosyncratic, it simply introduces classical measurement error
that works against finding statistically significant associations.12 The same is true if sample
selectivity is persistent across time but orthogonal to the (conditional) variable whose association
with test scores is of interest. Only if it is correlated with the error term of the estimation
equation does systematic sample selectivity introduce bias to econometric analyses.13
     In order to test the extent to which this is true, Hanushek and Woessmann (2010b) draw on
detailed information on sampling quality provided in the more recent international tests and
estimate whether international differences in sample selection affect the outcomes of typical
economic analyses. They show that countries having more schools and students excluded from
the targeted sample (e.g., because of intellectual or functional disabilities or limited proficiency
in the test language), having schools and students who are less likely to participate in the test
(e.g., because of unwillingness to participate or absence on the testing day), and having higher
overall school enrollment at the relevant age level indeed tend to perform better on the
international tests. However, accounting for this sample selectivity does not affect the results of
standard growth regressions and education production functions. This finding implies that the
international variation in selectivity of student samples is not systematically related to the
associations of interest in the economic analyses reviewed in this chapter.
     The tests included in our analyses have been devised in an international cooperative process
between all participating countries with the intent of making the assessments independent of the
culture or curriculum in any particular country. Yet, another criticism that is sometimes raised
against international comparisons of student achievement is that test items may be culturally
biased or inappropriate for specific participating countries (e.g., Hopmann, Brinek, and Retzl
(2007)). Adams, Berezner, and Jakubowski (2010) show that overall country rankings are
remarkably consistent when countries are compared using just those PISA-2006 items that




12
   The importance of this will be lessened in applications that use averages of performance across several tests, since
the error variance is reduced by averaging.
13
   Studies such as Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a) that include country fixed effects deal with possible bias from
systematic sampling errors by removing time-invariant factors for each country. They also show that changes in
enrollment rates over time are uncorrelated with trends in test scores, diluting worries that differential changes in
enrollment bias the results of economic analyses using test scores.


                                                            10
representatives of each specific country had initially expressed to be of highest priority for
inclusion, and presumably most appropriate for their own school system.14
     The summary is that international testing is now well-established and broadly accepted. The
assessments, particularly in Table 1, plus their corresponding survey information form the basis
for the cross-country analyses discussed here.


4. Determinants of International Educational Achievement
     In reviewing the economic literature on international educational achievement, this section
focuses on its determinants and the next section on its consequences. After a brief introduction
to the estimation of international education production functions, this section covers student
background, school inputs, and institutional structures of the education system as three groups of
factors determining achievement. Note that the analysis is weighted toward developed countries,
largely mirroring the time pattern of participation where developing countries have until very
recently participated infrequently. At the same time, since most international analyses of the
determination of achievement rely just on the cross-sectional data, it might be expected that this
balance will change in the near future.

4.1 International Evidence on Education Production Functions
    As is the case in the majority of the literature on educational production, the basic model
underlying the literature on determinants of international educational achievement resembles
some form of the education production function:

(3)                                 T = a 0 + a1 F + a 2 R + a3 I + a 4 A + e
which basically is a version of our equation (2) applied to students currently in school. Here, T is
the outcome of the educational production process as measured, e.g., by test scores of
mathematics, science, and reading achievement. The vector F captures facets of student and
family background characteristics, R is a vector of measures of school resources, I are
institutional features of schools and education systems, and A is individual ability.
     When estimating equation (3) within different countries, studies based on international data
face the same methodological challenges as studies restricted to a specific country (see Hanushek
(1979, 2002) and Todd and Wolpin (2003) for key issues in empirical identification of education
production functions). The fundamental challenge is that most inputs in the education
production function are likely not to be exogenous in a statistical sense. Leading concerns derive
from omitted variables, selection, and reverse causation. A key candidate of an omitted variable
is student ability A, most dimensions of which tend to go unmeasured and are likely correlated
with other inputs in important ways. An additional concern for research on most of the
international tests is their cross-sectional structure which does not allow for panel or value-added
estimations, so that temporally prior inputs are usually unobserved. School inputs will often be


14
  From the opposite perspective, the IAEP comparisons (not employed here) were built on tests directly taken from
the assessments used in the United States, but the results from these comparisons did not alter the low ranking of
U.S. students (see Lapointe, Mead, and Phillips (1989)).


                                                          11
the outcome of choices of parents, administrators, and schools that are correlated with the error
term of the production function. The same is true for some institutional characteristics. Given
this substantial scope for endogeneity bias, least-squares estimates of equation (3) need to be
interpreted with great care, even when they control for a large set of observable input factors.
This has led to the development of more elaborate techniques that try to draw on exogenous
variation in the variables of interest.
     In the following review of the literature, we will refer to the more descriptive studies only
briefly and mostly focus on studies trying to address the key identification issues. There is,
however, one specific aspect about making cross-country comparisons of estimates obtained
from performing the same estimation in different countries, though: If one is willing to make the
assumption that any bias is constant across countries, then a cross-country comparison of
estimates is feasible, even if interpretation of the size of each estimate is not.
     The main challenges change when it comes to studies estimating cross-country associations.
As discussed in the introduction to this chapter, there are both unique advantages and specific
concerns with using cross-country data to estimate the determinants of educational achievement.
At the most general level, cross-country estimation is able to get around the most pressing
concerns of bias from selection but introduces new kinds of omitted variable concerns. Within-
country variation is often subject to severe selection problems: For example, students who
choose to attend a private school may differ along both observable and unobservable dimensions
from students taught in neighborhood public schools. While many observable characteristics are
often controlled for in econometric analyses, thereby comparing students who are
observationally equivalent, within-country estimates may still suffer from selection on
unobserved characteristics.15 In cross-country analyses, one can aggregate the institutional
variable of interest up to the country level, thereby circumventing the selection problem. In
effect, the cross-country analysis then measures the impact of, for example, the share of students
in a country attending private schools on student achievement in the country as a whole. Such
cross-country analysis cannot be biased by standard issues of selection at the individual level, as
patterns of sorting cancel out at the system level.
     The main cost to this – apart from the limited degrees of freedom at the country level – is
that unobserved heterogeneity at the country level may introduce new forms of omitted variable
bias. For example, cultural factors such as “Asian values” may remain unobserved in the
econometric model and correlate both with student outcomes and relevant inputs in the education
production function. Education systems – and societies more generally – may also differ in other
important dimensions unobserved by the researcher. To address such concerns, the main results
of cross-country studies should be checked for robustness to including obvious correlates of the
cultural factors as control variables at the country level. Another robustness check is to draw
only on variation within major world regions by including regional (continental) fixed effects.
More fundamentally, some cross-country studies have started to adopt new techniques directly
developed to address such issues of identification in particular contexts, and these studies will be
the main focus of the following review.



15
  There is, for example, an extensive literature within the U.S. on private school choice and the potential problems
with student selection (see, for example, Coleman and Hoffer (1987); Coleman, Hoffer, and Kilgore (1981); Neal
(1997); Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005)).


                                                            12
     Early studies that employ the international student achievement tests to estimate similar
education production function within different countries include Heyneman and Loxley (1983)
and Toma (1996). Early studies using the cross-country variation of international tests to
estimate international education productions on country-level observations include Bishop
(1997), Hanushek and Kimko (2000), and Lee and Barro (2001). The first economic study to
make use of the vast potential of the international micro data on students’ achievement, family
background, and school inputs and of the broad array of institutional differences that exists
across countries to estimate extensive multivariate cross-country education production functions
is Woessmann (2003b). While still subject to the prior issues of cross-country identification,
employing the rich student-level data on background factors allows to hold constant a large set of
observable factors usually unavailable in national datasets.
     Table 4 presents an example estimation of an international education production function.16
Using student-level data for 29 OECD countries from the 2003 cycle of the PISA test of 15-year-
olds, the model expresses individual student achievement in math as a function of large set of
input factors. While this is a basic model that does not fully exploit the potential of the
international data, the model specification already documents the rich set of background factors
available from the student and school background questionnaires. Moreover, the international
data display wide variation in many of the potential inputs to achievement, thus allowing for
more precise estimation of any effects. At the individual level, the factors include student
characteristics such as age, gender, immigration, and preprimary educational attendance and
family-background measures such as socio-economic status, parental occupation, family status,
and the number of books in the home. At the school level, the model includes resource measures
such as class size and shortage of materials, instruction time, teacher education, community
location, and institutional factors such as a set of measures of teacher monitoring and student
assessment, different dimensions of school autonomy, and their interaction with accountability
measures. At the country level, this basic model includes a country’s GDP per capita,
educational expenditure per student, and the institutional factors of external exit exams, share of
privately operated schools, and average government funding of schools.
     While the cross-sectional nature of this estimation allows for a descriptive interpretation
only, it is worth noting that many measures of students’ individual and family background are
systematically related to their achievement, as are several measures of the institutional structure
of the school system. By contrast, the point estimate on class size, the classical measure of
quantitative school inputs, is counterintuitive,17 and the estimates on the more qualitative school
inputs, while positive, are more limited than the background and institutional estimates. The
model accounts for 39 percent of the achievement variation at the student level and for 87
percent at the country level. That is, while unobserved factors such as ability differences are
important at the individual level, the model is able to account statistically for most of the
between-country variation in academic achievement. These basic result patterns are broadly
common to all studies of international education production functions estimated on the different


16
  See Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009) for additional background and robustness analyses.
17
  The coefficient on country-level spending is very small. While it is statistically significant, identification here
comes from a very particular margin, as the correlation between spending and per-capita GDP (whose coefficient is
negative here) in this model is as high as 0.93. Other studies tend to find a significant positive coefficient on GDP
per capita, but not on spending. See below for more extensive discussion.


                                                            13
international student achievement tests.18 We will now discuss the literature on each of the three
groups of determinants – student and family background, school inputs, and institutions – in
greater detail.

4.2 Student and Family Background
     The results of the international education production function just presented show strong
associations of educational achievement with many measures of student and family background.
Given the importance of learning and child development outside school, family inputs have long
been viewed as a leading input in educational production. As a consequence, consideration of
measures of family background is generally taken as the most rudimentary quality standard when
analyzing effects of school inputs (cf. Hanushek (2002)). But the effects of different measures of
student and family background are generally seen as having important interest in their own right,
not least because they provide an indication of the equality of opportunity of children with
different backgrounds (see the chapter by Björklund and Salvanes (2010)). When using
international student achievement data to estimate the same basic specification in different
countries, measures of equality of opportunity can be compared across countries for several
dimensions such as social background, ethnicity and immigrant status, and gender. Moreover,
estimates of how strongly student achievement depends on family background provide an
indication of intergenerational mobility of a society. We first discuss evidence derived from
estimation within different countries and follow with evidence across countries.
     Figure 2 depicts an example, based on Schuetz, Ursprung, and Woessmann (2008), of using
international data to generate comparable estimates of the association between family
background and educational achievement in different countries. By combining the 1995 TIMSS
test with its 1999 repeat study, the study can draw on micro data for over 325,000 students from
a total of 54 countries. For the OECD countries, the figure depicts the coefficient on books
available in the student’s household in a student-level regression predicting the average 8th-grade
test score in math and science disaggregated by country. By controlling for the immigration
status of student, mother, and father interacted with family background (as well as age, gender,
and family status), the multivariate analysis ensures that the estimates are not driven by cross-
country differences in the immigrant population, but reflect socio-economic differences in the
non-migrant population of each country.
     The number of books in the students’ home is used as a proxy for socio-economic
background not only because cross-country comparability and data coverage are superior to such
indicators as parental education, but also because books at home are the single most important
predictor of student performance in most countries (Woessmann (2003b, 2008)). The
sociological literature suggests books at home as a powerful proxy for the educational, social,
and economic background of the students’ families. Furthermore, Schuetz, Ursprung, and
Woessmann (2008) corroborate the cross-country validity of the books-at-home variable by
showing that the association between household income and books at home does not vary
significantly between the six countries for which both income and books measures are available
in the PIRLS dataset. At the same time, it is important to be clear about the interpretation. The
consistency of the estimates across studies is not meant to imply that books in the home per se

18
  See Aghion et al. (2007) and Aghion (2008) for an example of an international education production function in
higher education, using university rankings based on the Shanghai research ranking (see above).


                                                          14
are causally related to achievement and that providing more books to families would raise
student performance. Books in the home proxy systematic differences in parenting, home
education, and home resources that are presumed to be causally related to performance. In other
words, the specific measures are not causally related to achievement even if the underlying
concept is.19
     The association between the family-background measure and student achievement is
statistically significant at the 1 percent level in every country in Figure 2. The size of the
estimates indicates how much students’ test scores, measured in percentage points of an
international standard deviation, increase when raising the number of books at home by one
category. For example, in England the difference in educational achievement between children
of families with more than two bookcases of books and children of families with only very few
books at home (the two extremes of the five available categories) is 1.15 standard deviations, or
more than three times what students on average learn during a whole school year.20 While the
estimated family-background effect differs substantially across countries, the socio-economic
difference equals roughly one grade-level equivalent even in France, the OECD country with the
lowest estimate. The United States falls in the top quarter of the most unequal OECD countries,
whereas Canada belongs to the group of most equal countries. By estimating the same
association in 54 countries, the study provides an index of inequality of educational opportunity
that permits comparisons of the intergenerational educational mobility across countries.
Obviously, specific country results may be sensitive to the specific background measure and
TIMSS dataset. On the other hand, analytical results on the cross-country association of
education policies with equality of opportunity are consistent when using an index of socio-
economic status as an alternative background measure and when estimated with the PISA dataset
(Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009)).
     Table 5 provides a detailed overview of studies using international tests to estimate the
association between several student background measures and educational achievement in
different countries. Education production functions that include several measures of student and
family background in a way comparable across countries have been estimated for groups of
countries in East Europe (Ammermueller, Heijke, and Woessmann (2005)), East Asia
(Woessmann (2005a)), West Europe and the United States (Woessmann (2008) using TIMSS,
Peterson and Woessmann (2007) using PISA), and Latin America (Woessmann (2010a)).
Special attention to the relative performance of students with immigration background in
different countries is given in Entorf and Minoiu (2005) and Schnepf (2007). Zimmer and Toma
(2000) and Ammermueller and Pischke (2009) focus on effects of peers’ background on student
achievement in different countries. Bedard and Dhuey (2006) and Sprietsma (2010) analyze the
effect of relative school starting age. Wolter and Coradi Vellacott (2003) look at sibling rivalry
in different countries. Jenkins, Micklewright, and Schnepf (2008) calculate measures of
between-school social segregation in different countries. In each case, these studies make use of
the cross-country structure of the data to compare the size of the association of the specific
background measure with student achievement across countries. In general, the studies find that

19
   A similar interpretation but in a different context can be seen from the use of family income to proxy behavior and
family outcomes (cf. Mayer (1997)). A similar point about the causal impact of parental education is made by
Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2005).
20
   On these tests, one grade-level equivalent equals roughly 35 percent of a standard deviation (see Schuetz,
Ursprung, and Woessmann (2008)).


                                                            15
educational achievement differs substantially by student and family background within the
separate countries, but also that there is substantial variation in the influence of families across
countries. Section 4.4 below will review studies that relate such measures of equity of
educational achievement to institutional differences in the education systems across countries.
     When estimating the association between socio-economic background and economic
achievement, the literature has been generally interested in overall associations, irrespective of
their origin. Methodologically, most of the cross-country literature on background effects so far
is thus descriptive in nature. At the same time, not much headway has been made on the
underlying causal mechanisms, such as the relative roles of nature and nurture in these
associations. However, lacking obvious reasons to assume that natural transmission differs
across countries, cross-country comparisons can be interpreted in terms of differences in the
extent to which societies achieve more or less equal educational opportunities. Differences in
the estimates across countries can thus still be correlated with different national features to
estimate relevant policy parameters (see below).
     As the studies covered in Table 6 testify, the strong association between students’ socio-
economic background and their educational achievement is also confirmed in cross-country
studies, estimated both at the country level (Lee and Barro (2001)) and at the student level
(Woessmann (2003b) using TIMSS, Fuchs and Woessmann (2007) using PISA).21 (Table 6
reports results on family backgrounds and school inputs together because most studies estimating
cross-country associations deal with both at the same time.) On more particular subjects,
Gunnarsson, Orazem, and Sánchez (2006) use variation across Latin American countries in the
LLECE test to estimate the effect of child labor on student achievement. They exploit cross-
country variation in truancy regulations to identify exogenous variation in the opportunity cost of
children’s time in a cross-country instrumental variable model. McEwan and Marshall (2004)
and Ammermueller (2007) perform decomposition analyses of the variation between two
countries to estimate the extent that family-background measures can account for achievement
difference between Cuba and Mexico and between Finland and Germany, respectively.
     For questions of specific background factors, the literature has also used more elaborate
identification techniques. For example, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) use the variation created by
national cutoff dates for school enrollment to derive exogenous variation in relative school
starting ages. The relative school starting age assigned by national cutoff date is consequently
used as an instrument for the actual relative school starting age of the students.22 Zimmer and
Toma (2000) make use of the specific structure of the SIMS study that included a one-year
follow-up to estimate value-added models when analyzing peer effects. More rudimentarily,
Woessmann (2010a) draws on retrospective reports on pre-school performance by parents in the
PIRLS study to estimate quasi-value-added models. In estimating peer effects, Ammermueller
and Pischke (2009) assume that classes within primary schools are randomly formed and



21
   Jürges and Schneider (2004) employ a two-step approach to first estimate country fixed effects and then relate
them to country-level measures in TIMSS.
22
   This strategy identifies effects of relative maturity at school entry. Leuven, Lindahl, Oosterbeek, and Webbink
(2010) is a study of the effect of absolute age at starting school. Bedard and Dhuey (2006) also indicate that the
cross-country pattern of results suggests that relative age effects may be less persistent in countries with limited
ability-differentiated learning groups during the primary grades. We will discuss the topic of tracking below.


                                                            16
accordingly employ school fixed effects estimation. They also address measurement error issues
by instrumenting the parent-reported variable by the same variable reported by the student.
     In sum, measures of student and family background prove to be key factors in international
education production functions. A significant association of students’ academic achievement
with the socio-economic background of their families is evident in all countries around the
world. The variation in this association across countries, however, suggests that differences in
education policies might be an important element in differences in equality of opportunity, a
topic to which we return below.23

4.3 School Inputs
    When moving from family to school determinants of educational achievement, the topic
most intensively researched are the inputs available in schools (Hanushek (2006)). As
exemplified in the international education production function shown in Table 4, measures of
school inputs include expenditure per student, class size, availability of instructional material,
and teacher characteristics. The studies reviewed in Table 6 reveal that in general, the cross-
country association of student achievement with resources tends to be much weaker than with
socio-economic backgrounds.

4.3.1 Evidence across Countries
    When looking across countries, the most straightforward starting point is the simple
association between the aggregate financial measure of average expenditure per student and
average achievement. Figure 3 presents the international association between cumulative
spending per student from age 6 to 15 and the average math achievement of 15-year-olds on the
2003 PISA test. Without considering the strong outliers of Mexico and Greece, there is no
association between spending levels and average achievement across countries.24 At the most
basic level, countries with high educational spending appear to perform at the same level as
countries with low expenditures.
     This picture has been evident in many other waves of the different international achievement
tests (e.g., Woessmann (2002), Section 3.2, for the 1995 TIMSS test). Furthermore, in most
cases the lack of a significant positive cross-country association between expenditure per student
and educational achievement holds up when numerous other determining factors such as family
background and school features (including instruction time) are accounted for in a regression
framework. Hanushek and Kimko (2000) and Lee and Barro (2001) perform country-level
regressions using different tests and Woessmann (2003b) and Fuchs and Woessmann (2007)

23
   While our focus is on the effects of cognitive skills, other related work has delved into cross-country differences
in participation in higher education and its relationship to family background (see, for example, Orr, Schnitzer, and
Frackmann (2008)). The transition into higher education has at the same time been shown to be closely related to
student achievement.
24
   With the two outliers, there is a weak positive association as long as other effects are ignored. Taken literally, the
full-sample association suggests that $60,000 per student in additional expenditure (a quadrupling of spending in the
low spending countries) is associated with about a half standard deviation improvement in scores. However, once a
country’s GDP per capita is controlled for, the cross-country association between student achievement and
expenditure loses statistical significance and even turns negative, suggesting that the bivariate association is driven
by the omitted factor of average socio-economic status.


                                                             17
perform student-level microeconometric regressions using TIMSS 1995 and PISA 2000,
respectively.
     As discussed above, such cross-sectional analysis has to be interpreted cautiously, even
when controlling for a large set of factors. There may be reverse causality, and unobserved
country differences – e.g., cultural traits or institutional and political factors – may be correlated
with both inputs and outcomes. As a first step to address such worries, one can look at within-
country variation over time (Table 7). By looking at changes in inputs and outcomes, one can
rule out unobserved level effects. Thus, Gundlach, Woessmann, and Gmelin (2001) calculate
changes in expenditure and achievement for individual OECD countries from 1970-1994, and
Gundlach and Woessmann (2001) for individual East Asian countries from 1980-1994.25
     The results, depicted in Figure 4, suggest that educational expenditure per student has
increased substantially in real terms in all considered OECD countries between the early 1970s
and the mid-1990s, and in all considered East Asian countries except the Philippines between the
early 1980s and the mid-1990s.26 Yet, comparing test scores over the same time intervals
suggests that no substantial improvement in average student achievement has occurred in any of
these countries. Combining the time-series evidence on resources and achievement, it is fair to
conclude that substantial increases in real school expenditure per student did not lead to
improvements in student outcomes in most of the sampled OECD and East Asian countries. In
fact, the experience of many countries is much bleaker than what had been termed the
“productivity collapse in schools” in the United States (Hanushek (1997)).27
    Apart from the aggregate expenditure measure, the cross-country variation has also been
used to analyze specific resource inputs in cross-sectional analysis (see Table 6 for details).
Expenditure per student is an encompassing measure of school inputs which considers not only
personnel costs but also material costs. But international comparisons of expenditure may be
hampered by the problem of choosing an appropriate exchange rate (Figure 3 uses conversion by
purchasing power parities). Because personnel costs make up more than three quarters of total
expenditure in nearly all countries, class size lends itself particularly well as a non-monetary
input measure for international comparisons which determines a large part of total expenditure.
However, using class size instead of expenditure per student yields the same general picture as in
Figure 3. Regression analyses that control for family background measures come to similar
results. At the country level, Lee and Barro (2001) find a positive effect of smaller student-

25
   Achievement data from the international tests at the two respective points in time are linked using U.S.
longitudinal achievement data. Increases in educational expenditure are adjusted not only for average inflation, but
also for the so-called “Baumol effect” of increasing costs in service sectors with constant productivity. Three
different approaches of calculating price deflators for the schooling sector that account for this effect are averaged in
the depiction of Figure 4. For details, see Gundlach, Woessmann, and Gmelin (2001), Gundlach and Woessmann
(2001), and Woessmann (2002), Section 3.3.
26
   Gundlach and Woessmann (2001) show that the resource expansion in the East Asian countries mostly results
from government decisions to raise the number of teachers per student.
27
   One potential explanation for this bivariate longitudinal pattern might of course be that students’ family
background might have deteriorated on average. Students may increasingly be lacking many of the basic
capabilities required for a successful education and may thus be increasingly expensive to educate. Such effects
may play a significant role in countries with a large inflow of immigrant students or with rising levels of poverty.
But on average, parents in the considered countries have been enjoying higher incomes and better education over
time, and the number of children per family has declined. Hence by the later periods, children may actually start
schooling with better basic capabilities than before. These issues, however, await thorough econometric analysis.


                                                             18
teacher ratios, but Hanushek and Kimko (2000) find no such relationship.28 However, country-
level analysis may suffer from aggregation bias (Hanushek, Rivkin, and Taylor (1996)), as Fertig
and Wright (2005) show that the probability of finding statistically significant and correctly
signed class-size effects increases with the level of aggregation. Student-level analyses that use
data on the actual size of the class of the tested students, rather than ratios of teachers to students
at some level, tend to find counterintuitive signs of the coefficient on class size that are often
statistically significant (e.g., Woessmann (2003b); Fuchs and Woessmann (2007); Table 4
above).
     The latter studies also take indicators of the shortage of instructional material, usually
reported by school principals, into account. Shortage of material tends to be negatively
associated with student outcomes. Measures of instruction time also tend to be significantly
related to achievement. By contrast, in multivariate analyses the availability of computers at
school is not related to student outcomes, and intensive computer use is negatively related to test
scores (Fuchs and Woessmann (2004)).
     In the student-level studies, measures of teacher education tend to show positive associations
with student achievement in cross-country analyses. Drawing on information from teacher
background questionnaires in TIMSS, Woessmann (2003b) finds positive associations of student
achievement with teacher experience and female gender and a negative one with teacher age. In
their country-level analysis, Lee and Barro (2001) find a positive effect of teacher salary levels.
Similarly, Woessmann (2005b) reports a significant positive coefficient on a country-level
measure of teacher salary when added to an international student-level regression. Dolton and
Marcenaro-Gutierrez (2010) pool country-level data from international tests in 1995-2006 to
show that teacher salaries – both when measured in absolute terms and relative to wages in each
country – are positively associated with student achievement, even after controlling for country
fixed effects.
     In sum, the general pattern of the cross-country analyses suggests that quantitative measures
of school inputs such as expenditure and class size cannot account for the cross-country variation
in educational achievement. By contrast, several studies tend to find positive associations of
student achievement with the quality of instructional material and the quality of the teaching
force. While these cross-country associations reveal to what extent different input factors can
descriptively account for international differences in student achievement, studies that focus
more closely on the identification of causal effects have reverted to using the within-country
variation in resources and achievement. This literature is most advanced for the estimation of
class-size effects. In the following, we discuss three approaches that have been suggested to
estimate causal class-size effects on international data: a combination of school fixed effects
with instrumental variables, a regression discontinuity approach that makes use of variation
stemming from maximum class-size rules, and a subject fixed effects approach.

4.3.2 Evidence within Different Countries
    The initial within-country studies, reviewed in Table 7, have used conventional least-squares
techniques to focus on developing countries and their comparison to developed countries, a

28
  Using country-level data for data envelopment analysis, Afonso and St. Aubyn (2006) find indications of
substantial inefficiencies in the use of teachers per student in most countries.


                                                          19
particular advantage of using international data. Relying on data from early international tests,
Heyneman and Loxley (1983) suggested that school resources tend to be more closely related to
student achievement in developing countries than in developed countries. Hanushek and Luque
(2003) did not corroborate this conclusion using the more recent TIMSS data. Michaelowa
(2001) uses the regional PASEC data to provide conventional evidence for five countries in
Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa.29
     The problem with such conventional estimates is that resources in general, and class sizes in
particular, are not only a cause but also a consequence of student achievement or of unobserved
factors related to student achievement. Many features may lead to the joint and simultaneous
determination of class size and student achievement, making class size endogenous to student
achievement. For example, schools may reduce class sizes for poorly performing students and
policymakers may design compensatory funding schemes for schools with large shares of
students from poor backgrounds (see West and Woessmann (2006) for international evidence).
In both cases, class sizes are allocated in a compensatory manner, biasing the class-size
coefficient upwards. In contrast, policymakers may also have high-performing students taught in
special small classes to support elite performance. Likewise, parents who particularly care for
the education of their children may both make residential choices to ensure that their children are
taught in schools with relatively small classes and support their children in many other ways,
leading them to be relatively high performers. In these cases, class sizes are allocated in a
reinforcing manner, biasing the class-size coefficient downwards. In short, parents, teachers,
schools, and administrators all make choices that might give rise to a non-causal association
between class size and student achievement even after controlling extensively for family
background. Conventional estimates of class-size effects may thus suffer from endogeneity bias,
the direction of which is ambiguous a priori.
     To identify causal class-size effects, two quasi-experimental strategies have been applied to
the international test data (cf. Woessmann (2005b)). The first quasi-experimental approach
draws on exogenous variation in class size caused by natural fluctuations in the size of
subsequent student cohorts of a school (similar to Hoxby (2000)). In this case, the quasi-
experiment results from the idea that natural fluctuations in student enrollment lead to variations
in average class size in two adjacent grades in the same school. Natural birth fluctuations around
the cut-off date that splits students into different grade levels occur randomly. Therefore, they
lead to variation in class size that is driven neither by students’ educational achievement nor by
other features that might jointly affect class size and student achievement.
     Woessmann and West (2006) develop a variant of this identification strategy that exploits
specific features of the TIMSS database. The sampling design of the first TIMSS study, which
tested a complete 7th-grade class and a complete 8th-grade class in each school, enables them to
use only the variation between two adjacent grades in individual schools. This strategy aims to
exclude biases from nonrandom between-school and within-school sorting through a
combination of school fixed effects and instrumental variables using grade-average class sizes as
instruments. The rationale of this approach is as follows. Any between-school sorting is
eliminated in a first step by controlling for school fixed effects, restricting the analysis solely to

29
  Using PIRLS data, Woessmann (2010a) estimates a quasi-value-added model, controlling for retrospective
information on pre-school performance, for primary-school students in two Latin American and several comparison
countries.


                                                         20
variation within individual schools. Within schools, the allocation of students to different classes
in a grade may also be non-random. Within-school sorting is filtered out in a second step by
instrumenting actual class size by the average class size in the relevant grade in each school.
Within-school variation in class size is thus used only insofar as it is related to variation in
average class size between the 7th and 8th grade of a school. The identifying assumption is that
such variation is not affected by student sorting but reflects random fluctuations in birth-cohort
size between the two grades in the catchment area of each school. Thus, causal class-size effects
are identified by relating differences in the relative achievement of students in 7th and 8th grade
within individual schools to that part of the between-grade difference in class size in the school
that reflects between-grade differences in average class size.
     Figure 5 illustrates the basic intuition behind this identification strategy for the example of
math achievement in Singapore. The top panel indicates that class-average test scores are
positively associated with class size, as is the case in most countries – likely reflecting ability
sorting of students between and within schools. The middle panel plots the achievement
difference between the 7th-grade and 8th-grade class in each school against the same grade
difference in class size, which is equivalent to including school fixed effects in a regression
framework. Overcoming effects of between-school sorting by removing any difference in
overall achievement levels between schools, the size of the positive correlation is reduced
substantially, but remains statistically significant. The reduction suggests that poorly performing
students tend to be sorted into schools with smaller classes in Singapore. The final step of the
identification strategy, illustrated in the bottom panel, additionally eliminates any effects of
within-school sorting by using only that part of the between-grade variation in actual class sizes
that can be predicted by variation in grade-average class sizes. The picture suggests that class
size has no causal effect on student achievement in math in Singapore. Rather, weaker students
seem to be consistently placed in smaller classes, both between and within schools.
     Woessmann and West (2006) implement this identification strategy in microeconometric
estimations of education production functions for 11 countries around the world.30 In line with
Figure 5, their results suggest that conventional estimates of class-size effects tend to be severely
biased. They find sizable beneficial effects of smaller classes in Greece and Iceland, but reject
the possibility of even small effects in four countries and of large beneficial effects in an
additional four countries. Additional specification tests support the identifying assumption that
students and teachers are not systematically sorted between grades within individual schools.
There are no systematic differences at all in the observable characteristics of students or teachers
between the two grades in schools in which one of the two adjacent grades has substantially
larger average class sizes than the other; there are no systematic differences in the estimated
class-size effects between expanding, stable, and contracting schools; and there are no systematic
differences in the estimated class-size effects between countries where 7th grade is the first grade
of a particular school and countries where it is not so that grade-average class sizes might have
been adjusted based on schools’ experience with the particular students.
     The basic pattern of results is corroborated by a second quasi-experimental identification
strategy based on rule-induced discontinuities. Following the study by Angrist and Lavy (1999)

30
  Additional evidence based on the same identification strategy for countries in West Europe, East Europe, and East
Asia is presented in Woessmann (2005b), Ammermueller, Heijke, and Woessmann (2005), and Woessmann
(2005a), respectively.


                                                          21
for Israel, Woessmann (2005b) exploits the fact that many countries have maximum class-size
rules that induce a nonlinear association between the number of students in a grade of a school
and average class size. In particular, the association has sharp discontinuities at multiples of the
maximum class size that can be exploited to identify variation in class sizes that is exogenous to
student achievement. The TIMSS data suggest that 10 West European school systems
implement national maximum class-size rules reasonably strictly and with enough sharpness to
enable an empirical implementation of this instrumental variable strategy.31 In all 10 countries,
results from identification by rule-induced discontinuities rule out the possibility of large causal
class-size effects in lower secondary school. The only statistically significant, but small
estimates are, again, in Iceland and, marginally, in Norway.
     Woessmann (2005b) shows that these results are robust to several specification tests. Some
models control for peer effects, in terms of the mean achievement and family background of each
student’s classmates, to exclude bias from peer sorting. Controlling for any continuous
association between grade enrollment and student achievement by adding enrollment in the
specific grade and its squared term as additional controls does not lead to substantive changes in
results. When applying the specification to a discontinuity sample of students whose grade
enrollment is within a margin of plus or minus 5 or 6 students of the rule-based discontinuities,
so that identification does not come from observations far off the discontinuities, the instrument
gets weak in about half the countries, while results remain robust in the other half. Excluding
especially large schools in each country (of a size three or four times the maximum class size)
does not lead to a substantive change in results.32
     However, as discussed by Woessmann (2005b), some reservations remain with this
regression-discontinuity identification strategy (cf. also Urquiola and Verhoogen (2009)). In
particular, intentional exploitations of the rule by systematic between- and within-school choices
might lead to remaining endogeneity in the rule discontinuity approach. Thus, it is possible that
parents and schools “play the system”: parents particularly keen to ensure low class sizes for
their children may make their enrollment decisions – and school principals their acceptance
decisions – on the basis of expected class size, and those decisions may be related to student
achievement. Still, in the end both quasi-experimental identification strategies come to a very
similar pattern of results. Moreover, the source of the potentially remaining biases differs in the
two cases, adding confidence that any remaining bias in each strategy is of second-order
magnitude.
     Both identification strategies reach the conclusion that class size is not a major force in
shaping achievement in lower secondary school in any of the countries considered. There is no
single country for which any of the specifications showed a statistically significant and large
class-size effect. In every case where one of the methods leads to a reasonably precise estimate,
a large effect size can be ruled out with considerable statistical confidence. There is only one
country, Iceland, where results create confidence that a causal class-size effects exists. However,
in both specifications the estimates are relatively small and estimated precisely enough to reject
the possibility of a large effect.


31
   The ten West European school systems that employ maximum class-size rules are: Denmark, France, Germany,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.
32
   The size of the induced discontinuity in class size is smaller when grade enrollment is larger.


                                                        22
     The unique value of cross-country research, however, lies in analyses of whether the cross-
country differences in estimated class-size effects are systematically related to underlying
features of the school systems. Such analyses can improve our understanding of the particular
circumstances under which class sizes matter or not. Although causal class-size effects are small
at best in all the countries considered, there are still differences across countries. The
international evidence shows that the estimated effect size does not vary systematically for
children from differing family backgrounds or for countries with different levels of average
achievement, economic development, average class size, or educational spending (Woessmann
and West (2006); Woessmann (2005b)). But the existence of class-size effects is systematically
associated with the salary and education level of the teaching force. In both studies, class-size
effects were detected only in countries with relatively low teacher salaries and education. The
pattern is similar within countries in which the education level of teachers varies. In these
countries, the estimated class-size effect tends to be larger in classes that are taught by teachers
with lower education. Interpreting average teacher salary and teacher education as proxies for
average teacher quality, the results suggest that relatively capable teachers do as well when
teaching large classes as when teaching small classes. By contrast, less capable teachers do not
seem to be up to the job of teaching large classes, while doing reasonably well in small classes.
Consequently, the pattern of international effect heterogeneity suggests that class-size effects
occur only when the quality of the teaching force is relatively low.
     A third approach to the identification of causal class-size effects tries to avoid bias from
non-random sorting of students by using variation within individual students. If the same student
is taught two different academic subjects in differently sized classes, the within-student between-
subject variation can be used for identification (cf. Dee (2005); Dee and West (2008)). The
inclusion of student fixed effects, implemented by differencing across subjects, effectively
excludes bias from subject-invariant student, family, and school characteristics, observable and
unobservable. Unobserved characteristics that vary by subject and are correlated with class size,
such as subject-specific fast-track or enrichment classes or teacher characteristics, could,
however, still bias this research design. Altinok and Kingdon (2009) implement this
identification strategy to estimate class-size effects in up to 45 countries using TIMSS 2003 data,
which provide test scores in math and science for each student. Their results provide little
support for class-size effects, with only few countries showing significant and sizeable positive
effects of smaller classes. Analyzing the cross-country variation in class-size effects, they
confirm that class-size effects are larger where teacher qualifications are lower, and also find
indication of larger class-size effects in developing countries.
    Beyond class-size effects, Ammermueller and Dolton (2006) use the same cross-subject
identification strategy to estimate the effect of teacher-student gender interaction in England and
the United States using TIMSS and PIRLS data. In most specifications (with the exception of
one in England), they find little evidence of a significant effect of the interaction between student
and teacher gender on student achievement. Schwerdt and Wuppermann (2009) use the same
cross-subject identification with student fixed effects to identify the effects of teaching practices
on TIMSS data in the United States. At a more descriptive level, Bratti, Checchi, and Filippin
(2008) use the PISA data to estimate the association of student achievement with cooperative and
competitive attitudes towards learning at the individual and school level.
    All in all, the international evidence on the role of school inputs in educational production
provides little confidence that quantitative measures of expenditure and class size are a major


                                                   23
driver of student achievement, across and within countries. Studies using different methods to
identify causal class-size effects consistently find no strong effects of class size in most
countries. The cross-country pattern suggests that class size is a relevant variable only in settings
with low teacher quality. Descriptive evidence suggests that measures of the quality of inputs
and, in particular, teachers are more closely related to student outcomes. However, research in
this area awaits more work to identify the underlying causal links.

4.4 Institutions
     Motivated by the poor results on school inputs, research has increasingly focused on
whether non-resource institutional features of school systems affect student outcomes. In this
topic, the particular opportunity of cross-country research comes into play: The chief advantage
of the international comparative approach stems from its ability to exploit the substantial
variation in national education policies across countries (cf. Woessmann (2007b)). By contrast,
within-country studies are usually restricted to analysis of much more limited variation in
institutional structure. Moreover, by drawing on wider and long-established institutional
variation between countries, the international approach can capture general-equilibrium effects
of institutional settings, which will not necessarily be the case when a specific educational
reform is introduced only on a small scale, or only very recently. Such long-term general-
equilibrium effects are usually the ones that economic theory stresses as being particularly
important, because persistent institutional changes will alter incentives and thus behavior. By
changing prices, available alternatives and competitive pressures for other market participants
will have effects on market outcomes beyond the people specifically treated.
     Since cross-country studies can address the most obvious issues of selection into treatment
by using average measures of institutions at the systemic level, the main challenge for the
identification of causal effects lies in unobserved country heterogeneity. Institutions may be
correlated with other, unobserved country characteristics that are related to student achievement.
While still in its infancy, several methods have been developed to address this problem, tailored
to specific worries related to each specific institution. As will be discussed below, the range
includes fixed effects for world regions to eliminate the most basic cultural differences; within-
country identification where different education systems exist within one country (holding
constant differences in language, legal structures, and cultures); differences-in-differences
models that identify effects from changes between grades within each country; and the use of
historical instruments that gave rise to arguably exogenous variation in institutional structures
today.
     The following review is structured around five institutional features that have attracted the
most attention in the international literature so far: accountability measures, school autonomy,
competition and private involvement, school tracking, and the pre-primary education system. It
closes with more explorative studies into education beyond the school level and less formal,
cultural features of societies. Table 8-10 provide details on the individual studies analyzing
institutional features. Table 8 reports evidence within different countries and the other two
tables report cross-country evidence. Given that different institutional features tend to be related
both to the level and to the equity of outcomes, Table 9 focuses on achievement levels, and Table
10 on the equity of achievement.




                                                   24
4.4.1 Accountability
     Analyses of the impact of curriculum-based external exit exam (CBEEE) systems illustrates
the unique power of international production function estimates to address important policy-
relevant issues.33 By signaling student achievement to potential employers on the labor market
and institutions of higher education, external school-leaving exams increase students’ rewards
for learning as well as parents’ scope for monitoring the education process, so that they can be
understood as an accountability devise. (See Bishop (2006) for a discussion of the underlying
theoretical concepts).
     Students in countries that have external exit-exam systems very consistently perform
significantly and substantially better on the international student achievement tests than students
in countries without external exit-exam systems (see Table 9). Using country-level data, John
Bishop has shown this for the 1991 IAEP math, science, and geography tests (Bishop (1995),
section 4), the 1991 SIRS reading test (Bishop (1999)), the 1995 TIMSS math and science tests
(Bishop (1997)), and the PISA 2000 reading, math, and science tests (Bishop (2006), section 3).
Microeconometric cross-country analyses that extensively control for family-background and
school-input factors at the student level have confirmed this result for the 1995 TIMSS tests
(Woessmann (2001, 2003b)), the 1999 TIMSS-Repeat tests (Woessmann (2003a)), the 2000
PISA tests (Woessmann (2005c); Fuchs and Woessmann (2007)), and the 2003 PISA tests
(Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009); see Table 4). Taken as a whole, the
existing cross-country evidence suggests that the effect of external exit exams on student
achievement may well be larger than a whole grade-level equivalent, or between 20 and 40
percent of a standard deviation of the respective international tests.34
     Beyond external exit exams, student achievement in PISA 2000 is also positively associated
with teachers’ monitoring of student progress by regular standardized tests (Fuchs and
Woessmann (2007)). Richer data on additional accountability mechanisms available in PISA
2003 (documented in Table 4) reveal positive associations of student achievement with
accountability measures aimed at teachers, such as internal and external monitoring of teacher
lessons, and with accountability measures aimed at schools, such as assessments used to compare
them to district or national achievement (Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009)).
     Given the cross-sectional nature of identification, possible unobserved country heterogeneity
related to the existence of external exit exams is a concern. To exclude the possibility that
external exit exams just capture general cultural features of different world regions, Woessmann
(2003a) shows that results are robust to a regional fixed effects specification that controls for
indicators of nine world regions. To ensure that the results do not capture other features of
centralization, results also prove robust to including controls for the centralization of school
curricula and textbook approval, the share of central government financing, and ethno-linguistic
fractionalization as a proxy for the homogeneity of a country’s population.


33
   We concentrate on accountability for achievement that comes through exit exams, because understanding this
topic requires analyses spanning jurisdictions with and without such institutions, making it a natural topic for use of
international assessments. Of course, many analyses of accountability systems in general have proceeded within
individual countries; see Hanushek and Raymond (2004) and Figlio and Loeb (2010).
34
   Schneeweis (2010) finds that across countries, central exit exams are negatively related to the achievement gap
between migrants and natives.


                                                             25
     Substantial cultural biases are also ruled out by the fact that the same positive association
between central exams and student achievement is found within countries where some regions
have external exam systems and other not. Such cross-regional studies exist for Canadian
provinces (Bishop (1997)), German states (Jürges, Schneider, and Büchel (2005); Woessmann
(2010b)), and U.S. states (Bishop, Moriarty, and Mane (2000). Woessmann (2010b) even shows
that the estimated size of the effect of external exit exams does not differ significantly between
the sample of German states and the sample of OECD countries. To probe causality further,
Jürges, Schneider, and Büchel (2005) apply a differences-in-differences approach to the German
TIMSS 1995 data that exploits the fact that in some secondary-school tracks, the states with
central exit exams have them in math but not in science, finding smaller but still substantial
effects.35
     Woessmann (2005c) exploits the student-level variation within each country to analyze
whether external-exam effects are heterogeneous along several dimensions in quantile
regressions and interacted specifications. Results using the TIMSS, TIMSS-Repeat, and PISA
tests suggest that the effect tends to increase with student ability but does not differ with most
family-background measures. It increases during the course of secondary education and with
regular standardized examination. Furthermore, as discussed below, the effects of external
exams are complementary to several dimensions of school autonomy.

4.4.2 Autonomy
     Another institutional feature that is sometimes argued to exert positive effects on student
outcomes is school autonomy, because local decision-makers tend to have superior information.
On the other hand, in decision-making areas where their interests are not strictly aligned with
improving student achievement, local decision-makers may act opportunistically unless they are
held accountable for the achievement of their students (see Woessmann (2005c) for a discussion
in a principal-agent framework).
     The school background questionnaires of the international tests allow deriving measures of
school autonomy in several different decision-making areas. The general pattern of results (cf.
Table 9) is that students perform significantly better in schools that have autonomy in process
and personnel decisions (Woessmann (2003b); Fuchs and Woessmann (2007); Woessmann,
Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009)). These decisions include such areas as deciding on the
purchase of supplies and on budget allocations within schools, hiring and rewarding teachers
(within a given budget), and choosing textbooks, instructional methods, and the like. Similarly,
students perform better if their teachers have both incentives and the possibility to select
appropriate teaching methods. By contrast, school autonomy in budget formation and teacher
autonomy over the subject matter to be covered in class – two decision-making areas that are
likely subject to substantial opportunism but little superior local knowledge – are negatively
associated with student achievement.
    The international evidence also points to a significant interaction of the effect of school
autonomy with the extent of accountability in the school system (as previously found in Table 4).


35
  This approach assumes that there are no spillovers between achievement in math and in science. Jürges and
Schneider (2010) find positive effects of central exit exams on student achievement, but negative effects on self-
reported student attitudes toward math, across German states.


                                                            26
In some areas, autonomy is negatively associated with student achievement in systems that do
not have external exit exams, but the association turns positive when combined with external-
exam systems. Reflecting coefficient estimates from a student-level international education
production function using the combined TIMSS and TIMSS-Repeat data, Figure 6 depicts school
autonomy over teacher salaries as one such example. School autonomy over teacher salaries is
negatively associated with student achievement in systems without external exams. However, in
line with the arguments above, the average level of student achievement is higher in systems
with external exams. But what is more, the association between school autonomy and student
achievement turns completely around in systems with external exams: Salary autonomy of
schools is positively associated with student achievement in external-exam systems. The
estimates in Figure 6 are expressed in percentages of a standard deviation on the international
test scores, suggesting that the achievement difference between the best and worst institutional
setting amounts to three quarters of a standard deviation, a huge effect compared to other
educational interventions. Evidence from PISA 2000 corroborates this interaction pattern (Fuchs
and Woessmann (2007)). Similar positive interactions between external exams and school
autonomy have also been found for such decision-making areas as school autonomy in
determining course content and teacher influence on resource funding, among others (see
Woessmann (2005c) for details).
     In light of economic theory, this pattern of results is intuitively appealing. It indicates that
local autonomy can lead to worse student outcomes if schools do not face incentives to focus
attention on these outcomes. By contrast, when external exams hold schools accountable for
student achievement, school autonomy leads to better outcomes. However, methodologically the
existing empirical evidence on school autonomy is descriptive and awaits additional work that
tries to more explicitly identify exogenous variation in school autonomy.36

4.4.3 Competition from Private Schools
     A third institutional feature that has been researched using international data is the relative
performance of publicly and privately operated schools and the competition introduced by the
latter. (For a general overview of school competition, see Hoxby (2003) and Rouse and Barrow
(2009)).
     A first approach is to estimate differences in student achievement between public and
private schools in each country, after controlling extensively for student and school background
information. The PISA school background questionnaire provides specific school-level
information on public versus private management and financing. Public school management is
defined as schools managed directly or indirectly by a public education authority or governing
board appointed by government or elected by public franchise, whereas private school
management is defined as schools managed directly or indirectly by a non-government
organization, for example churches, trade unions, or businesses. The share of public funding of
each school is reported as the percentage of total school funding coming from government
sources (at different levels), as opposed to such private contributions as fees and donations.



36
  At the level of higher education, Aghion et al. (2007) and Aghion (2008) provide descriptive evidence that
university autonomy is associated with better outcomes in terms of research rakings.


                                                           27
     Looking across all countries (Table 8), private school management tends to be positively
associated with student achievement, with a difference to publicly operated schools of 16-20
percent of an international standard deviation in the three subjects in PISA 2000 (Fuchs and
Woessmann (2007)). A similar result is found in PISA 2003 (Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz,
and West (2009)). The pattern is not uniform across countries, however, as revealed when
estimating the effect within countries (Woessmann (2009b)). Toma (1996) (see also Toma
(2005)) similarly estimates the effect of private school operation in five countries using the 1981
SIMS, noting that the positive effect of private provision is independent of whether the countries
tend to finance the schools publicly or not. Estimating the effect of private school operation in
eight countries in PISA 2000, Vandenberghe and Robin (2004) find positive effects only in some
countries, but they do not account for differences in the source of school funding. Using the
same database and distinguishing between privately operated schools that do and do not depend
on government funding, Corten and Dronkers (2006) find a positive association of the
achievement of students with low socio-economic status with private government-dependent
schools, but no significant differences between public and private-independent schools.
Dronkers and Robert (2008) find that the better performance of government-dependent private
schools can be accounted for by a better school climate.
     Using school-level variation of public-private operation in a pooled sample of countries,
Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009) find positive interactions between private
school operation and the average extent of autonomy that schools have in a country. Privately
operated schools perform better if schools in the system are autonomous in formulating the
budget and in staffing decisions, suggesting that the incentives created by parental choice of
private schools work particularly well if (private and public) schools in the system have
autonomy to respond to the parental demands. Furthermore, they show that the association of
student achievement with two measures of external accountability – the monitoring of teacher
lessons by external inspectors and assessment-based comparisons of schools to national
performance – is stronger in privately operated schools than in publicly operated schools.
Private schools may thus benefit particularly from the accountability created by external
inspection and performance comparisons with other schools.
     Given the problem of non-random selection into private versus public schools within a
country, these results based on micro-level variations within countries should be interpreted with
caution. While many features of self-selection will be held constant by the extensive family-
background controls that most of the studies contain, possible unobserved student heterogeneity
may still raise concerns of selection bias. Because issues of self-selection cancel out at the
country level, the cross-country estimation approach provides the possibility to address selection
concerns by measuring private schooling as a share at the country level. In addition, in contrast
to most within-country studies, studies that measure private-school shares at the country level are
able to capture general-equilibrium effects that may arise from private competition. If the
existence of private alternatives exerts competitive pressure on nearby public schools, both
private and public schools may perform at a higher level due to larger private shares.
Consequently, there may be important effects of private schools at the system level even if there
is no performance difference between private and public schools at the school level.
    Studies that include country-level measures of private school operation (Table 9)
consistently find a strong positive association with student achievement (see Woessmann
(2003b) for TIMSS 1995; Woessmann (2009b) for PISA 2000; and Woessmann, Luedemann,


                                                  28
Schuetz, and West (2009) for PISA 2003). At the same time, the measure of private funding
shares available in PISA is negatively associated with student achievement. This pattern is
depicted in Figure 7 and Table 4, which show that students in countries that combine relatively
high shares of private operation with relatively high shares of public funding perform highest
among the different operation-funding combinations, while students in countries that combine
public operation with private funding perform lowest. On average, the difference between the
countries at the first and ninth decile on the international distribution – 60 percentage points in
terms of private operation and 45 percentage points in terms of government funding – can
account for roughly 0.35 standard deviations in educational achievement each.
     The results point towards the importance of distinguishing between the operation and
funding dimensions of private involvement. Without public funding, poor families may be
constrained in their choices because they do not have the financial means to opt for private
schooling. In this case, public funding may help families to exert their choices in terms of
privately managed schools. The fact that public funding is positively associated with student
achievement may thus also point to positive performance effects of school choice and
competition. This line of reasoning is consistent with evidence in Woessmann (2009b) showing
that at the school level, the advantage of privately operated schools over publicly operated
schools is particularly strong in countries with large shares of public funding. It is also in line
with the finding of Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009), who show that students
in countries where public funding is equalized between privately and publicly operated schools
perform significantly better than students in countries where privately operated schools receive
less government funding than publicly operated schools. Thus, a level playing field between
public and private schools in terms of government funding may be an important ingredient for
the competitive effects of private schools to emerge.
     Beyond choice created by private schools, Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West
(2009) do not find significant associations on average of student achievement with proxies for
choice among public schools, such as the share of students in a country who do not attend their
school because it is the local school and who report that they attend their school because it is
better than alternatives. But within urban areas where there are schools to choose from, reduced
local attendance and increased choice of better schools are associated with better student
achievement. Using sub-national regional variation in PISA 2003, Sprietsma (2008) finds a
positive association of student achievement with the regional average of students reporting to
attend their school because it is known to be a good school, which is interpreted as a measure of
quality-based school choice.
     Combining German state-level data with data for OECD countries, Woessmann (2010b)
shows that the association of private school shares with student achievement is not statistically
different between the sample of German states and the sample of OECD countries. The result
suggests that the international finding is not driven by major cultural differences between
countries.
     But there are additional challenges to causal identification of the effect of private
competition. Omitted variables may be correlated with both the extent of private schooling and
student achievement, such as factors related to the demand for private schooling or institutional
or policy factors that affect its supply. Moreover, even well-controlled comparisons of countries
or regions with small and large private sectors will be biased to the extent that low-quality public
schools increase demand for private schooling as a substitute. To address these concerns, West

                                                   29
and Woessmann (forthcoming) develop an instrumental variable identification that exploits the
fact that resistance of the Catholic Church to the state schooling emerging in the 19th century has
repercussions for the size of the private school sector today. This historical source of variation
can be used as a natural experiment to identify exogenous variation in private school
competition. The instrumental-variable specification uses the share of Catholics in 1900 –
interacted with an indicator for Catholicism not being the state religion, as Catholics had no need
to opt out of the state school system if the Church could control it – as an instrument for current
private-school shares. The historical nature of the instrument allows controlling directly for any
effect that the current Catholic share has on student achievement.
     Estimating richly controlled student-level international education production functions on
the PISA 2003 data, West and Woessmann (forthcoming) confirm a significant positive effect of
the share of privately operated schools on student achievement in math, science, and reading.
The fact that the current share of Catholics, a control in some of their model, is negatively related
to student achievement suggests that distinctive cultural features of traditionally Catholic
countries are unlikely to be driving the results. The validity of the identification is additionally
corroborated by the fact that Catholic shares are historically related to lower literacy and lower
GDP per capita. To account for other possible channels through which the historical prevalence
of Catholicism might be related to student outcomes today, the models also control for current
GDP per capita and educational spending per student. Additional specification tests show that
other current outcomes that might be conceived to be related to historical Catholicism, such as
the decentralization of school policy decision-making, public social spending, and income
inequality, are in fact uncorrelated with historical Catholic shares. West and Woessmann
(forthcoming) also show that much of the positive effect of private school shares accrues to
students in public schools. This suggests that the overall effect is not simply due to privately
operated schools being more effective, but rather reflects general-equilibrium effects of private
competition. Finally, private competition is also found to reduce educational expenditure per
student in the system, so that the better educational outcomes are obtained at lower cost.
     As the overview in Table 10 shows, a topic that emerged only relatively recently in the
international literature is the question to which extent institutional features of the school systems
can account for differences in the equity (rather than level) of student achievement across
countries. A consistent pattern in this literature is that shares of privately operated schools and
shares of public funding are not only associated with higher levels of student achievement, but
also with a reduced dependence of student achievement on socio-economic background. This
has been shown both for the books-at-home indicator of family background in TIMSS and
TIMSS-Repeat (Schuetz, Ursprung, and Woessmann (2008)) and for an index of socio-economic
background in PISA 2003 (Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009), chapter 7).37 In
addition, Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009) find that a higher difference
between private and public schools in the share of government funding is negatively associated
not only with average student achievement, but also with equality of educational opportunity.




37
  Ammermueller (2005) finds a negative association of the share of private schools with his measure of equality of
opportunity, but this may be due to the fact that the model does not control for public versus private funding of
schools.


                                                          30
4.4.4 Tracking
     Another institutional feature of school systems that has been discussed mostly in terms of
the equity of student outcomes is tracking. Here, tracking is meant to refer to the placement of
students into different school types, hierarchically structured by performance. Such school
placement policies are variously called tracking, streaming, ability grouping, or selective (as
opposed to comprehensive) schooling. From a theoretical viewpoint, the effects of educational
tracking are controversial: Depending on the nature of peer effects assumed, homogeneous
classes may contribute to optimal learning situations for all students through focused curricula
and adequate progress, or weaker groups may be systematically disadvantaged if they are
separated early on.38 Countries differ widely in the age at which they first track children into
different types of schools. In the majority of OECD countries, tracking takes place at the age of
15 or 16, with no tracking until grade 9 or 10. In contrast, some countries undertake the first
tracking at the age of 10. Again, this international variation lends itself particularly well to
analyze the effects of the institutional feature of tracking (cf. Woessmann (2009a)).
     Hanushek and Woessmann (2006) develop an international differences-in-differences
approach to identify the causal effect of early tracking in a cross-country setting (cf. Table 10).
The basic idea starts with the fact that in all countries, students are taught in a uniform school
type for the first four years of schooling. Therefore, a comparison of the change in educational
inequality between 4th grade and the end of lower-secondary school between countries with and
without early tracking can provide information on possible impacts of tracking. The analysis
takes out the general level of inequality and considers only the change in inequality that occurs
after 4th grade to determine the effect of early tracking. This method basically involves an
investigation of the relationship depicted in Figure 8. The figure shows the inequality in reading
achievement in 4th grade (in PIRLS) and at age 15 (in PISA 2003) for all countries that
participated in both studies, measuring educational inequality by the standard deviation in
student test scores. The essence of the analysis is to compare the change in inequality that
occurs from primary to lower-secondary school between countries with and without educational
tracking during this period. When looking at the change between the achievement dispersion in
PIRLS and PISA, that part of the inequality measured at the end of lower-secondary school that
already existed in 4th grade is eliminated. The change is indicated by the lines that connect the
two points of each country. For countries with early tracking, solid connecting lines are used,
while dashed lines indicate countries without early tracking. It is clearly visible that nearly all
black solid lines point upwards whereas nearly all red dashed lines point downwards: In
countries with early tracking, inequality increases systematically, whereas it decreases in
countries without tracking.
     Hanushek and Woessmann (2006) confirm this graphic depiction in country-level
econometric estimates based on a differences-in-differences approach: The difference between
countries with and without early tracking is investigated in terms of the difference in inequality
between primary and lower-secondary school. The results show that early tracking
systematically increases the inequality of student achievement. In total, their analyses take into
account eight pairs of tests in primary and secondary schools, combining a total of 176 country

38
  Here we concentrate entirely on tracking that occurs between schools, i.e., where children are sorted into separate
schools. Many countries of the world, including the U.S., pursue tracking within schools but not generally across
schools. For more on within-school tracking, see Betts (2010).


                                                            31
observations. In contrast to the results on inequality, the results on achievement levels are less
clear. But there is little evidence that early tracking increases the achievement level. To the
contrary, in the most comprehensive model there is a marginally significant negative effect of
early tracking on the average achievement level. When evaluating achievement at different
percentiles of the performance distribution, not even for the best 5 percent of students is there a
positive effect of early tracking.
     While this investigation considers the dispersion of student achievement, Schuetz, Ursprung,
and Woessmann (2008) investigate the more direct measure of inequality of opportunity outlined
above: the extent to which individual student achievement depends on the family background of
the student. At a more descriptive level, the effect of early tracking on equity is identified by the
interaction of the country-level measure of early tracking with the student-level measure of
family background in a student-level model with country fixed effects. The measure of
inequality of opportunity familiar from Figure 2 above is found to be significantly smaller, the
later the tracking age of students. If tracking is postponed by four years, for example, the impact
of family background on student achievement is smaller by one quarter of the entire impact of
the family background averaged across the OECD countries. In a model without country fixed
effects, the association between early tracking and the average achievement level is statistically
insignificant and negative.
     The same association between tracking and equality of opportunity is found in a related
study using PISA 2003 data (Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009), chapter 7).
Using the Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status (ESCS) provided by the PISA study as
an alternative measure for family background, the qualitative results are the same: The
association between test scores and family background is significantly smaller, the higher the age
of first tracking. This association is depicted in Figure 9: In countries with earlier tracking, the
achievement difference between children with different socio-economic backgrounds is
considerably larger. As the figure reveals, this effect arises primarily from the fact that children
with low socio-economic status in countries without early tracking perform considerably better.
At the same time, children from families with a relatively high socio-economic status perform at
approximately the same level. Accordingly, the effect of later tracking on the average
achievement level is again positive, albeit not statistically significant.
     In terms of the equity effects, Ammermueller (2005) reports similar results for the number
of school types (rather than the age of first tracking) based on the international PIRLS and PISA
data. Waldinger (2006) uses a combination of the approach of Hanushek and Woessmann
(2006) and Schuetz, Ursprung, and Woessmann (2008) and tends to find statistically
insignificant results, but this may be largely due to limited degrees of freedom in samples of only
8-14 countries and a less informative tracking measure. Brunello and Checchi (2007) use the
international approach described here for results beyond school age, finding that tracking
increases the effect of family background on earnings in the labor market. Using a similar
approach, Schneeweis (2010) finds some indication that an index of between-school social
segregation, presumably partly caused by early tracking, is positively associated with the
achievement gap between migrants and natives across countries.
     Using system-level data, Woessmann (2010b) pools German states (most of which track
after 4th grade, but some of which track after 6th grade) with OECD countries in a sample of 42-
54 observations. Results indicate that the negative association between early tracking and the
measure of inequality of educational opportunity (the slope of the socio-economic gradient) is

                                                   32
statistically indistinguishable between the sample of German states and the sample of OECD
countries. This shows that the cross-country association cannot be accounted for by such
country-level omitted factors as differences in culture, language, or legal background.

4.4.5 Pre-primary Education System
     The fact, discussed above, that student achievement is strongly associated with family
background is suggestive of the idea that learning in the formative years before formal schooling
is important for ultimate academic achievement. Consequently, student achievement towards the
end of compulsory school is not only related to features of the school system, but also to pre-
school education (see the conceptual discussion in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov
(2006) and Blau and Currie (2006) for a general review of the empirical literature). In line with
this reasoning, Schuetz, Ursprung, and Woessmann (2008) find a positive association of student
achievement in 8th grade (in TIMSS and TIMSS-Repeat) with the usual duration of the pre-
school cycle in a country.
     Schuetz (2009) uses the individual-level information on pre-primary attendance available in
PISA 2003 to show that pre-primary attendance is positively associated with achievement at age
15 in most countries. She goes on to exploit the fact that the size of this association varies
substantially across countries. Estimating a cross-country student-level specification with
country fixed effects and interactions between individual pre-primary attendance and country-
level indicators of the quality of pre-primary education, she finds that the achievement gap
between students who did and did not attend pre-primary education is positively associated with
country-level measures of per-student spending in pre-primary education, of the share of pre-
primary institutions being privately operated, and of the training level and relative pay of pre-
primary teachers. Thus, indicators of institutions and structural quality of pre-primary education
systems can account for variation in the estimated coefficients on pre-primary attendance across
countries. While the study is descriptive in the sense that individual pre-primary attendance may
not be conditionally random, the estimators of interest are unbiased by selection decisions as
long as the selection process is the same in all countries. In this sense, under the assumption that
that enrollment in pre-primary education follows the same rules in all countries, interacted
specification can be interpreted as an international differences-indifferences approach.
    In terms of equity, using the interacted specification described above, Schuetz, Ursprung,
and Woessmann (2008) show that the association between socio-economic background and 8th-
grade student achievement is negatively related to the duration of pre-primary education in a
country. Furthermore, the thus measured equality of educational opportunity follows an inverted
U-shaped relationship with pre-school enrollment: The association between the books-at-home
measure of socio-economic background and TIMSS student achievement increases up to a pre-
primary enrollment rate of 60 percent in a country and decrease beyond that threshold. This
result pattern may indicate that initially, children who are otherwise advantaged attend pre-
primary education. Only once most of a country’s children attend pre-primary institutions does
pre-primary attendance increase equality of educational opportunity for children from lower
socio-economic backgrounds. Using a similar approach to focus on equality of educational
opportunity between native and migrant children, Schneeweis (2010) finds that the migrant
achievement gap is negatively associated with pre-primary enrollment across countries.




                                                   33
4.4.6 Additional Results
     Apart from the five institutions discussed so far – accountability, autonomy, competition,
tracking, and pre-primary system – descriptive studies have also looked beyond school age and
into less formal institutional settings of societies. Cascio, Clark, and Gordon (2008) focus on the
education system beyond the school level by observing age profiles of literacy into adulthood
using the IALS adult achievement test. They show that countries with higher university
graduation rates have larger literacy gains into adulthood. Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales
(2008) show a negative country-level association of the achievement gap between boys and girls
in PISA 2003 with several indicators of a gender-equal culture such as indices of cultural
attitudes towards women, female economic activity, and women’s political empowerment.
These suggestive findings warrant further rigorous testing.

4.5 Conclusions on the Determinants of International Educational Achievement
     The economic literature on determinants of international differences in educational
achievement has applied two main approaches. The first approach exploits the cross-country
variation for identification of cross-country associations. The second approach estimates the
same association within different countries in order to enhance understanding of whether a
factor’s importance differs systematically in different settings. Part of the existing work is
descriptive in nature, estimating the association of student achievement with certain factors after
controlling for the rich set of possible inputs into educational production available in the
international background data. But quasi-experimental work has been developed to identify
some of the underlying causal mechanisms both in the cross-country and in the within-country
approach.
     On family background and school inputs, the international results tend to mirror the existing
national evidence on educational production. Many dimensions of students’ family background
are important factors for their educational achievement. At the same time, it is hard to find
evidence of substantial positive effects of most resource inputs, in particular class sizes and
expenditure levels. Among school inputs, there is somewhat more indication of positive effects
of measures capturing teacher quality, such as (in an international setting) teacher education. A
particular opportunity of the international research is that it can unveil whether certain effects
differ systematically across countries, such as class-size effects or the equality of educational
achievement for students with different family or migration backgrounds. For example, the
international pattern suggests that significant class-size effects are only present in systems with
relatively low teacher quality. This result raises the cost-effectiveness question of whether
student achievement is best served by reducing class size or by increasing the low teacher quality
even in the countries where class-size effects are present.
     The second particular opportunity of the international research is the substantial institutional
variation that exists across countries. The international evidence on education production
functions suggests that schools matter for student outcomes, but not so much in terms of
traditional inputs. Instead the impact of schools comes through teacher quality and institutional
structures that determine incentives. Institutional features of school systems can account for a
substantial part of the cross-country variation in student achievement. In the school system,
institutions that tend to be associated with higher achievement levels include accountability
measures like external exit exams, school autonomy in process and personnel decisions (if


                                                   34
combined with accountability), private-school competition, and public financing. Later tracking,
public funding, and private operation are systematically related to the equality of student
outcomes. While some of the evidence is descriptive, convincing causal identification has been
developed that support the results on external exit exams, private-school competition, and
tracking. Also beyond the school system, institutions of the pre-school and post-school
education systems are related to international differences in educational achievement. In
particular, more extensive pre-primary education systems relate to more equalized student
achievement for children from different family and migration backgrounds, and measures of pre-
primary quality tend to be related to the size of the pre-primary effect.
     As more and more countries participate in the international tests, the opportunities grow for
future research on the determinants of international educational achievement. With the
additional variation, the international research will be able to draw on more experience with
different institutions and start to analyze additional specific features beyond the broad concepts
of institutional structures analyzed so for. There is also considerable scope for future research to
advance identification in quasi-experimental research settings. Furthermore, as more regular
tests with reasonable comparability over time become available, a panel structure of international
tests emerges that provides longitudinal information within countries. This will allow future
research to exploit educational reforms in different countries over time. A limiting factor
remains the lack of individual-level panel data in the international tests.


5. Economic Consequences of International Educational Achievement
     Turning to the economic consequences of educational achievement, the international
achievement data permit several types of studies that are impossible when relying on skill
information for a single country. First, at the individual level it is possible to investigate whether
the translation of skills into earnings differs across a range of countries. While there are many
studies of schooling and earnings within individual countries, it is impossible to make reliable
comparisons across countries without common skill measures for the different countries. And
without such comparisons, it is not possible to understand how economic institutions and market
forces affect the returns to skills. Second, it is impossible to understand fully how these same
forces enter into the determination of earnings distributions of countries. While it is possible to
trace the evolution of the income and earnings distributions over time within a country, it is very
difficult to understand how differences in the structure of the country’s economy enter into the
observed distributional outcomes. Finally, effects of labor-force skills on aggregate economic
outcomes essentially demand cross-country data so that outcomes can be related to varying
structures. Work on each of these areas is evaluated in the subsequent sections.

5.1 Cognitive Skills and Individual Labor-Market Outcomes
    Evaluating the impact of cognitive skills on individual earnings has always been difficult
because of data availability issues. Most work in earnings determination has relied just on
school attainment – in large part because individual earnings and school attainment are
frequently collected together in population censuses. Thus, for example, the world survey of
Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004) provides estimates of basic Mincer earnings functions for 98



                                                    35
separate countries.39 But it is much less common to measure both cognitive skills and labor-
market outcomes within the same survey.40 Cognitive skills are typically measured for students
in school, and thus generally before any labor-market outcomes can be observed. The most
common joint measurement of skills and wages comes from panel data that covers both
schooling periods and subsequent labor-market experiences, and these are invariably available
for just individual countries.41
     One innovation in international surveys is to sample adults of different ages instead of using
a school-based or cohort-based design. The first international survey of this type was the
International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS), a set of surveys and tests given to 20 countries
between 1994 and 1998. This focus was very different than the school-based international tests
because it considered a labor force centered survey that covered adults (age 16-65). The tests
employed were also unique, covering several functional areas including: Prose Literacy – the
knowledge and skills needed to understand and use information from texts including editorials,
news stories, poems, and fiction; Document Literacy – the knowledge and skills required to
locate and use information contained in various formats, including job applications, payroll
forms, transportation schedules, maps, tables, and graphics; and Quantitative Literacy – the
knowledge and skills required to apply arithmetic operations, either alone or sequentially, to
numbers embedded in printed materials, such as balancing a checkbook, calculating a tip,
completing an order form, or determining the amount of interest on a loan from an
advertisement. They were designed to be very practical.42
     All of the existing comparative analyses rely on data from the IALS survey (Table 11).43 By
linking labor-market outcomes to comparably measured cognitive skills, direct international
comparisons and analyses are possible.44

39
   The model of earnings determination by Mincer (1970, 1974) relates the logarithm of earnings to years of
schooling, potential experience, potential experience squared, and possibly other control variables; see equation (4)
below. The coefficient on school attainment is frequently interpreted as the rate of return to a year of schooling,
although this interpretation is challenged by Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006, 2008). In our analysis below, we
do not interpret the common estimates as a rate of return but instead simply think of them as the earnings gradient
that is associated with schooling or higher cognitive skills.
40
   We focus exclusively on cognitive skills, although others have pointed to the role of non-cognitive skills. Non-
cognitive skills, while seldom precisely defined, include a variety of interpersonal dimensions including
communications ability, team work skills, acceptance of social norms, and the like. Along such a line, Samuel
Bowles and Herbert Gintis and more recently James Heckman and his co-authors have argued that non-cognitive
skills are very important for earnings differences. The early work along these lines includes Bowles and Gintis
(1976) and Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001). This is extended in a variety of ways in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner,
and Masterov (2006) and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006). Nonetheless, no consistent international data have
been available on non-cognitive skills.
41
   Because of our focus on international comparative analyses, we do not review the work related to individual
countries. For a review of the role of cognitive skills on earnings determination within individual countries, see
Hanushek and Woessmann (2008).
42
   The tests on the IALS surveys are identified as being very practical, but they have been shown to be closely
related to the PISA scores for individuals. For individual performance on the prose literacy scale, the correlation
with PISA is 0.85 (Yamamoto (2002)).
43
   The follow-on Adult Literacy and Life Skills Survey (ALLS), conducted in 2002-06, has not been used, in part
because only five countries participated. A second follow-up by the OECD, the Programme for the International
Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC), promises an expansion of participating countries when it is initially
administered in 2011.


                                                           36
     The clearest example of the possibilities can be found in Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem
(2004). They consider a simple question of whether underlying supply and demand for skills
could explain the pattern of observed wage differentials in countries. This work was partly
motivated by an earlier study by Blau and Kahn (1996), which suggested that returns to school
attainment across countries did not reflect supply and demand conditions. Leuven, Oosterbeek,
and Ophem (2004) use the skill measures from the IALS survey for 14 countries. By comparing
the relative demand for skill categories across industries in each country to the aggregate supply
of these skill groups, they find that wage patterns are indeed consistent with a simple supply-
demand model, at least for lower and intermediate skill categories. This analysis highlights the
necessity of having cross-country information to address questions about overall economic
structures.
     The typical international study of individual earnings emulates wage determination models
employed in studies of individual economies, although here the interpretation becomes more
difficult because of concerns about quality differentials. By far the most common model of
individual earnings is the “Mincer earnings model”, which can be thought of as a specialized
form of equation (1). In this, the standard estimation model takes the form:

(4)                                y = b0 + b1S + b2 Exp + b3 Exp 2 + b4W + υ
where Exp is labor-market experience, W is a vector of other measured factors affecting incomes,
and y is labor-market earnings, typically measured in logarithms. One can think of this as
estimating equation (1) where S is simply substituted as the measure of human capital (H). But,
according to equation (2), the estimated return to a year of schooling (b1) is biased through the
correlation of S with F, A, and any omitted elements of Z; examples of such correlation would be
predicted in standard optimizing models of the choice of years of schooling (e.g., Card (1999);
Glewwe (2002)). Recognizing this, significant attention has concentrated on ability bias arising
from the correlation of school attainment with A and from other selection effects having to do
with families and ability (see Card (1999)).
     One set of typical estimates of earnings models adds test-score measures to the Mincer
model in equation (4) explicitly to control for ability differences. The international versions of
these can be found in Denny, Harmon, and Redmond (2000) and Denny, Harmon, and
O’Sullivan (2004). Their focus is largely on how inclusion of IALS test scores in equation (4)
alters the estimates of b1.
     The second issue beyond general concerns about omitted variables bias in equation (4) is
that most formulations of Mincer models assume that school quality is either constant or can be
captured by addition of direct measures of school quality such as school resources in equation
(4). One extended version is to assume that cognitive skills is a measure of school quality –
leading to estimating models that either add cognitive skills to equation (4) or interact cognitive
skills with school attainment.
     But both approaches neglect the importance of non-school influences on cognitive skills,
particularly from the family. These factors have been well documented within the literature on

44
  Other researchers have used single-country samples from IALS to investigate labor-market issues, but we do not
include them in our evaluation of the cross-country uses of the data. See, for example, Oosterbeek (1998), McIntosh
and Vignoles (2001), and Edin and Gustavsson (2008).


                                                          37
education production functions, and recognition of them provides the backdrop for the
formulation in equation (2).45 If the vector of other factors, W, in the earnings model includes
the relevant other influences on human capital from equation (2), the estimate of b1 would be
simply φγ (as long as school quality is constant).46 Unfortunately, rich information about other
determinants of skills outside of school attainment is seldom available, because this requires data
about factors contemporaneous with schooling and long before observed labor-market data are
available. While a number of ingenious approaches have been used, including for example
exploiting the common experiences of twins, it is seldom plausible to conclude that the other
factors in equation (2) have been adequately controlled, leading to the interpretation of b1 as the
combined influence of school and correlated but omitted other influences.47 As such, b1 is a
reduced-form coefficient that will give biased estimates of the potential impact from a policy
designed to change school attainment alone.
     An alternative conceptual approach is simply to take the measure of cognitive skills as a
direct measure of human capital. While this appears similar in some ways to the classic
estimation of Mincer equations except that cognitive skills (C) are employed instead of school
attainment (S), it has some potential advantages, because it implicitly subsumes the various
(unmeasured) determinants of human capital in equation (2).
     This suggests the following modification of equation (4), which is a reduced-form equation
that combines influences of cognitive factors through the channels of C and S:

(5)                             y = b0' + b1' S + b2' Exp + b3' Exp 2 + b4' W + b5' C + υ '
     In this formulation, estimation of equation (5) with the inclusion of C yields an implication
that the coefficient on S (i.e., b1' ) would reflect the impact of human capital differences that are
not captured by C.48 Yet, for the same reasons discussed previously, b1' would not be simply φγ .
It is still biased by other omitted determinants of C, such as the family, described in equation (2).
     It is important to note, nonetheless, that finding a direct effect of schooling on earnings to be
zero ( b1' = 0 ) after conditioning on cognitive skills is not the same as saying that school
attainment does not matter. It merely says that the impact of school comes entirely through the

45
   See, for example, the discussion in Hanushek (1979).
46
   While equation (2) highlights measurement error and its sources, the historical treatment has concentrated almost
exclusively on simple misreporting of years of schooling, as opposed to potential omitted variables bias from
neglecting (correlated) components of the true skill differences contained in H. See, for example, Ashenfelter and
Krueger (1994). In our context, simple survey errors in S are a relatively small part of the measurement errors and
omissions in specifying human capital.
47
   In terms of equation (2), studies using schooling and income differences of twins (see Card (1999)) assume that
school quality differences are relatively unimportant or unsystematic so that quantity of schooling, S, is the central
object. Then, if ability, family circumstances, and other factors affecting skills are relatively constant across twins,
differences in schooling can be related to differences in earnings to obtain an unbiased estimate of γ. Of course, the
key question remaining is why S differs across otherwise identical twins who presumably face identical investment
payoffs. Other instrumental variable approaches have also been introduced to deal with the endogeneity of
schooling, but they frequently will suffer if human capital evolves from non-school factors as in equation (2).
48
   Heckman and Vytlacil (2001) go further to argue that it is not possible to separate school attainment and
achievement because they are so highly correlated. The importance of this depends, however, on the specific data
samples and questions being investigated.


                                                              38
impact on cognitive skills, so that schooling that does not raise cognitive skills is not productive.
In general, the impact of school attainment is:

(6)                                        ∂y / ∂S = b1' + b5' (∂C / ∂S )
     What does this mean in an international context? First, as discussed previously, it does not
make much sense to combine the estimates of earnings models across countries, because it is
inappropriate to assume that the rate of learning during a year of school is the same across
countries. It also implies that it is difficult to compare international returns to school attainment,
since the estimated returns are dependent on country-specific elements including school quality,
the importance of other determinants of skills, and the rewards for differing levels of schooling.
     The pattern of returns to cognitive skills across countries can be seen from estimating
equation (5) for the sample of countries in the IALS survey. Hanushek and Zhang (2009)
provide estimates of b5' for 13 separate countries, which exhibit wide variation, as shown in
Figure 10. Each standard deviation of test performance is associated with almost 20 percent
higher annual earnings in the U.S. but less than 5 percent in Sweden and is actually
insignificantly different from zero in Poland. (Note, however, that the Polish survey was
conducted in 1994, and its economy had yet to adjust completely from the fall of communism).
     The IALS survey permits direct investigation of the importance of omitted factors from
equation (2) when estimating Mincer models. Obtaining unbiased estimates of the return to
school attainment within different countries has consumed considerable attention, but little work
has actually combined the determinants of achievement with the estimation of equation (4).
Figure 11 illustrates the impact on estimated schooling parameters from including information
about an individual’s family background and cohort-specific measures of health and ability.49
From this figure, it is apparent that the average returns to attainment fall significantly (from
0.071 to 0.044) while the variation across countries is also lessened considerably. These
adjustments are also more significant than is typical in the literature concerned with the
estimation of returns to schooling (Card (1999)).
     The study of substantive economic policy issues is also aided by having international data
for individuals with comparable skills. In work consistent with the discussion here, Kahn (2004)
takes cognitive skills measured by IALS test scores as a consistent measure of human capital and
focuses directly on inter-country differences in immigrants. His comparison of the labor-market
employment rates of immigrants in four different developed countries shows variations in labor-
market assimilation (that largely remain unexplained). In a second international study, Kahn
(2007) defines skill categories of workers by the IALS cognitive-skills tests in order to look at
the distributional impacts of varying employment protection laws across countries – a subject
that cannot be easily researched within countries because of the uniformity of the laws within a
country. He finds that low-skill workers are pushed from permanent jobs to temporary jobs by
more stringent employment protection laws.50

49
   One element of the analysis in Hanushek and Zhang (2009) is the adjustment of school attainment for variations in
school quality over time (for each country separately). They find that many countries have had significant changes
in quality (generally improvements in quality) over time, but the U.S. is an exception to this.
50
   Similar impacts are also seen for youth and for immigrants in the seven countries analyzed (Canada, Finland,
Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States).


                                                           39
     Finally, while it is too early to see the full range of possibilities, some individual countries
have followed earlier PISA test takers or have merged data from PISA with other existing data
such as that from country registers. These studies, because they build on either the PISA-2000 or
the PISA-2003 data and have relatively short transitions since age 15 when the students were
tested, have looked largely at school transitions and movements into first jobs.51 A common
finding of these studies is that performance on the international tests is predictive of entry into
higher education. Nevertheless, since these have been the uncoordinated work of individual
countries, there is neither consistent data outside of PISA nor any commitments to continue these
datasets into the future. Thus, these uses appear to be idiosyncratic to individual countries and
do not easily support cross-country analyses.

5.2 Cognitive Skills and the Distribution of Economic Outcomes
     One implication of the impact of cognitive skills on individual earnings is that the
distribution of those skills in the economy will have a direct effect on the distribution of income.
Cognitive skills by themselves do not of course determine the full distribution, because other
factors such as labor-market institutions, taxes, and the like enter. But the importance of skills is
becoming increasingly evident.
     Very suggestive evidence on the impact of skills on the income distribution comes from
Nickell (2004). Nickell, using the IALS data, considers how differences in the distribution of
incomes across countries are affected by the distribution of skills and by institutional factors
including unionization and minimum wages. While union coverage is statistically significant, he
concludes that “the bulk of the variation in earnings dispersion is generated by skill dispersion”
(page C11).52
     The impact of the skill distribution across countries is shown dramatically in Figure 12
which is derived from a simple comparison of the dispersion of wages and the dispersion of
prose literacy scores (each measured as the ratio of the 90th to the 10th percentile). The tight
pattern around the regression line reflects a simple correlation of 0.85 (which is not affected by
including the other institutional factors).
     There are of course many reasons to be concerned about this aggregate descriptive
comparison, and other authors have pursued more systematic analysis of the variation in earnings
using the micro data. Table 12 lists three existing studies that contrast the distribution of
earnings in the U.S. with that in one or more other countries and that employ IALS data to define
the underlying distribution of skills. Blau and Kahn (2005) provide the most comprehensive
study where the U.S. is compared to nine other countries, and earnings are decomposed
following the general approach of Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1993). They reach two general



51
   See, for example, studies in Canada (Knighton and Bussière (2006); Bushnik, Barr-Telford, and Bussière (2004)),
Denmark (Jensen and Andersen (2006); Humlum, Kleinjans, and Nielsen (2010)), and Switzerland (Bertschy,
Cattaneo, and Wolter (2009)). Follow-up data collection is also being developed in Australia and in the Czech
Republic, although analyses using these data are currently unavailable. See also the summary of databases and
analyses in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2007), p. 300.
52
   De Gregorio and Lee (2002) find a (somewhat weaker) positive association between inequality in years of
schooling and income inequality.


                                                          40
conclusions that provide a useful link to the previous analyses of earnings determination.53 First,
variations in cognitive skills are indeed a component of the observed earnings distribution,
explaining 3-13 percent of variations in earnings depending on gender and the specific
distributional measure, but they are not the dominant determinant. Second, differences in prices,
i.e., the rewards to differences in skills, explain a considerably larger part of the observed
variation: 28-55 percent.
     The results of the decomposition into skills and prices by Blau and Kahn (2005) are
consistent with the relatively small explanatory power of skills in the more restricted analyses of
Freeman and Schettkat (2001) and Devroye and Freeman (2001) and lead to questions about how
to interpret Figure 12. The argument of Nickell (2004) is that skill distributions and not labor-
market institutions are the dominant determinant of earnings variations, but this conflicts with
the analyses of micro data from the same survey.
     The reconciliation of Figure 12 with the micro analyses is straightforward at one level. The
results from the previous section described differences in returns to cognitive skills and school
attainment (Figures 10 and 11). These prior results show vividly that the prices of skills vary
widely across countries. Moreover, there is a strong positive association of the estimated returns
for cognitive skills in Figure 10 and the magnitude of test-score inequalities in Figure 12. Thus,
the skill differences and the price differences reinforce each other to yield that almost linear
relationship of skill variations and earnings variations in Figure 12.
     The deeper question revolves around what aspects of labor markets lead to these price
differences, which in turn appear so important in explaining earnings distributions. The analysis
of Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem (2004) focused on how the relative supplies and demands for
skills were key, while Blau and Kahn (2005) suggest that other institutional features of the labor
markets may be as important if not more important.54 Moreover, the variations in skills
themselves may feed back into the character of the labor market and the observed skill prices.
     These analyses underscore the value of expanding the international component of various
investigations of labor markets. The role of supply and demand conditions, of market
institutions, and of governmental policy in determining skill prices and distributional issues
remains a rather open and fertile ground for further investigation – and it has obvious
ramifications for a variety of actively discussed governmental policies.

5.3 Cognitive Skills and Macroeconomic Growth
     Macroeconomists have long been interested in the factors that contribute to the growth of
nations. Economists have considered the process of economic growth for much of the last 100



53
   A third conclusion of Blau and Kahn (2005) is the suggestion that a significant effect of school attainment (while
also conditioning on cognitive skills) in their statistical analysis introduces some question about the use of cognitive
skills as the only index of human capital as done by Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem (2004).
54
   Note that Nickell (2004) attempted to address the issue of other institutional features with simple cross-country
regressions that added unionization and minimum-wage restrictions and concluded that it was just the skill
distribution that was important. In the formulation of Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem (2004) or of Blau and Kahn
(2005), however, the linear model would be inappropriate since the returns to skills are themselves a function of
features of the labor market, including possibly the employment restrictions.


                                                             41
years, but most studies remained as theory with little empirical work.55 Over the past two
decades, economists linked analysis much more closely to empirical observations and in the
process rediscovered the importance of growth.
    Human capital has been a central focus of much of the recent growth modeling, and it is a
standard element of any empirical work. The empirical macroeconomic literature focusing on
cross-country differences in economic growth has overwhelmingly employed measures related to
school attainment, or years of schooling, to test the predictions of growth models.56 Initial
analyses employed school enrollment ratios (e.g., Barro (1991); Mankiw, Romer, and Weil
(1992); Levine and Renelt (1992)) as proxies for the human capital of an economy. An
important extension by Barro and Lee (1993, 2001) was the development of internationally
comparable data on average years of schooling for a large sample of countries and years, based
on a combination of census and survey data.
     The vast literature of cross-country growth regressions has tended to find a significant
positive association between quantitative measures of schooling and economic growth.57 But,
average years of schooling are a particularly incomplete and potentially misleading measure of
education for comparing the impacts of human capital on the economies of different countries. It
implicitly assumes that a year of schooling delivers the same increase in knowledge and skills
regardless of the education system. For example, a year of schooling in Peru is assumed to
create the same increase in productive human capital as a year of schooling in Japan.
Additionally, this measure assumes that formal schooling is the primary (sole) source of
education and, again, that variations in non-school factors – such as included in equation (2) –
have a negligible effect on education outcomes and human capital. This neglect of cross-country
differences in the quality of education and in the strength of family, health, and other influences
is probably the major drawback to employing such attainment measures of schooling. It also
highlights the potential role for using the international data on cognitive skills described in
section 3 above.
     The empirical inconsistencies arising from explaining growth with school attainment are
well-described in Pritchett (2004, 2006). In simplest terms, positive trends in schooling
attainment around the world and especially in developing countries have not been matched by
changes in growth rates, suggesting problems with either the underlying conceptual model or
with the measurement of human capital.

5.3.1 Aggregate Measures of Cognitive Skills
     A clear way to deal with the human capital measurement issues is to introduce information
from the international achievement tests, paralleling the use of the cognitive-skills measures in
the IALS surveys in analyzing patterns of earnings determination. There are two issues that are

55
   For an account of the historical development, see Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004). The associated empirical work
concentrated on within-country analyses such as Solow (1957), Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), or Denison (1985).
A concise review of alternative models and the associated empirical testing can be found in Hanushek and
Woessmann (2008).
56
   The earliest studies used adult literacy rates (e.g., Azariadis and Drazen (1990); Romer (1990)) but these data
cover a limited number of countries and are error prone.
57
   For extensive reviews of the literature, see, e.g., Topel (1999), Temple (2001), Krueger and Lindahl (2001),
Sianesi and Van Reenen (2003), and Pritchett (2006).


                                                          42
important in developing suitable data for macroeconomic analyses. First, each of the testing
situations is a separate activity with no general attempt to provide common scaling. Second, the
relevant feature for considering growth is clearly the skills of the labor force of a nation, but the
international tests described previously provide data on the current school population.
    The aggregation of prior test information to create a composite for each country involves
empirical calibration.58 To understand the basic approach, we sketch the approach in Hanushek
and Woessmann (2009a) that was used to produce the score aggregates in the final column of
Table 3 and that enters into several of the recent cross-country analyses.59
     As shown in Table 1, there are data from international student achievement tests on twelve
major international testing occasions before 2005. The individual testing situations contain
separate tests in different subjects and at different age groups. These testing occasions yield 36
separate test-subject-age observations, each providing internationally comparable performance
data for between 11 and 45 participating countries. Most of the tests were conducted by the IEA,
with the exception of the OECD-conducted PISA tests. Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a)
describe in detail a methodology for making the separate testing data comparable, which we
sketch here.
     The methodology involves adjusting both the level of test performance and the variation of
test performance through two data transformations. Because the United States has both
participated in all of the international tests and has maintained its own longitudinal testing (the
National Assessment of Educational Progress, or NAEP), the U.S. international performance
over time can be calibrated to this external standard – thus benchmarking each of the separate
international tests to a comparable level. This provides a relative comparison of countries taking
each test over time, but it is also necessary to establish the variance on the tests so that direct
compatibility of countries taking different tests can be established. The calibration of the
dispersion of the tests relies on holding the score variance constant within a group of countries
with stable education systems (defined in terms of secondary school attendance rates) over time.
For this, Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a) use the thirteen OECD countries who had half or
more students completing upper secondary education around the beginning of international
testing in the 1970s as the “stable” country group, and standardize variances to their group
performance on the 2000 PISA tests.
    These two normalizations of the separate test data provide the basis for comparing and
aggregating the available test data. The simple average of the transformed mathematics and
science scores over all the available international tests in which a country participated provides
the most straightforward combination of the data. The test instruments yield a total of 77
countries, indicated in the final column of Table 3, that have ever participated in any of the



58
   Empirical scaling as described here relies upon information about the overall distribution of scores on each test to
compare national responses. This contrasts with the psychometric approach to scaling that calls for calibrating tests
through use of common elements on each test. More recent testing, such as the PISA tests by the OECD, are
constructed so that they can be consistent over time through using common questions to link tests in different years.
A few of the available studies use data from a single testing occasion and thus do not have to aggregate scores; see
Lee and Lee (1995), Coulombe, Tremblay, and Marchand (2004), and Coulombe and Tremblay (2006).
59
   This construction builds on earlier attempts to develop consistent aggregates as found in Hanushek and Kimko
(2000) and Barro (2001). Altinok and Murseli (2007) present a different approach but the details are unclear.


                                                             43
twelve international student achievement tests in mathematics and science through 2003.60 We
scale scores to a mean of 500 with a student-level standard deviation of 100 among the OECD
countries (the same scale currently used by PISA).
     This procedure of averaging performance over a forty year period is meant to provide a
consistently measured proxy for the educational performance of the whole labor force, because
the basic objective is not to measure the skills of students but to obtain an index of the skills of
the workers in a country. If the quality of schools and skills of graduates are roughly constant
over time, this averaging is appropriate and uses the available information to obtain the most
reliable estimate of skills. If on the other hand there is changing performance, this averaging will
introduce measurement error of varying degrees over the sample of economic data. (The analysis
in Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a) shows some variation over time, but its importance will
clearly depend on the analytical approach and questions – a subject discussed below).
     The precise scaling on the transformed metric is of course subject to considerable noise, in
particular for the early tests and for countries performing far below the international mean. The
tests are usually not developed to provide reliable estimates of performance in the tails of the
achievement distribution, which would be relevant for very poorly performing countries.
However, the rough pattern across countries of overall performance should not be severely
affected by the re-scaling.

5.3.2 Evidence on the Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic Growth
     Empirical analyses building on aggregate measures of cognitive skills have reached
dramatically different conclusions than most of the prior growth analysis built on school
attainment measures of human capital. Table 13 displays the range of studies that have
considered the impacts of cognitive skills. On the whole, these contributions to empirical growth
research demonstrate that better measures of human capital alter the assessment of the role of
education and knowledge in the process of economic development dramatically.
     Using the data from the international student achievement tests through 1991 to build a
measure of labor force quality, Hanushek and Kimko (2000) – first released as Hanushek and
Kim (1995) – find a statistically and economically significant positive effect of the cognitive
skills on economic growth in 1960-1990 that dwarfs the association between quantity of
schooling and growth.61 Thus, even more than in the case of education and individual earnings,

60
   The latest rounds of PISA results, conducted in 2006 and released in December 2007 and in 2009 for release in
December 2010, are not contained in our aggregations which were developed to analyze growth over the 1960-2000
period. There are five countries participating in PISA 2006 that had never participated on a previous international
test. Likewise, the 2006 round of the PIRLS primary-school reading test includes three additional participants
without prior international achievement data.
61
   Their estimates employ a statistical model that relates annual growth rates of real GDP per capita to the measure
of cognitive skills, years of schooling, the initial level of income, and a wide variety of other control variables
(including in different specifications the population growth rates, political measures, openness of the economies, and
the like). Hanushek and Kimko (2000) find that adding the international achievement test measures to a base
specification including only initial income and educational quantity boosts the variance in GDP per capita among
the 31 countries in their sample that can be explained by the model from 33 to 73 percent. The effect of years of
schooling is greatly reduced by including cognitive skills, leaving it mostly insignificant in alternative
specifications. At the same time, adding the other factors leaves the effects of cognitive skills basically unchanged.
Their basic formulation is also applied in much of the work described below.


                                                            44
ignoring differences in cognitive skills very significantly misses the true importance of education
for economic growth. Their estimates suggest that one country-level standard deviation higher
test performance would yield around one percentage point higher annual growth rates. (The
country-level standard deviation is roughly equivalent to half of the individual-level standard
deviation on the PISA scale).
     Table 13 provides short descriptions of the array of currently available models of cognitive
skills and economic growth. This area is rapidly expanding, but it is valuable to assess where it
currently stands.
     The most current picture in Hanushek and Woessmann (2008, 2009a) expands the
international student achievement tests from 31 countries in Hanushek and Kimko (2000) to 50
countries and uses more recent data on economic growth that extends the modeling to the longer
time period (1960-2000).62 The basic result is reported in column (2) of Table 14 and depicted
graphically in Figure 13. After controlling for the initial level of GDP per capita and for years of
schooling, the test-score measure of math and science skills features a statistically significant
effect on the growth in real GDP per capita for 1960-2000.63 According to this specification, test
scores that are larger by one standard deviation (measured at the student level across all OECD
countries in PISA) are associated with an average annual growth rate in GDP per capita that is
two percentage points higher over the whole 40-year period. This quantitative result is virtually
identical to that in Hanushek and Kimko (2000).
     When cognitive skills are added to a model that just includes initial income and years of
schooling (column (1) of Table 14), the share of variation in economic growth explained by the
model (the adjusted R2) jumps from 0.25 to 0.73. As shown in the top of Figure 14, quantity of
schooling is statistically significantly related to economic growth in a specification that does not
include the measure of cognitive skills, but the association between years of schooling and
growth turns insignificant and its marginal effect is reduced to close to zero once cognitive skills
are included in the model (see the bottom of Figure 14). In other words, school attainment has
no independent effect over and above its impact on cognitive skills. The result remains the same
when the measure of years of schooling refers to the average between 1960 and 2000, rather than
the initial 1960 value (column (3) of Table 14). In the different specifications, there is evidence
for conditional convergence in the sense that countries with higher initial income tend to grow
more slowly over the subsequent period.
     Several intervening studies have since found very similar results (see Table 13). Another
early contribution, by Lee and Lee (1995), found an effect size similar to Hanushek and Kimko

62
   While more countries have test data, fifty are included in the analyses of economic growth. Twenty-five countries
are not included in the growth database due to lack of data on economic output or because they drop out of the
sample for a standard exclusion criterion in growth analyses (fifteen former communist countries, three countries for
which oil production is the dominant industry, two small countries, three newly created countries, and two further
countries lacking early output data). Two further countries (Nigeria and Botswana) turn out to be strong outliers in
the growth regressions and are therefore dropped from the sample (see Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a)). The
source of the income data is version 6.1 of the Penn World Tables (cf. Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002)), and the
data on years of schooling is an extended version of the Cohen and Soto (2007) data which is developed from Barro
and Lee (1993, 2001).
63
   Another recent set of international tests has focused on reading. While the reliability of these measures is an
issue, consideration of them in addition to or instead of the math and science tests does not change the basic results
(see Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a)).


                                                            45
(2000) using data from the 1970-71 First International Science Study on the participating 17
countries, also leaving quantitative measures of education with no significant effect on growth.
Using a more encompassing set of international tests, Barro (2001) also finds that, while both the
quantity of schooling and test scores matter for economic growth, measured cognitive skills are
much more important. Employing the measure of cognitive skills developed by Hanushek and
Kimko (2000) in a development accounting framework, Woessmann (2002, 2003c) finds that the
share of cross-country variation in levels of economic development attributable to international
differences in human capital rises dramatically when cognitive skills are taken into account.
Building on Gundlach, Rudman, and Woessmann (2002), this work analyzes output per worker
in 132 countries in 1990. The variation that can be attributed to international differences in
human capital rises from 21 percent to 45 percent once the international achievement measures
are taken into account, and to over 60 percent in samples with reasonable data quality.
     Extensions of the measure of Hanushek and Kimko (2000) and its imputation in Woessmann
(2003c) are also used in the cross-country growth regressions by Bosworth and Collins (2003)
and in the cross-country industry-level analysis by Ciccone and Papaioannou (2009). Both also
find that measured cognitive skills strongly dominate any effect of schooling quantity on
growth.64 Coulombe and Tremblay (2006) use test-score data from the International Adult
Literacy Survey (see Section 5.1 above) in a panel of 14 OECD countries, confirming the result
that the test-score measure outperforms quantitative measures of education.65 Jamison, Jamison,
and Hanushek (2007) extend the Hanushek and Kimko (2000) analysis by using the mathematics
component of the transformed and extended tests in Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a),
replicating and strengthening the previous results by using test data from a larger number of
countries, controlling for a larger number of potentially confounding variables, and extending the
time period of the analysis. Using the panel structure of their growth data, they suggest that
cognitive skills seem to improve income levels mainly though speeding up technological
progress, rather than shifting the level of the production function or increasing the impact of an
additional year of schooling.66
     The collection of existing studies strongly suggests that cognitive skills are closely related to
the long-run growth rates for countries. While there is some variation, the existing studies also
indicate a consistency in the quantitative magnitude of effects. Simulation exercises show that
this magnitude means that relatively small improvements in the skills of a nation’s labor force
can have very large effects on long-run economic well-being (Hanushek and Woessmann
(2010a)).




64
   Note that Bosworth and Collins (2003) cannot distinguish the effect of cognitive skills from the effect of quality
of government institutions. The analysis in Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) shows, however, that they can be
separated when we use our new measure of cognitive skills that also extends the country sample by several
additional data points on international test scores.
65
   Additional details of this study can be found in Coulombe, Tremblay, and Marchand (2004).
66
   A novel element of the work by Jamison, Jamison, and Hanushek (2007) is investigation of the impact of
cognitive skills on changes in health outcomes across countries, which can be taken as another indicator of the
welfare on nations. They find that cognitive skills have a strong impact on the decline of infant mortality rates.


                                                             46
5.3.3 Causation in a Cross-Country Framework
     Work on cross-country growth analysis has been plagued by legitimate questions about
whether any truly causal effects have been identified, or alternatively whether the estimated
statistical analyses simply pick up a correlation without causal meaning. Perhaps the easiest way
to see the problems is early discussion of how sensitive estimated growth relationships were to
the precise factors that were included in the statistical work and to the country samples and time
periods of the analyses (Levine and Renelt (1992); Levine and Zervos (1993)). The sensitivity of
the estimated models provided prima facie evidence that various factors were omitted from many
of the analyses.
     Whether or not the impact of cognitive skills is a causal relationship is indeed a very
important issue from a policy standpoint. It is essential to know that, if a country managed to
improve its achievement in some manner, it would see a commensurate improvement in its long-
run growth rate. Said differently, if the estimates simply reflect other factors that are correlated
with test scores, a change in test scores may have little or no impact on the economy (unless the
other factors also changed). Indeed, analysis of prior estimates of school attainment have been
identified as possibly reflecting reverse causality; i.e., improved growth leads to more schooling
rather than the reverse (Bils and Klenow (2000)).
     It is difficult to develop conclusive tests of causality issues within the limited sample of
countries included in the analysis. Nonetheless, Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a) provide
initial analyses of the issue of causality between cognitive skills and growth. That study pursues
a number of different approaches to ruling out major factors that could confound the results and
that could lead to incorrect conclusions about the potential impact. While none of the
approaches addresses all of the important issues and while each approach fails to be conclusive
for easily recognized reasons, the combination of approaches eliminates a number of common
concerns about the identification of a causal relationship.
     First, in an extensive investigation of alternative model specifications, different measures of
cognitive skills, various groupings of countries, and specific sub-periods of economic growth,
the consistency of the alternative estimates – both in terms of quantitative impacts and statistical
significance – indicate a robustness of estimates that is uncommon to most cross-country growth
modeling. These specifications consider the timing of tests and growth in detail.67 To tackle the
most obvious reverse-causality issues, one specification separates the timing of the analysis by
estimating the effect of scores on tests conducted until the early 1980s on economic growth in
1980-2000. In this analysis, available for a smaller sample of countries only, test scores pre-date
the growth period. Results are even stronger than using the measure based on all tests.68 In
addition, reverse causality from growth to test scores is also unlikely because of the results of
education production functions, discussed above, that indicate additional resource in the school


67
   For example, Ramirez, Luo, Schofer, and Meyer (2006) suggest that if one looks at the recent period (1980-2000)
and also drops the East Asian countries, math and science is no longer significant. However, Hanushek and
Woessmann (2009a) show that the coefficient on test scores is virtually the same in their basic results as when the
sample is restricted to 1980-2000 and dropping East Asian countries. Their study, which relies on the cognitive
skills measures from Hanushek and Kimko (2000), is likely to suffer from a combination of measurement issues and
small sample problems.
68
   Similarly, the studies by Altinok (2007) and Appleton, Atherton, and Bleaney (2008) use initial test scores to
predict subsequent growth in a panel framework, confirming significant growth effects of cognitive skills.


                                                          47
system (which might become affordable with increased growth) do not relate systematically to
improved test scores.
     The only substantial effect on the estimates is the inclusion of various measures of economic
institutions (security of property rights and openness of the economy). Including measures of
economic institutions, suggested for example by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005), does
lead to a reduction in the estimated impact of cognitive skills by about one third. However, as
Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004) argue, there is a good case that human
capital causes better institutions as opposed to the opposite. Thus, one could consider the
estimate with institutional measures as a lower bound on any achievement effects. This estimate
remains highly significant and very substantial. Furthermore, in the sample of OECD countries,
where there is more limited variation in these broad institutions, the reduction is much smaller at
15 percent, and the institutional measures do not enter significantly.69
     Second, an instrumental variable specification traces the impact on growth of just the
variations in achievement that arise from the previously identified institutional characteristics of
each country’s school system (exit examinations, autonomy, and private schooling).70 This
estimated impact is essentially the same as reported in the OLS regressions, lending support both
to the causal impact of more cognitive skills and to the conclusion that schooling policies can
have direct economic returns.
     Third, one major concern is that countries with good economies also have good school
systems – implying that those that grow faster because of the basic economic factors also have
high achievement. To deal with this, immigrants to the U.S. who have been educated in their
home countries are compared to those educated just in the U.S. Since it is the single labor
market of the United States, any differences in labor-market returns associated with cognitive
skills cannot arise because of differences in the economies of their home country. Looking at
labor-market returns, the cognitive skills seen in the immigrant’s home country lead to higher
incomes – but only if the immigrant was educated at home. Immigrants from the same home
country schooled in the U.S. receive no return to home-country quality. This difference-in-
differences approach rules out the possibility that test scores simply reflect cultural factors or
economic institutions of the home country.71 It also provides further support to the potential role
of schools to change the cognitive skills of citizens in economically meaningful ways.
    Finally, perhaps the toughest test of causality is reliance on how changes in test scores over
time lead to changes in growth rates, thereby eliminating possible bias from any time-invariant
country-specific economic and cultural factors. Figure 15 relates the gains in test scores over


69
   Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) also find a positive interaction between cognitive skills and institutional
measures, suggesting that good institutional quality and good cognitive skills can reinforce each other in advancing
economic development.
70
   The statistical analysis employs an instrumental variable strategy that relies upon changes in achievement induced
by school structure. Its major limitation is that the instruments tend to be weak, given the small number of countries
that is included.
71
   Two potential problems arise in this analysis. First, it just looks at labor-market returns for individuals and not the
aggregate impact on the economy of achievement differences. Second, those who migrate at a young enough age to
be educated in the U.S. might differ from those who migrate at later ages; while effects of the migration age that are
the same across countries are held constant in the regression, cross-country differences in age-migration patterns that
are related to the quality of the home-country education system would affect the results.


                                                              48
time to the gains in growth rates over time, revealing a consistent and strong positive
association.72 As with the other approaches, this analysis must presume that the pattern of
achievement changes has been occurring over a long time, because it is not the achievement of
school children but the skills of workers that count. Nonetheless, the consistency of the patterns
and the similarities of magnitudes of the estimates to the basic growth models is striking (see
Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a)).
     Again, each approach to providing a deeper look at the issue of causation is subject to some
real uncertainty. The simple conclusion from the combined evidence is that differences in
cognitive skills lead to economically significant differences in economic growth. Nonetheless,
further investigations of the causal structure of growth relationships provide an obvious field for
further research. The approach in Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a) is to employ standard
microeconomic approaches to the investigation of causation in the context of cross-country
models. Alternative approaches could provide additional information. Similarly, expanded data
samples or different model specifications may prove useful.

5.3.4 Expanding Country Samples by Regional Tests from Developing Countries
     A limiting factor in some of the prior analyses is the size of the samples, which in turn is
dictated by past participation in the international testing programs. This issue is especially
important when looking at developing countries and at different economic regions of the world.
Latin America, for example, has been a perennial concern because of its low growth and its
inability to show continued development, but Latin American countries are very lightly
represented in the prior testing programs.
     While progress has been made, disappointment has been growing with Latin American
development strategies built on schooling because expansion of school attainment has not
guaranteed improved economic conditions (Easterly (2001)). In 1960, adult school attainment in
Latin America was surpassed only by OECD countries and was significantly ahead of East Asia,
Sub-Saharan Africa, and the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. Still, economic
growth in Latin America since 1960 has lagged so much behind growth in East Asia and MENA
that Latin American income per capita, which was considerably above the other three regions in
1960, has by now been overtaken by East Asia and MENA, leaving only Sub-Saharan Africa
behind.
    The poor growth performance of Latin America despite its relatively high initial schooling
level remains a puzzle by conventional thinking. While economic research on Latin American
growth has given much attention to institutional and financial factors (e.g., Edwards, Esquivel,
and Márquez (2007) or Fernández-Arias, Manuelli, and Blyde (2005)), the basic puzzle remains
unresolved.


72
   Only 12 OECD countries have participated in international tests over a long enough period to provide the
possibility of looking at trends in test performance over more than 30 years. The analysis simply considers a
regression of test scores on time for countries with multiple observations (allowing for student age and subject of
tests). The trends in growth rates are determined in a similar manner: annual growth rates are regressed on a time
trend. The plot provides the pattern of slopes in the test regression to slopes in the growth-rate regression.
Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a) consider more complicated statistical relationships, but the overall results hold
up.


                                                           49
    To compare countries within the region, Hanushek and Woessmann (2009b) make use of
regional measures of cognitive skills that were designed specifically for Latin American
countries. Regional achievement tests from the Laboratorio Latinoamericano de Evaluación de
la Calidad de la Educación (LLECE) were conducted in 1997 and in 2006 (see Table 2).
Together, the two tests cover all sixteen Latin American countries usable in analyses of national
growth, which is an important expansion compared to the seven Latin American countries that
ever participated in a worldwide test. Neither of the two tests is perfect for such analyses,
because they measure performance just in early grades and because both are very recent.
Nonetheless, these regional tests offer the possibility of explaining the large differences in
growth among the countries of Latin America.
     Their results using the regional test data support the important role of cognitive skills in
understanding Latin American growth. These test scores are statistically and quantitatively
significant in predicting economic growth differences in intra-regional growth regressions. They
increase the explanatory power of standard growth models considerably and render the effect of
years of schooling insignificant. Also in Latin America, schooling appears relevant for
economic growth only insofar as it actually raises the knowledge that students gain as depicted in
tests of cognitive skills.
    Hanushek and Woessmann (2009b) also splice the regional test information into the
worldwide tests discussed above. Results of the worldwide regressions extended to 59 countries
confirm the consistent effect of cognitive skills. They can even resolve the Latin American
growth puzzle: The poor growth performance of Latin American countries can be fully
accounted for by their poor performance on student achievement tests.
     This analysis suggests that an even wider set of student assessments – those included in
Table 2 – can be usefully employed to understand fundamentals of the aggregate economies.
The expansion of sampling, in this case to regional economies with limited participation in past
tests, permits more detailed analysis than previously possible.
     While part of the sampling problem is automatically being dealt with through the continued
expansion from new countries added to the PISA and TIMSS programs, other issues of the
appropriateness of those tests and of the ancillary survey data suggest that these other data sets
should not be neglected. For example, sub-Saharan Africa is only minimally included in prior
testing. Furthermore, the worldwide tests may simply be too difficult for the typical student in
many countries in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. Because test efficiency requires the
international assessments to focus testing time on discriminating performance in the vicinity of
the international mean, there may not be sufficient test questions that reliably distinguish
performance at the level of many developing countries. This limits the power of these tests in
discriminating performance at low levels and makes intra-regional comparisons in these regions
unreliable. Splicing regional tests into the worldwide tests therefore provides a viable option to
expand international analysis to countries far below the mean of OECD countries.73




73
  The value of regional testing programs could also be expanded substantially by ensuring that the assessments
included specific linking questions with PISA and/or TIMSS. This practice would permit each country to ascertain
where it stands in the world achievement rankings.


                                                         50
5.3.5 Basic Skills, Top Performance, and Growth
     The modeling efforts to date have concentrated most attention on mean achievement and on
the implications of overall differences in human capital. However, this sidesteps important
questions facing education officials in many countries. Some argue in favor of elitist school
systems which focus on the top performers as potential future managers of the economy and
drivers of innovation. This approach, for example, appears to match the historic policies of
India, with a set of premier engineering schools coexisting with a large illiterate population.
Others favor more egalitarian school systems to ensure well-educated masses that will be capable
of implementing established technologies. This approach would coincide with development
policies such as the Education for All initiative (UNESCO (2005)) that concentrate on raising the
skills of all to minimal levels. Do these choices have a discernible effect on aggregate economic
performance?
     To capture these differences in the distributional patterns of the test-score performance in
different countries, Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a) use the micro data from each of the
international assessments to calculate measures of the share of students in each country who
reach at least basic skills as well as those who reach superior performance levels. Specifically,
they use performance of at least 400 test-score points on the PISA international scale – one
standard deviation below the OECD mean – as the threshold of basic literacy and numeracy and
one standard deviation above the OECD as the measure of superior performance. They then
employ these alternative measures of skill distribution instead of mean performance in their
cross-country growth models.
     Their analysis suggests that both measures of the test-score distribution are significantly
related to economic growth, either when entered individually or jointly. Both the basic-skill and
the top-performing dimensions of educational performance appear separately important for
growth.
     These early results, however, still leave open a series of analytical and policy questions. For
example, while these models indicate the relative impacts of improving the different levels of
performance, policies built upon these would have to use other information about the costs or
feasibility of changing people at the different skill levels.

5.3.6 IQ Models
     An alternative perspective is that IQ differences among nations are driving the results
described previously. The potential difference from the preceding analysis is the common view
that IQs are fixed and not subject to schooling or environmental influences. If true, this would
suggest both that IQ measures might more accurately represent the relevant cognitive skills and
the analytics of them might be less prone to the types of identification issues discussed. This
fixed-factor view, often related to ideas of the high degree of heritability of IQs, of course is not
the uniform view of researchers in the area. Indeed, in the economics literature, Goldberger and
Manski (1995) and Heckman (1995) have clear analyses showing that families and schools have




                                                    51
strong effects on measured IQ.74 Thus, the most reasonable interpretation of IQ studies is that
they apply an alternative measure of cognitive skills to the international assessments previously
described.
     All studies of the economic impacts of IQ are based on the international IQ scores compiled
by Lynn and Vanhanen (2002, 2006).75 They have assembled data from specific national
samples using a variety of measurement instruments. The earliest work by Weede and Kämpf
(2002) mimics that of the work described previously (see Table 15). Similar to the analyses of
cognitive skills, IQ differences have a strong and significant effect on growth rates even allowing
for differences in school attainment. Jones and Schneider (2006) provide a series of robustness
analyses, similar to Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhofer, and Miller (2004) with the addition of the Lynn
and Vanhanen (2002) measures of IQ. They demonstrate that the IQ has a strong predictive
power with economic growth. They also show that the measures are very strongly correlated
with the labor-force quality measures of Hanushek and Kimko (2000). Ram (2007) estimates
models similar to the augmented neoclassical production functions of Mankiw, Romer, and Weil
(1992). The general conclusion is that school attainment appears less relevant when IQ measures
(again from Lynn and Vanhanen (2002)) are included in the analysis. Finally, Jones and
Schneider (2010) use IQ measures of skills to account for variations in immigrant wages, similar
to the analyses of Hanushek and Kimko (2000) and Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a). They
conclude that IQ is a powerful predictor of wages and, relatedly, that it explains a significant
portion of earnings differences across countries.
     The real question with these analyses is what exactly is being measured. The underlying IQ
scores by country come from an idiosyncratic collection of national data that relies on
specialized samples for specific cohorts and subsets of the population.76 Thus, the question that
arises is how much measurement error there is in an underlying skill dimension. Hunt and
Wittmann (2008) provide a direct analysis (albeit in terms of the level of GDP per capita) of the
empirical value of IQ scores versus PISA scores. They conclude that PISA scores are better
predictors of GDP per capita than the Lynn and Vanhanen (2002) measures of IQ. Lynn and
Mikk (2007, 2009) confirm the very high correlations between IQ scores and either TIMSS or



74
   Much of this recent discussion in the economics literature came in response to Herrnstein and Murray (1994), who
argued that the labor-market relationships to relatively fixed IQ measures had strong implications for social policy.
Much of the discussion is, of course, outside of economics. While there is ongoing controversy to how genetics and
environment are seen as influencing IQ (see, for example, the exchange by Rose (2009) and Ceci and Williams
(2009)), it is clear that environment can have substantial impact on measured IQ (e.g., Turkheimer et al. (2003)).
Another source of discussion is the so-called “Flynn effect” where political scientist James Flynn noted that IQ
scores had been rapidly rising in many nations around the world over the 20th Century. For discussions of this, see
Dickens and Flynn (2001) and Flynn (2007), both of which argue that aggregate societal factors can affect the
measured national data.
75
   Their analyses of economic outcomes relate the level of GDP per capita to IQ scores. It is difficult to see these
analyses in level form as identifying the impact of skills. Their data series, however, have been used extensively in
other analyses.
76
   As Hunt and Wittmann (2008) point out, concerns with the data include that values for the majority of countries
are derived from an unclearly specified method drawing on data from nearby countries and that most data points are
not derived from representative samples. For example, the value for Ethiopia is based on the IQ scores of a highly
selected group that had emigrated to Israel, and the value for Equatorial Guinea, the lowest IQ estimate in the data,
refers to a group of children in a home for the developmentally disabled in Spain.


                                                           52
PISA scores. More importantly, this analysis questions whether the simple relationships
estimated in Lynn and Vanhanen (2002) are causal (as Lynn and Vanhanen (2002) assert).
     The conclusion from the various models of the impact of national IQ scores on economic
outcomes is that IQ provides another potential measure of cognitive skills. If accurate, the Lynn
and Vanhanen IQ data provide for a considerable expansion of the sample sizes, reaching 113
nations (Lynn and Vanhanen (2006), Appendix 1). Nonetheless, most of the analyses would
suggest that this measure is noticeably more error prone than the international test data stressed
here. Additionally, rather than capturing innate differences, they are amenable to family and
school influences – opening a similar set of identification issues as discussed here (but not
addressed in these analyses).

5.4 Conclusions on the Economic Impact of Differences in Cognitive Skills
     The international data on the individual returns to cognitive skills begin to paint an
interesting picture of the value of human capital in the labor market – a picture going beyond the
common but misleading view that only schooling attainment matters. First, while labor markets
in a broad set of countries clearly reward individuals with higher skill as measured by
assessments of math and science, the rewards do appear to vary significantly across countries.
The underlying determinants of these differential rewards remain an important but unanswered
question. Second, variations in skills within countries have clear impacts on the distribution of
incomes. Here again, while the facts are relatively clear, the interaction of skills and rewards –
which is a fundamental determinant of the distributional outcomes – is much less understood.
     The results of growth modeling that employ measures of national cognitive skills strongly
suggest that the basic human capital model is very relevant for aggregate outcomes. Variations
in skills measured by international math and science tests are strongly related to variations in
economic growth, and they solve many of the difficult measurement problems with the more
traditional school attainment measures.
     At the same time, there are many issues to be addressed in future work. Clearly the
limitations of having just cross-country variations for a limited number of countries raise
uncertainties with the results. Most importantly, given the myriad of differences among nations,
confirming any causal impact is difficult. Each of these issues is high on the research agenda,
particularly given the rapid expansion of test information from expanded new testing
opportunities.


6. Conclusion and Outlook
     The economic literature on international educational achievement has expanded our
understanding of the determinants and economic consequences of international educational
achievement tremendously. Considering that, with few antecedents, this literature is only a
decade old, it has clearly covered a lot of ground and made remarkable progress. In doing so, it
has exploited the possibilities opened up by the international data to raise fundamental questions,
ones not amenable to any simple within-country analysis. For example, this work highlights the
crucial role of educational achievement in understanding the vast international differences in
economic well-being. It also begins to suggest some key factors that account for the immense
international differences in educational achievement.

                                                  53
     At the same time, by the very nature of the limited degrees of freedom in cross-country
identification, it can mostly reveal broad patterns. At the very least, a lot of the details of
specific implementation issues related to any policy application obviously must be left for
national approaches.
     Given its infancy, there is obviously still considerable scope for future advances in the
economic literature on international evidence on educational achievement. Clear directions
forward include exploring further the institutional variation and making more use of regional
information, yielding larger numbers of independent observations. Interesting extensions could
also go beyond general schooling to cover topics in vocational and higher education.
     A topic unexplored by economists is also the international tests in non-traditional subjects,
such as foreign languages, civic education, and information technology. More generally, some
of the rich background information contained in the international studies could be explored
further, and part of it may provide information on relevant non-cognitive skills. For example,
recent work by Falck and Woessmann (2010) attempts to derive measures of entrepreneurial
intentions from the international background data, and chapter 6 in Woessmann, Luedemann,
Schuetz, and West (2009) explores such measures of non-cognitive outcomes as student morale
and commitment, non-disruptive behavior, disciplinary climate, and tardiness. Further
information on non-cognitive skills may be derived from the international background
questionnaires. As a more distant outlook, international testing of non-cognitive skills would be
an obvious challenge.
    Methodologically, further exploration of quasi-experimental settings in the international data
should be high on the agenda. When analyzing determinants of educational achievement,
building panel datasets from the more extensively emerging international tests could help in this
regard and allow the evaluation of educational reforms in different countries.
     In the more distant future, it is tempting to envision what research will be able to do with the
sort of achievement data that will be available in 20 to 30 years from now. The number of
participating countries is as high as 57 in both PISA 2006 and TIMSS 2007, and more than 60
countries are currently planning to participate in the next PISA and TIMSS cycles. With these
sets of comparable achievement data for extensive samples of countries being linked to
subsequent economic growth, and with the emerging long panels of regular achievement data for
large samples of countries, the outlook for future research in the economics of international
differences in educational achievement is clearly bright.




                                                   54
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005. "Institutions as a fundamental
     cause of long-run growth." In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion
     and Steven N. Durlauf. Amsterdam: North Holland: 385-472.

Adams, Raymond J. 2003. "Response to 'Cautions on OECD's recent educational survey
      (PISA)'." Oxford Review of Education 29, no. 3: 377-389.

Adams, Raymond J., Alla Berezner, and Maciej Jakubowski. 2010. "Analysis of PISA 2006
      preferred items ranking using the percentage correct method." OECD Education Working
      Paper 46. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Afonso, António, and Miguel St. Aubyn. 2006. "Cross-country efficiency of secondary education
      provision: A semi-parametric analysis with non-discretionary inputs." Economic
      Modelling 23, no. 3: 476-491.

Aghion, Philippe. 2008. "Higher education and innovation." Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik
      9, Special Issue: 28-45.

Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, Caroline M. Hoxby, Andreu Mas-Colell, and André
      Sapir. 2007. Why reform Europe’s universities? Bruegel Policy Brief 2007/04. Brussels:
      Bruegel.

Altinok, Nadir 2007. "Human capital quality and economic growth." IREDU Working Paper DT
       2007/1. Université de Bourgogne: Institute for Research in Education (IREDU).

Altinok, Nadir, and Geeta Kingdon. 2009. "New evidence on class size effects: A pupil fixed
       effects approach." CSAE Working Paper WPS/2009-16. Oxford: Centre for the Study of
       African Economies, University of Oxford.

Altinok, Nadir, and Hatidje Murseli. 2007. "International database on human capital quality."
       Economics Letters 96, no. 2 (August): 237-244.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. "Selection on observed and
        unobserved variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools." Journal of
        Political Economy 113, no. 1 (February): 151-184.

Ammermueller, Andreas. 2007. "PISA: What makes the difference? Explaining the gap in test
     scores between Finland and Germany." Empirical Economics 33, no. 2: 263-287.

Ammermueller, Andreas 2005. "Educational opportunities and the role of institutions." ZEW
     Discussion Paper 05-44. Mannheim: Centre for European Economic Research.

Ammermueller, Andreas, and Peter Dolton. 2006. "Pupil-teacher gender interaction effects on
     scholastic outcomes in England and the USA." ZEW Discussion Paper 06-060.
     Mannheim: Centre for European Economic Research.

                                                 55
Ammermueller, Andreas, Hans Heijke, and Ludger Woessmann. 2005. "Schooling quality in
     Eastern Europe: Educational production during transition." Economics of Education
     Review 24, no. 5: 579-599.

Ammermueller, Andreas, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. "Peer effects in European primary
     schools: Evidence from the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study." Journal of
     Labor Economics 27, no. 3: 315-348.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy. 1999. "Using Maimondides' rule to estimate the effect of
       class size on scholastic achievement." Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 2 (May):
       533-575.

Appleton, Simon, Paul Atherton, and Michael Bleaney. 2008. "International school test scores
       and economic growth." Credit Research Paper 08/04. University of Nottingham: Centre
       for Research in Economic Development and International Trade.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. "Estimates of the economic return to schooling
      from a new sample of twins." American Economic Review 84, no. 5 (December): 1157-
      1173.

Azariadis, Costas, and Allan Drazen. 1990. "Threshold externalities in economic development."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, no. 2: 501-526.

Baker, David P. 1997. "Surviving TIMSS: Or, everything you blissfully forgot about
       international comparisons." Phi Delta Kappan 79, no. 4 (December): 295-300.

Barro, Robert J. 1991. "Economic growth in a cross section of countries." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 106, no. 2 (May): 407-443.

———. 2001. "Human capital and growth." American Economic Review 91, no. 2: 12-17.

Barro, Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee. 1993. "International comparisons of educational
       attainment." Journal of Monetary Economics 32, no. 3 (December): 363-394.

———. 2001. "International data on educational attainment: Updates and implications." Oxford
   Economic Papers 53, no. 3 (July): 541-563.

Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2004. Economic growth. Second ed. Cambridge, MA:
       The MIT Press.

Becker, Gary S. 1964. Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special
       reference to education. First Edition ed. New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic
       Research.

Bedard, Kelly, and Elizabeth Dhuey. 2006. "The persistence of early childhood maturity:
      International evidence of long-run age effects." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, no.
      4: 1437-1472.



                                                 56
Bertschy, Kathrin, M. Alejandra Cattaneo, and Stefan C. Wolter. 2009. "PISA and the transition
       into the labour market." LABOUR: Review of Labour Economics and Industrial Relations
       23, Special Issue: 111-137.

Betts, Julian. 2010. "The economics of tracking in education." In Handbook of the Economics of
        Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann.
        Amsterdam: Elsevier: forthcoming.

Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2000. "Does schooling cause growth?" American Economic
       Review 90, no. 5 (December): 1160-1183.

Bishop, John H. 1995. "The impact of curriculum-based external examinations on school
       priorities and student learning." International Journal of Educational Research 23, no. 8:
       653-752.

———. 1997. "The effect of national standards and curriculum-based examinations on
   achievement." American Economic Review 87, no. 2: 260-264.

———. 1999. "Are national exit examinations important for educational efficiency?" Swedish
   Economic Policy Review 6, no. 2: 349-398.

———. 2006. "Drinking from the fountain of knowledge: Student incentive to study and learn --
   Externalities, information problems, and peer pressure." In Handbook of the Economics
   of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland:
   909-944.

Bishop, John H., Joan Y. Moriarty, and Ferran Mane. 2000. "Diplomas for learning, not seat
       time: The impact of New York Regents examinations." Economics of Education Review
       19, no. 4: 333-349.

Björklund, Anders, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2010. "Education and family background:
       Mechanisms and policies." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric
       A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann. Amsterdam: Elsevier:
       forthcoming.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. "Why the apple doesn't fall far:
       Understanding intergenerational transmission of human capital." American Economic
       Review 95, no. 1 (March): 437-449.

Blau, David M., and Janet Currie. 2006. "Pre-school, day care, and after-school care: Who’s
       minding the kids?" In Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric A.
       Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North-Holland: 1163-1278.

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1996. "International differences in male wage
       inequality: Institutions versus market forces." Journal of Political Economy 104, no. 4
       (August): 791-837.




                                                 57
———. 2005. "Do cognitve test scores explain higher US wage inequality?" Review of
   Economics and Statistics 87, no. 1 (February): 184-193.

Bosworth, Barry P., and Susan M. Collins. 2003. "The empirics of growth: An update."
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003, no. 2: 113-206.

Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 1976. Schooling in capitalist America: Educational reform
      and the contradictions of economic life. New York: Basic Books.

Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne. 2001. "The determinants of earnings: A
      behavioral approach." Journal of Economic Literature 39, no. 4 (December): 1137-1176.

Bratti, Massimiliano, Daniele Checchi, and Antonio Filippin. 2008. "Should you compete or
        cooperate with your schoolmates?" IZA Discussion Paper 3599. Bonn: Institute for the
        Study of Labor.

Brunello, Giorgio, and Daniele Checchi. 2007. "Does school tracking affect equality of
       opportunity? New international evidence." Economic Policy 22, no. 52: 781-861.

Bushnik, Tracey, Lynn Barr-Telford, and Patrick Bussière. 2004. In and out of high school: First
      results from the second cycle of the Youth in Transition Survey. Ottawa: Statistics
      Canada.

Card, David. 1999. "The causal effect of education on earnings." In Handbook of Labor
       Economics, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North-Holland:
       1801-1863.

———. 2001. "Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric
   problems." Econometrica 69, no. 5 (September): 1127-1160.

Cascio, Elizabeth, Damon Clark, and Nora Gordon. 2008. "Education and the age profile of
       literacy into adulthood." Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 3: 47-70.

Ceci, Stephen J., and Wendy M. Williams. 2009. "Should scientists study race and IQ? Yes: The
       scientific truth must be pursued." Nature 457 (February 12): 788-789.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou. 2009. "Human capital, the structure of production,
      and growth." Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 1: 66-82.

Coleman, James S., and Thomas Hoffer. 1987. Public, Catholic, and private schools: The
      importance of community. New York: Basic Books.

Coleman, James S., Thomas Hoffer, and Sally Kilgore. 1981. "Questions and answers: Our
      response." Harvard Educational Review 51, no. 4 (November): 526-544.

Corten, Rense, and Jaap Dronkers. 2006. "School achievement of pupils from the lower strata in
       public, private government-dependent and private government-independent schools: A



                                                 58
       cross-national test of the Coleman-Hoffer thesis." Educational Research and Evaluation
       12, no. 2: 179-208.

Coulombe, Serge, and Jean-François Tremblay. 2006. "Literacy and growth." Topics in
      Macroeconomics 6, no. 2: Article 4.

Coulombe, Serge, Jean-François Tremblay, and Sylvie Marchand. 2004. Literacy scores, human
      capital and growth across fourteen OECD countries. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006.
       "Interpreting the evidence on life cycle skill formation." In Handbook of the Economics
       of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 697-
       812.

De Gregorio, José, and Jong-Wha Lee. 2002. "Education and income inequality: New evidence
      from cross-country data." Review of Income and Wealth 48, no. 3: 395-416.

Dee, Thomas S. 2005. "A teacher like me: Does race, ethnicity, or gender matter?" American
       Economic Review 95, no. 2: 158-165.

Dee, Thomas, and Martin West. 2008. "The non-cognitive returns to class size." NBER Working
       Paper 13994. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (May).

Denison, Edward F. 1985. Trends in American economic growth, 1929-1982. Washington, D.C.:
      The Brookings Institution.

Denny, Kevin, Colm Harmon, and Vincent O’Sullivan. 2004. "Education, earnings and skills: A
      multi-country comparison." IFS Working Paper 04/08. London: Institute for Fiscal
      Studies.

Denny, Kevin, Colm Harmon, and Sandra Redmond. 2000. "Functional literacy, educational
      attainment and earnings: Evidence from the International Adult Literacy Survey." IFS
      Working Paper 00/09. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.

Devroye, Dan, and Richard B. Freeman. 2001. "Does inequality in skills explain inequality in
      earnings across advanced countries?" NBER Working Paper 8140. Cambridge, MA:
      National Bureau of Economic Reserach.

Dickens, William T., and James R. Flynn. 2001. "Heritability estimates versus large
      environmental effects: The IQ paradox resolved." Psychological Review 108, no. 2: 346-
      369.

Dolton, Peter, and Oscar D. Marcenaro-Gutierrez. 2010. "If you pay peanuts do you get
       monkeys? A cross country analysis of teacher pay and pupil performance." Mimeo.
       London: Royal Holloway College, University of London.




                                                 59
Dronkers, Jaap, and Péter Robert. 2008. "Differences in scholastic achievement of public, private
      government-dependent, and private independent schools: A cross-national analysis."
      Educational Policy 22, no. 4: 541-577.

Easterly, William. 2001. The elusive quest for growth: An economist's adventures and
       misadventures in the tropics. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Edin, Per-Anders, and Magnus Gustavsson. 2008. "Time out of work and skill depreciation."
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 61, no. 2: 163-180.

Edwards, Sebastian, Gerardo Esquivel, and Graciela Márquez, eds. 2007. The decline of Latin
      American economies: Growth, institutions, and crises. Chicago, IL: University of
      Chicago Press.

Entorf, Horst, and Nicoleta Minoiu. 2005. "What a difference immigration policy makes: A
        comparison of PISA scores in Europe and traditional countries of immigration." German
        Economic Review 6, no. 3: 355-376.

Falck, Oliver, and Ludger Woessmann. 2010. "School competition and students’ entrepreneurial
       intentions: International evidence using historical Catholic roots of private schooling."
       Program on Education Policy and Governance Working Paper PEPG 10-01. Cambridge,
       MA: Harvard University.

Fernández-Arias, Eduardo, Rodolfo Manuelli, and Juan S. Blyde, eds. 2005. Sources of growth
      in Latin America: What is missing? Washington, DC: Inter-American Development
      Bank.

Fertig, Michael, and Robert E. Wright. 2005. "School quality, educational attainment and
        aggregation bias." Economic Letters 88, no. 1: 109-114.

Figlio, David, and Susanna Loeb. 2010. "School accountability." In Handbook of the Economics
        of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann.
        Amsterdam: Elsevier: forthcoming.

Flynn, James R. 2007. What is intelligence?: Beyond the Flynn effect. Cambridge, UK:
       Cambridge University Press.

Foshay, Arthur W. 1962. "The background and the procedures of the twelve-country study." In
      Educational achievement of thirteen-year-olds in twelve countries: Results of an
      international research project, 1959-61, edited by Arthur W. Foshay, Robert L.
      Thorndike, Fernand Hotyat, Douglas A. Pidgeon, and David A. Walker. Hamburg:
      Unesco Institute for Education.

Freeman, Richard B., and Ronald Schettkat. 2001. "Skill compression, wage differentials, and
      employment: Germany versus the US." Oxford Economic Papers 53, no. 3: 583-603.




                                                 60
Fuchs, Thomas, and Ludger Woessmann. 2004. "Computers and student learning: Bivariate and
       multivariate evidence on the availability and use of computers at home and at school."
       Brussels Economic Review 47, no. 3/4: 359-385.

———. 2007. "What accounts for international differences in student performance? A re-
   examination using PISA data." Empirical Economics 32, no. 2-3: 433-462.

Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Forencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. "Do
       institutions cause growth?" Journal of Economic Growth 9, no. 3: 271-303.

Glewwe, Paul. 2002. "Schools and skills in developing countries: Education policies and
     socioeconomic outcomes." Journal of Economic Literature 40, no. 2 (June): 436-482.

Goldberger, Arthur S., and Charles F. Manski. 1995. "Review article: The bell curve by
      Herrnstein and Murray." Journal of Economic Literature 33, no. 2: 762-776.

Guiso, Luigi, Ferdinando Monte, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. "Culture, math, and
       gender." Science 320, no. 5880: 1164-1165.

Gundlach, Erich, Desmond Rudman, and Ludger Woessmann. 2002. "Second thoughts on
      development accounting." Applied Economics 34, no. 11: 1359-1369.

Gundlach, Erich, and Ludger Woessmann. 2001. "The fading productivity of schooling in East
      Asia." Journal of Asian Economics 12, no. 3: 401-417.

Gundlach, Erich, Ludger Woessmann, and Jens Gmelin. 2001. "The decline of schooling
      productivity in OECD countries." Economic Journal 111, no. 471 (May): C135-C147.

Gunnarsson, Victoria, Peter F. Orazem, and Mario A. Sánchez. 2006. "Child labor and school
      achievement in Latin America." World Bank Economic Review 20, no. 1: 31-54.

Hanushek, Eric A. 1979. "Conceptual and empirical issues in the estimation of educational
      production functions." Journal of Human Resources 14, no. 3 (Summer): 351-388.

———. 1997. "The productivity collapse in schools." In Developments in School Finance, 1996,
   edited by William J. Fowler, Jr. Washington, DC: National Center for Education
   Statistics: 185-195.

———. 2002. "Publicly provided education." In Handbook of Public Economics, edited by Alan
   J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 2045-2141.

———. 2006. "School resources." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric
   A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland: 865-908.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Dongwook Kim. 1995. "Schooling, labor force quality, and economic
      growth." NBER Working Paper 5399. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
      Research (December).



                                                61
Hanushek, Eric A., and Dennis D. Kimko. 2000. "Schooling, labor force quality, and the growth
      of nations." American Economic Review 90, no. 5 (December): 1184-1208.

Hanushek, Eric A., Victor Lavy, and Kohtaro Hitomi. 2008. "Do students care about school
      quality? Determinants of dropout behavior in developing countries." Journal of Human
      Capital 1, no. 2 (Spring): 69-105.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Javier A. Luque. 2003. "Efficiency and equity in schools around the
      world." Economics of Education Review 22, no. 5 (August): 481-502.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Margaret E. Raymond. 2004. "The effect of school accountability
      systems on the level and distribution of student achievement." Journal of the European
      Economic Association 2, no. 2-3 (April-May): 406-415.

Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin, and Lori L. Taylor. 1996. "Aggregation and the estimated
      effects of school resources." Review of Economics and Statistics 78, no. 4 (November):
      611-627.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2006. "Does educational tracking affect
      performance and inequality? Differences-in-differences evidence across countries."
      Economic Journal 116, no. 510 (March): C63-C76.

———. 2008. "The role of cognitive skills in economic development." Journal of Economic
   Literature 46, no. 3 (September): 607-668.

———. 2009a. "Do better schools lead to more growth? Cognitive skills, economic outcomes,
   and causation." NBER Working Paper 14633. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
   Economic Research (January).

———. 2009b. "Schooling, cognitive skills, and the Latin American growth puzzle." NBER
   Working Paper 15066. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (June).

———. 2010a. The high cost of low educational performance: The long-run economic impact of
   improving PISA outcomes. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
   Development.

———. 2010b. "Sample selectivity and the validity of international student achievement tests in
   economic research." NBER Working Paper 15867. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
   Economic Research (March).

Hanushek, Eric A., and Lei Zhang. 2009. "Quality-consistent estimates of international schooling
      and skill gradients." Journal of Human Capital 3, no. 2 (Summer): 107-143.

Heckman, James J. 1995. "Lessons from the bell curve." Journal of Political Economy 103, no. 5
     (October): 1091-1120.

Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd. 2006. "Earnings functions, rates of
     return and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond." In Handbook of the


                                                 62
       Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam:
       North Holland: 307-458.

———. 2008. "Earnings functions and rates of return." Journal of Human Capital 2, no. 1
   (Spring): 1-31.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The effects of cognitive and
     noncognitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior." Journal of Labor
     Economics 24, no. 3 (July): 411-482.

Heckman, James J., and Edward Vytlacil. 2001. "Identifying the role of cognitive ability in
     explaining the level of and change in the return to schooling." Review of Economics and
     Statistics 83, no. 1 (February): 1-12.

Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles A. Murray. 1994. The bell curve: Intelligence and class
       structure in American life. New York: Free Press.

Heyneman, Stephen P., and William Loxley. 1983. "The effect of primary school quality on
      academic achievement across twenty-nine high and low income countries." American
      Journal of Sociology 88, no. 6 (May): 1162-1194.

Hopmann, Stefan Thomas, Gertrude Brinek, and Martin Retzl, eds. 2007. PISA zufolge PISA:
     Hält PISA, was es verspricht? / PISA according to PISA: Does PISA keep what it
     promises? Vienna: LIT Verlag.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2003. "School choice and school competition: Evidence from the United
      States." Swedish Economic Policy Review 10, no. 3: 9-65.

Hoxby, Caroline Minter. 2000. "The effects of class size on student achievement: New evidence
      from population variation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, no. 3 (November):
      1239-1285.

Humlum, Maria K., Kristin J. Kleinjans, and Helena S. Nielsen. 2010. "An economic analysis of
     identity and career choice." Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.

Hunt, Earl, and Werner Wittmann. 2008. "National intelligence and national prosperity."
       Intelligence 36, no. 1: 1-9.

Jamison, Eliot A., Dean T. Jamison, and Eric A. Hanushek. 2007. "The effects of education
      quality on mortality decline and income growth." Economics of Education Review 26, no.
      6 (December): 772-789.

Jenkins, Stephen P., John Micklewright, and Sylke V. Schnepf. 2008. "Social segregation in
       secondary schools: How does England compare with other countries?" Oxford Review of
       Education 34, no. 1: 21-38.




                                                 63
Jensen, Torben Pilegaard, and Dines Andersen. 2006. "Participants in PISA 2000 – four years
       later." In Northern Lights on PISA 2003. Copenhagen: Nordic Council of Ministers: 239-
       248.

Jones, Garett, and W. Joel Schneider. 2006. "Intelligence, human capital, and economic growth:
       A bayesian averaging of classical estimates (BACE) approach." Journal of Economic
       Growth 11, no. 1: 71-93.

———. 2010. "IQ in the production function: Evidence from immigrant earnings." Economic
   Inquiry, forthcoming.

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Zvi Griliches. 1967. "The explanation of productivity change." Review
       of Economic Studies 34, no. 3 (July): 249-282.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1993. "Wage inequality and the rise in
       returns to skill." Journal of Political Economy 101, no. 3 (June): 410-442.

Jürges, Hendrik, and Kerstin Schneider. 2004. "International differences in student achievement:
        An economic perspective." German Economic Review 5, no. 3: 357-380.

———. 2010. "Central exit examinations increase performance... but take the fun out of
   mathematics." Journal of Population Economics 23, no. 2: 497-517.

Jürges, Hendrik, Kerstin Schneider, and Felix Büchel. 2005. "The effect of central exit
        examinations on student achievement: Quasi-experimental evidence from TIMSS
        Germany." Journal of the European Economic Association 3, no. 5: 1134-1155.

Kahn, Lawrence M. 2004. "Immigration, skills and the labor market: International evidence."
       Journal of Population Economics 17, no. 3: 501-534.

———. 2007. "The impact of employment protection mandates on demographic temporary
   employment patterns: International microeconomic evidence." Economic Journal 117,
   no. 521: F333-F356.

Kiker, B. F. 1968. Human capital: In retrospect. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina.

Knighton, Tamara, and Patrick Bussière. 2006. "Educational outcomes at age 19 associated with
      reading ability at age 15." Culture, Tourism and the Centre for Education Statistics
      Research papers Ottawa: Statistics Canada (June).

Krueger, Alan B., and Mikael Lindahl. 2001. "Education for growth: Why and for whom?"
      Journal of Economic Literature 39, no. 4 (December): 1101-1136.

Lapointe, Archie E., Nancy A. Mead, and Gary W. Phillips. 1989. A world of differences: An
       international assessment of mathematics and science. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing
       Service.




                                                 64
Lee, Doo Won, and Tong Hun Lee. 1995. "Human capital and economic growth: Tests based on
       the international evaluation of educational achievement." Economics Letters 47, no. 2:
       219-225.

Lee, Jong-Wha, and Robert J. Barro. 2001. "Schooling quality in a cross-section of countries."
       Economica 68, no. 272: 465-488.

Leuven, Edwin, Mikael Lindahl, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Dinand Webbink. 2010. "Expanding
      schooling opportunities for 4-year-olds." Economics of Education Review 29, no. 3: 319-
      328.

Leuven, Edwin, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Hans van Ophem. 2004. "Explaining international
      differences in male skill wage differentials by differences in demand and supply of
      skills." Economic Journal 114, no. 495 (April): 466–486.

Levine, Ross, and David Renelt. 1992. "A sensitivity analysis of cross-country growth
       regressions." American Economic Review 82, no. 4 (September): 942-963.

Levine, Ross, and Sara J. Zervos. 1993. "What we have learned about policy and growth from
       cross-country regressions?" American Economic Review 83, no. 2 (May): 426-430.

Lynn, Richard, and Jaan Mikk. 2007. "National differences in intelligence and educational
       attainment." Intelligence 35, no. 2 (March/April): 115-121.

———. 2009. "National IQs predict educational attainment in math, reading and science across
   56 nations." Intelligence 37, no. 3 (May/June): 305-310.

Lynn, Richard, and Tatu Vanhanen. 2002. IQ and the wealth of nations. Westport, CT: Praeger
       Publishers.

———. 2006. IQ and global inequality. Augusta, GA: Wahington Summit Publishers.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil. 1992. "A contribution to the empirics of
      economic growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 2 (May): 407-437.

Marshall, Alfred. 1898. Principles of economics. Vol. 1. London: Macmillan and Company.

Mayer, Susan E. 1997. What money can't buy: Family income and children's life chances.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

McEwan, Patrick J., and Jeffery H. Marshall. 2004. "Why does academic achievement vary
     across countries? Evidence from Cuba and Mexico." Education Economics 12, no. 3:
     205-217.

McIntosh, Steven, and Anna Vignoles. 2001. "Measuring and assessing the impact of basic skills
      on labor market outcomes." Oxford Economic Papers 53, no. 3: 453-481.




                                                 65
Michaelowa, Katharina. 2001. "Primary education quality in francophone Sub-Saharan Africa:
      Determinants of learning achievement and efficiency considerations." World
      Development 29, no. 10: 1699-1695.

Mincer, Jacob. 1970. "The distribution of labor incomes: a survey with special reference to the
      human capital approach." Journal of Economic Literature 8, no. 1 (March): 1-26.

———. 1974. Schooling, experience, and earnings. New York: NBER.

Mullis, Ina V. S., Michael O. Martin, and Pierre Foy. 2008. TIMSS 2007 international
        mathematics report: Findings from IEA’s Trends in International Mathematics and
        Science Study at the fourth and eighth grades. Chestnut Hill, MA: TIMSS & PIRLS
        International Study Center, Lynch School of Education, Boston College.

Mullis, Ina V.S., Michael O. Martin, Ann M. Kennedy, and Pierre Foy. 2007. PIRLS 2006
        international report: IEA’s Progress in International Reading Literacy Study in primary
        schools in 40 countries. Chestnut Hill, MA: TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center,
        Lynch School of Education, Boston College.

Neal, Derek. 1997. "The effect of Catholic secondary schooling on educational attainment."
       Journal of Labor Economics 15, no. 1, Part 1 (January): 98-123.

Neidorf, Teresa S., Marilyn Binkley, Kim Gattis, and David Nohara. 2006. Comparing
       mathematics content in the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP),
       Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), and Program for
       International Student Assessment (PISA) 2003 assessments. Washington: National Center
       for Education Statistics (May).

Nickell, Stephen. 2004. "Poverty and worklessness in Britain." Economic Journal 114, no. 494
       (March): C1-C25.

Oosterbeek, Hessel 1998. "Unravelling supply and demand factors in work-related training."
       Oxford Economic Papers 50, no. 2: 266-283.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2007. PISA 2006: Science
       competencies for tomorrow’s world. Vol. 1 – Analysis. Paris: OECD.

———. 2009. PISA 2006 technical report. Paris: OECD.

Orr, Dominic, Klaus Schnitzer, and Edgar Frackmann. 2008. Social and economic conditions of
       student life in Europe: Synopsis of indicators, Final report, Eurostudent III 2005–2008.
       Bielefeld, Germany: W. Bertelsmann Verlag GmbH & Co.

Peterson, Paul E., and Ludger Woessmann. 2007. "Introduction: Schools and the equal
       opportunity problem." In Schools and the Equal Opportunity Problem, edited by Ludger
       Woessmann and Paul E. Peterson. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 3-27.




                                                 66
Petty, Sir William. 1676 [1899]. "Political arithmetic." In The economic writings of Sir William
        Petty, edited by Charles Henry Hull. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press: 233-
        313.

Prais, Sig J. 2003. "Cautions on OECD's recent educational survey (PISA)." Oxford Review of
        Education 29, no. 2 (June): 139-163.

Pritchett, Lant. 2004. "Access to education." In Global Crises, Global Solutions, edited by Björn
        Lomborg. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 175-234.

———. 2006. "Does learning to add up add up? The returns to schooling in aggregate data." In
   Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch.
   Amsterdam: North Holland: 635-695.

Psacharopoulos, George, and Harry A. Patrinos. 2004. "Returns to investment in education: a
       further update." Education Economics 12, no. 2 (August): 111-134.

Ram, Rati. 2007. "IQ and economic growth: Further augmentation of Mankiw-Romer-Weil
      model." Economics Letters 94, no. 1: 7-11.

Ramirez, Francisco, Xiaowei Luo, Evan Schofer, and John Meyer. 2006. "Student achievement
      and national economic growth." American Journal of Education 113(November): 1-29.

Romer, Paul. 1990. "Human capital and growth: Theory and evidence." Carnegie-Rochester
      Conference Series on Public Policy 32: 251-286.

Rose, Steven. 2009. "Should scientists study race and IQ? No: Science and society do not
       benefit." Nature 457 (February 12): 787-788.

Rotberg, Iris C. 1995. "Myths about test score comparisons." Science 270, no. 5241 (December
       1): 1446-1448.

Rouse, Cecilia Elena, and Lisa Barrow. 2009. "School vouchers and student achievement:
       Recent evidence and remaining questions." Annual Review of Economics 1: 17-42.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, Gernot Doppelhofer, and Ronald I. Miller. 2004. " Determinants of long-
       term growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) approach." American
       Economic Review 94, no. 4 (September): 813-835.

Schneeweis, Nicole. 2010. "Educational institutions and the integration of migrants." Journal of
      Population Economics, forthcoming.

Schnepf, Sylke V. 2007. "Immigrants’ educational disadvantage: An Examination across ten
      countries and three surveys." Journal of Population Economics 20, no. 3: 527-545.

Schuetz, Gabriela. 2009. "Does the quality of pre-primary education pay off in secondary
       school? An international comparison using PISA 2003." Ifo Working Paper 68. Munich:
       Ifo Institute for Economic Research.


                                                 67
Schuetz, Gabriela, Heinrich W. Ursprung, and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. "Education policy and
       equality of opportunity." Kyklos 61, no. 2: 279-308.

Schultz, Theodore W. 1961. "Investment in human capital." American Economic Review 51, no.
       1 (March): 1-17.

Schwerdt, Guido, and Amelie C. Wuppermann. 2009. "Is traditional teaching really all that bad?
      A within-student between-subject approach." CESifo Working Paper 2634. Munich:
      CESifo.

Sianesi, Barbara, and John Van Reenen. 2003. "The returns to education: Macroeconomics."
       Journal of Economic Surveys 17, no. 2: 157-200.

Smith, Adam. 1979. An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations. Oxford:
       Clarendon Press.

Solow, Robert M. 1957. "Technical change and the aggregate production function." Review of
       Economics and Statistics 39, no. 3 (August): 312-320.

Sprietsma, Maresa. 2008. "Regional school choice and school selectivity: How do they relate to
       student performance? Evidence from PISA 2003." European Journal of Comparative
       Economics 5, no. 2: 133-156.

———. 2010. "The effect of relative age in the first grade of primary school on long-term
   scholastic results: International comparative evidence using PISA 2003." Education
   Economics 18, no. 1: 1-32.

Temple, Jonathan. 2001. "Growth effects of education and social capital in the OECD countries."
      OECD Economic Studies 33: 57-101.

Todd, Petra E., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2003. "On the specification and estimation of the
       production function for cognitive achievement." Economic Journal 113, no. 485
       (February): F3-33.

Toma, Eugenia F. 1996. "Public funding and private schooling across countries." Journal of Law
      and Economics 39, no. 1: 121-148.

———. 2005. "Private schools in a global world: 2004 presidential address." Southern
   Economic Journal 71, no. 4: 693-704.

Topel, Robert. 1999. "Labor markets and economic growth." In Handbook of Labor Economics,
       edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 2943-2984.

Turkheimer, Eric, Andreana Haley, Mary Waldron, Brian D'Onofrio, and Irving I. Gottesman.
      2003. "Socioeconomic status modifies heritability of IQ in young children."
      Psychological Science 14, no. 6 (November): 623-628.




                                                 68
UNESCO. 2005. Education for all: The quality imperative, EFA Global Monitoring Report.
     Paris: UNESCO.

Urquiola, Miguel, and Eric Verhoogen. 2009. "Class-size caps, sorting, and the regression-
       discontinuity design." American Economic Review 99, no. 1 (March): 179-215.

Vandenberghe, Vincent, and Stephane Robin. 2004. "Evaluating the effectiveness of private
      education across countries: A comparison of methods." Labour Economics 11, no. 4:
      487-506.

Waldinger, Fabian. 2006. "Does tracking affect the importance of family background on
      students’ test scores?" Mimeo. London: London School of Economics.

Weede, Erich, and Sebastian Kämpf. 2002. "The impact of intelligence and institutional
      improvements on economic growth." Kyklos 55, no. 3: 361-380.

West, Martin R., and Ludger Woessmann. 2006. "Which school systems sort weaker students
      into smaller classes? International evidence." European Journal of Political Economy 22,
      no. 4: 944-968.

———. forthcoming. "'Every Catholic child in a Catholic school': Historical resistance to state
   schooling, contemporary school competition, and student achievement." Economic
   Journal.

Woessmann, Ludger. 2001. "Why students in some countries do better: International evidence on
     the importance of education policy." Education Matters 1, no. 2 (Summer): 67-74.

———. 2002. Schooling and the quality of human capital. Berlin: Springer.

———. 2003a. "Central exit exams and student achievement: International evidence." In No
   child left behind? The politics and practice of school accountability, edited by Paul E.
   Peterson and Martin R. West. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press: 292-323.

———. 2003b. "Schooling resources, educational institutions, and student performance: The
   international evidence." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 65, no. 2: 117-170.

———. 2003c. "Specifying human capital." Journal of Economic Surveys 17, no. 3: 239-270.

———. 2005a. "Educational production in East Asia: The impact of family background and
   schooling policies on student performance." German Economic Review 6, no. 3: 331-353.

———. 2005b. "Educational production in Europe." Economic Policy 20, no. 43: 446-504.

———. 2005c. "The effect heterogeneity of central examinations: evidence from TIMSS,
   TIMSS-Repeat and PISA." Education Economics 13, no. 2 (June): 143 - 169.

———. 2007a. "International evidence on expenditure and class size: A review." In Brookings
   Papers on Education Policy 2006/2007. Washington D.C.: Brookings: 245-272.


                                                 69
———. 2007b. "International evidence on school competition, autonomy and accountability: A
   review." Peabody Journal of Education. 82, no. 2-3: 473-497.

———. 2008. "How equal are educational opportunities? Family background and student
   achievement in Europe and the United States." Zeitschrift für Betriebswirtschaft 78, no.
   1: 45-70.

———. 2009a. "International evidence on school tracking: A review." CESifo DICE Report -
   Journal for Institutional Comparisons 7, no. 1: 26-34.

———. 2009b. "Public-private partnerships and student achievement: A cross-country analysis."
   In School choice international: Exploring public-private partnerships, edited by Rajashri
   Chakrabarti and Paul E. Peterson. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 13-45.

———. 2010a. "Families, schools, and primary-school learning: Evidence for Argentina and
   Colombia in an international perspective." Applied Economics, forthcoming.

———. 2010b. "Institutional determinants of school efficiency and equity: German states as a
   microcosm for OECD countries." Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik /
   Journal of Economics and Statistics 230, no. 2: 234-270.

Woessmann, Ludger, Elke Luedemann, Gabriela Schuetz, and Martin R. West. 2009. School
     accountability, autonomy, and choice around the world. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Woessmann, Ludger, and Martin R. West. 2006. "Class-size effects in school systems around the
     world: Evidence from between-grade variation in TIMSS." European Economic Review
     50, no. 3: 695-736.

Wolter, Stefan C., and Maja Coradi Vellacott. 2003. "Sibling rivalry for parental resources: A
       problem for equity in education? A six-country comparison with PISA data." Swiss
       Journal of Sociology 29, no. 3: 377-398.

Yamamoto, Kentaro. 2002. "Estimating PISA students on the IALS prose literacy scale."
     Mimeo. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service (Summer).

Zimmer, Ron W., and Eugenia F. Toma. 2000. "Peer effects in private and public schools across
     countries." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19, no. 1 (Winter): 75-92.




                                                 70
Figure 1: Participation in international student achievement tests of IEA and OECD
          through 2007


                                                                                              OECD
                       20
                                                                                              non-OECD




                       15
 Number of countries




                       10




                       5




                       0
                            1   2   3   4    5     6     7     8      9    10    11    12   13     14     15
                                            Number of tests participated (1964-2007)

Notes:
Number of tests in which a country has participated in the following 15 IEA and OECD tests: FIMS, FISS, FIRS,
SIMS, SISS, SIRS, TIMSS, TIMSS-Repeat, PISA 2000/02, PIRLS, TIMSS 2003, PISA 2003, PIRLS 2006, PISA
2006, TIMSS 2007.
Total number of participating countries: 96.
Figure 2: Family-background effects in different countries
         England                                                                                                        28.8
         Scotland                                                                                                27.0
         Hungary                                                                                             25.8
        Germany                                                                                              25.6
           Korea                                                                                          24.8
     Slovak Rep.                                                                                     24.0
             USA                                                                                   23.1
          Ireland                                                                                 23.0
     New Zealand                                                                                  22.8
      Czech Rep.                                                                                 22.5
        Australia                                                                           21.5
          Sweden                                                                           21.2
          Austria                                                                         20.8
         Norway                                                                      20.0
          Greece                                                                   19.2
            Italy                                                           17.5
     Netherlands                                                           17.0
 Belgium, French                                                           16.8
      Switzerland                                                          16.8
            Spain                                                   15.3
        Denmark                                                     15.1
          Finland                                             14.0
           Japan                                             13.5
          T urkey                                     11.8
          Iceland                                    11.4
 Belgium, Flemish                                   11.0
         Port ugal                              10.4
          Canada                              9.8
          France                        8.3

                     0        5            10                 15                   20                   25               30

Notes: Coefficient estimates from a student-level regression within each country of the mean of math and science
performance in the TIMSS-95 and TIMSS-Repeat international tests on books at home, which is a categorical
variable with five categories. Regressions control for age, gender, family status, student born in country, mother
born in country, father born in country, interactions between the three immigration variables and books, and a
dummy for the second test cycle. All estimates are statistically significantly different from zero at the 1 percent
level.
Source: Based on Schuetz, Ursprung, and Woessmann (2008), Table 3.
Figure 3: Expenditure per student and student achievement across countries
 Math performance in PISA 2003
 550                                                                   Finland
                                                                                           Japan
                                                       Korea       Netherlands                     Belgium
                                                                                  Canada                  Switzerland
                               Czech Rep.                                     Australia      Iceland     Denmark
                          2
                         R = 0.01                                               Sweden       France
           Slovak Rep.                                Ireland                                               Austria
 500                                                                     Germany
                                            Hungary                                                    Norway
                              Poland
                                                                      Spain
                          2                                                                                        USA
                         R = 0.15
                                                                        Portugal                                  Italy

 450                                                  Greece




 400
                          Mexico




 350
       0        10000          20000          30000       40000       50000        60000        70000                   80000
                                                         Cumulative educational expenditure per student

Notes: Association between average math achievement in PISA 2003 and cumulative expenditure on educational
institutions per student between age 6 and 15, in US dollars, converted by purchasing power parities. Dark line:
regression line for full sample. Light line: regression line omitting Mexico and Greece.
Source: Woessmann (2007a).
Figure 4: Change in expenditure per student and in student achievement over time
 Change in student performance
 (base year=100)
   110

                         SWE
                                                     SGP
                          NLD                                                                 KOR
                                                           ITA
   100                    USA                  JPN
                                                                                 AUS
                                  BEL    DEU     HKG                                        THA
                                                                     FRA
                                         GBR
    90                                                                     NZL




    80
                  PHL




    70
         0           1            2             3                4         5           6            7
                                            Change in educational expenditure (percent per year)

Notes: Data for OECD countries refer to 1970-1994, data for East Asian countries to 1980-1994. Change in student
performance: students’ average educational performance in math and science in 1994 relative to base year. Change
in educational expenditure: average annual rate of change in real educational expenditure per student in percent.
Country abbreviations: Australia (AUS), Belgium (BEL), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), Hong Kong (HKG), Italy
(ITA), Japan (JPN), Netherlands (NLD), Philippines (PHL), Singapore (SGP), South Korea (KOR), Sweden (SWE),
Thailand (THA), United Kingdom (GBR), United States (USA).
Source: Based on Gundlach, Woessmann, and Gmelin (2001) and Gundlach and Woessmann (2001).
Figure 5: Identifying class-size effects: Singapore as an illustrative example
                                  Test score
                                  750
                                                                T = 435.94 + 5.47 S
                                  700                                        (0.41)

                                  650
 (a) All classes




                                  600

                                  550

                                  500

                                  450
                                                                                                          R 2 = 0.40
                                  400
                                                         0                      10         20   30   40             50
                                                  × Seventh grade            o Eighth                        Class size

                                                      Test score
                                                      250
                                                                  T = 29.63 + 2.69 S
                                                      200                     (0.58)
 (b) Grade difference




                                                      150
                                                      100
                                                       50
                                                        0
                                                      -50
                                                                                                          R 2 = 0.14
                                          -100
                                                            -20                 -10         0   10   20             30
                                                                                                             Class size

                                                      Test score
                                                       250
                 (c) Grade difference, instrumented




                                                                      T = 53.03 - 0.23 S
                                                       200                       (0.97)

                                                       150

                                                       100

                                                         50

                                                            0

                                                        -50
                                                                                                          R 2 = 0.00
                                                       -100
                                                                -20               -10       0   10   20             30
                                                                                                            Class size

Source: Woessmann (2007a).
Figure 6: External exams, school autonomy, and student achievement across countries


                                                                                     76.2
                         80
 Math performance
 in TIMSS/TIMSS-R
 test scores (relative   70
 to lowest category)                                           55.5

                         60


                         50


                         40


                          30


                          20


                          10                                                                 Yes
                                                        23.7

                              0                                                             Central
                                                                            0.0     No       exams
                                     No
                                        School autonomy
                                       over teacher salaries   Yes


Notes: Performance difference between the four categories relative to the lowest category which is set equal to zero.
Based on a cross-country student-level multiple regression using the combined TIMSS and TIMSS-Repeat micro
databases that extensively controls for family background, school inputs, and other institutional features.
Source: Woessmann (2005c).
Figure 7: Private operation, public funding, and student achievement across countries


 M ath performance 80
in PISA test scores
                                                                       70.9
 (relative to lowest 70
           category)
                     60

                    50

                                                 33.9
                     40

                     30                                         36.9

                     20

                     10                                                               high
                                         0.0                                        Average share of
                          0                                                             government
                                                                                low
                                                                                            funding
                                  low

                                        Share of privately   high
                                         operated schools


Notes: Performance difference between the four categories relative to the lowest category which is set equal to zero.
Based on a cross-country student-level multiple regression using the PISA 2003 micro database that extensively
controls for family background, school inputs, and other institutional features. “Low” and “high” refer to the 1st and
9th decile on the international distribution of the two variables (0% and 60% in the case of private operation and 55%
and 100% in the case of government funding).
Source: Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009).
Figure 8: Educational inequality in primary and secondary school
              PIRLS (Primary school)                                 PISA 2003 (Secondary school)

           New Zealand
                                                20.0




                   Turkey                       15.0

                                                                                     Germany
          United States

                 Norway                         10.0
                                                                                     New Zealand
                                                                                     Greece

                                                                                     Norway
                                                  5.0                                United States
                                                                                     Italy
                   Iceland
                Greece                                                               Iceland
               Canada                                                                Sweden
                                                  0.0
                   Italy                                                             Czech Rep.
                France                                                               Turkey
            Slovak Rep.                                                              Slovak Rep.
             Germany                                                                 Russian Fed.
                                                                                     Hungary
       HungarySweden                             -5.0
          Russian Fed.                                                               Latvia
           Czech Rep.                                                                Canada
           Hong Kong
                Latvia                         -10.0
                                                                                     Hong Kong
                                                                                     Netherlands

                                                         Standard              •–––• Tracked
            Netherlands                        -15.0     deviation             •- - -• Not tracked

Notes: Dispersion of student achievement measured as standard deviation of test scores in primary school (PIRLS)
in comparison to lower-secondary school (PISA 2003), in both cases measured as difference to the international
mean of national standard deviations in each test. The lines indicate the change in performance dispersion from
primary to lower-secondary school. The black solid lines indicate school systems that track their students into
different school types before the age of 16, while the red dashed lines refer to those school systems that do not track
their students by this age.
Source: Based on Hanushek and Woessmann (2006).
Figure 9: Tracking and socio-economic status in PISA
Performance in PISA 2003
test scores (relative to
lowest category)
        60                                               59.4

                                                  57.6
         50


         40


         30


          20              21.7

                                       0.0
          10
                                                                          ten
                                                                                   Age of first
                                                                                     tracking
              0
                                                                    fifteen (at least)
                        low
                                               high
                  Socio-economic status

Notes: Performance difference between the four categories relative to the lowest category which is set equal to zero.
Based on a cross-country student-level multiple regression using the PISA 2003 micro database that extensively
controls for family background, school inputs, and other institutional features. Low and high socio-economic status
correspond to the 25th and 75th percentile of the PISA ESCS index, respectively.
Source: Based on Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009).
Figure 10: Returns to cognitive skills, International Adult Literacy Survey
                                    0.2
 Increase per standard deviation




                                   0.15




                                    0.1




                                   0.05




                                     0




                                                                                                                                   Norway
                                                                                                       Hungary
                                                                                             Germany




                                                                                                                 Italy




                                                                                                                                                    Sweden
                                                             Switzerland
                                          US




                                                                           Chile




                                                                                                                                            Czech
                                                                                                                         Denmark




                                                                                                                                                             Poland
                                               Netherlands




                                                                                   Finland




Source: Hanushek and Zhang (2009).
Figure 11: Impact of controlling for family inputs and ability on returns to schooling
 0.12


  0.1


 0.08


 0.06


 0.04


 0.02


    0




                                                                                                        Norway
                                                             Switzerland




                                                                                               Sweden
                                                                                     Hungary
                                  Germany


                                            Italy
          Chile


                  US




                                                    Czech
                         Poland




                                                                           Denmark




                                                                                                                 Netherlands


                                                                                                                               Finland
         Returns to Quality-adjusted Schooling              Returns Accounting for Family Inputs and Ability

Source: Hanushek and Zhang (2009).
Figure 12: Inequality of test scores and earnings
Earnings inequality
 4.5
                                                                         USA
                                                            CAN

 4.0



 3.5
                                                   IRE UK


 3.0
                                                 AUS

                                                      SWI
                          NET
 2.5
                              FIN
                            GER                 BEL
              DEN          SWE
 2.0                NOR



 1.5
       1.3                 1.5                    1.7                     1.9
                                                       Test score inequality

Notes: Measure of inequality is the ratio of ninth decile to first decile in both cases; test performance refers to prose
literacy in the International Adult Literacy Survey.
Source: Based on Nickell (2004).
Figure 13: Cognitive skills and economic growth




Notes: Added-variable plot of a regression of the average annual rate of growth (in percent) of real GDP per capita
in 1960-2000 on the initial level of real GDP per capita in 1960, average years of schooling in 1960, and average test
scores on international student achievement tests.
Source: Hanushek and Woessmann (2008).
Figure 14: Years of schooling and economic growth without and with test-score controls




Notes: Added-variable plot of a regression of the average annual rate of growth (in percent) of real GDP per capita
in 1960-2000 on the initial level of real GDP per capita in 1960 and average years of schooling in 1960. The bottom
panel additionally controls for average test scores on international student achievement tests, whereas the top panel
does not.
Source: Based on Hanushek and Woessmann (2008).
Figure 15: Trends in educational achievement and trends in growth rates




Notes: Scatter plot of trend in the growth rate of GDP per capita from 1975 to 2000 against trend in test scores for
countries whose test scores range back before 1972.
Source: Own depiction based on the database derived in Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a).
Table 1: International tests of educational achievement: IEA and OECD student achievement tests
   Abbr.           Study                                                Year     Region      Subject            Agea,b       Countriesc Organiz.d Scalee
1 FIMS             First International Mathematics Study                1964      World      Math               13,FS        11          IEA        PC
2 FISS             First International Science Study                    1970-71 World        Science            10,14,FS     14,16,16    IEA        PC
3 FIRS             First International Reading Study                    1970-72 World        Reading            13           12          IEA        PC
4 SIMS             Second International Mathematics Study               1980-82 World        Math               13,FS        17,12       IEA        PC
5 SISS             Second International Science Study                   1983-84 World        Science            10,13,FS     15,17,13    IEA        PC
6 SIRS             Second International Reading Study                   1990-91 World        Reading            9,13         26,30       IEA        IRT
                                                                                                                9(3+4),
7 TIMSS            Third International Mathematics and Science Study    1994-95 World        Math/Science                  25,39,21      IEA        IRT
                                                                                                                13(7+8),FS
8 TIMSS-Repeat TIMSS-Repeat                                             1999     World       Math/Science       13(8)        38          IEA        IRT
9 PISA 2000/02 Programme for International Student Assessment           2000+02 OECD+W. Math/Scie./Read. 15                  31+10       OECD       IRT
10 PIRLS           Progress in International Reading Literacy Study     2001      World      Reading            9(4)         34          IEA        IRT
11 TIMSS 2003      Trends in Internat. Mathematics and Science Study    2003      World      Math/Science       9(4),13(8)   24,45       IEA        IRT
12 PISA 2003       Programme for International Student Assessment       2003     World       Math/Scie./Read. 15             40          OECD       IRT
13 PIRLS 2006      Progress in International Reading Literacy Study     2006     World       Reading            >9.5(4)      39          IEA        IRT
14 PISA 2006       Programme for International Student Assessment       2006     World       Math/Scie./Read. 15             57          OECD       IRT
                                                                                                                >9.5(4),
15 TIMSS 2007      Trends in Internat. Mathematics and Science Study    2007     World       Math/Science                    35,48       IEA        IRT
                                                                                                                > 13.5(8)
Notes:
a. Grade in parentheses where grade level was target population.
b. FS = final year of secondary education (differs across countries).
c. Number of participating countries that yielded internationally comparable performance data.
d. Conducting organization: International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA); Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD).
e. Test scale: percent-correct formal (PC); item-response-theory proficiency scale (IRT).
Table 2: International tests of educational achievement: Additional testing
   Abbr.           Study                                                 Year      Region    Subject            Agea,b       Countriesc Organiz.d Scalee
                   Programa de Estudios Conjuntos para la Integración
1 ECIEL                                                                  1975-76 Latin Ame. Reading/Science     (1, 4, 6, FS) 7         ECIEL     PC
                   Económica Latinoamericana
2 IAEP-I           International Assessment of Educational Progress I    1988      OECD      Math/Science       13           6          IAEP      PC
3 IAEP-II          International Assessment of Educational Progress II   1990-91 World       Math/Science       10,14/9,13 13,19/13,18 IAEP       PC
                                                                                             Prose/Document/
4 IALS             International Adult Literacy Survey                   1994-98 World                         16-65         20         OECD      IRT
                                                                                             Quantit. Literacy
                   Southern and Eastern Africa Consortium for                      Sou.+East.                                           IIEP/
5 SACMEQ I                                                               1995-98              Math/Reading      (6)          7
                   Monitoring Educational Quality                                  Africa                                               SACMEQ
                   Programme d’Analyse des Systèmes Educatifs des        1996+98 Franc. Sub-                                            CONFE-
6 PASEC                                                                                      Math/Reading       (2),(5)      6                 PC
                   Pays de la CONFENEM                                   +2001   Sah. Africa                                            NEM
7 LLECE            Primer Estudio Internacional Comparativo              1997      Latin Ame. Math/Reading      (3),(4)      11         LLECE     IRT
                   Southern and Eastern Africa Consortium for            1999-     Sou.+East.                                           SACMEQ
8 SACMEQ II                                                                                   Math/Reading      (6)          14
                   Monitoring Educational Quality                        2004      Africa                                               /IIEP
                                                                                             Prose/Document
9 ALLS             Adult Literacy and Life Skills Survey                 2002-06 OECD                           16-65        5          OECD      IRT
                                                                                             Liter./Numeracy
                                                                                   Latin                        (3),(6)/(6)/
10 SERCE           Segundo Estudio Regional Comparativo Explicativo      2006                Math/Scie./Read.                16/9/16    LLECE     IRT
                                                                                   America                      (3),(6)
Notes:
a. Grade in parentheses where grade level was target population.
b. FS = final year of secondary education (differs across countries).
c. Number of participating countries that yielded internationally comparable performance data.
d. Conducting organization: Estudos Conjuntos de Integraçâo Ecônomica da América Latina (ECIEL); International Assessment of Educational Progress
(IAEP); Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP); Southern and
Eastern Africa Consortium for Monitoring Educational Quality (SACMEQ); Conférence des Ministres de l’Éducation des Pays ayant le Français en Partage
(CONFENEM); Laboratorio Latinoamericano de Evaluación de la Calidad de la Educación (LLECE).
e. Test scale: percent-correct formal (PC); item-response-theory proficiency scale (IRT).
Table 3: Performance on selected international student achievement tests
                                   FIMS    SIMS     TIMSS    TIMSS-      PISA     TIMSS   PISA   PISA   TIMSS
Code      Country                                                                                               cognitivea
                                   1964   1980-82    1995   Repeat 99   2000/02    2003   2003   2006    2007
ALB       Albania                                                         381                                     378.5
DZA       Algeria                                                                                        387
ARG       Argentina                                                      388                     381              392.0
ARM       Armenia                                                                  478                   499      442.9
AUS       Australia                27.0              530      525        533       505    524    520     496      509.4
AUT       Austria                                    539                 515              506    505              508.9
AZE       Azerbaijan                                                                             476
BHR       Bahrain                                                                  401                   398      411.4
BEL       Belgium                  43.4     52.8     546      558        520       537    529    520              504.1
BIH       Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                         456
BWA       Botswana                                                                 366                   364      357.5
BRA       Brazil                                                         334              356    370              363.8
BGR       Bulgaria                                   540      511        430       476           413     464      478.9
CAN       Canada                            50.9     527      531        533       532    532    527              503.8
CHL       Chile                                               392        384       387           411              404.9
CHN       China                                                                                                   493.9
COL       Colombia                                   385                                         370     380      415.2
HRV       Croatia                                                                                467
CYP       Cyprus                                     474      476                  459                   465      454.2
CZE       Czech Rep.                                 564      520        498              516    510     504      510.8
DNK       Denmark                                    502                 514              514    513              496.2
EGY       Egypt                                                                    406                   391      403.0
SLV       El Salvador                                                                                    340
EST       Estonia                                                                  531           515              519.2
FIN       Finland                  37.7     48.2              520        536              544    548              512.6
FRA       France                   30.0     53.5     538                 517              511    496              504.0
GEO       Georgia                                                                                        410
DEU       Germany                  36.3              509                 490              503    504              495.6
GHA       Ghana                                                                    276                   309      360.3
GRC       Greece                                     484                 447              445    459              460.8
HKG       Hong Kong-China                   49.9     588      582        560       586    550    547     572      519.5
(continued on next page)
Table 3 (continued)
                               FIMS    SIMS     TIMSS    TIMSS-      PISA     TIMSS   PISA   PISA   TIMSS
Code      Country                                                                                           cognitivea
                               1964   1980-82    1995   Repeat 99   2000/02    2003   2003   2006    2007
HUN       Hungary                       54.6     537       532        488      529     490    491    517      504.5
ISL       Iceland                                 487                 514              515    506             493.6
IND       India                                                                                               428.1
IDN       Indonesia                                       403        367       411    360    391     397      388.0
IRN       Iran, Islamic Rep.                     428      422                  411                   403      421.9
IRL       Ireland                                527                 503              503    501              499.5
ISR       Israel               46.1    45.6      522      466        433       496           442     463      468.6
ITA       Italy                                           479        457       484    466    462     480      475.8
JPN       Japan                46.0    63.5      605      579        557       570    534    523     570      531.0
JOR       Jordan                                          428                  424           384     427      426.4
KAZ       Kazakhstan
KOR       Korea, Rep.                            607      587        547       589    542    547     597      533.8
KWT       Kuwait                                 392                                                 354      404.6
KGZ       Kyrgyzstan                                                                         311
LVA       Latvia                                 493      505        463       508    483    486              480.3
LBN       Lebanon                                                              433                   449      395.0
LIE       Liechtenstein                                              514              536    525              512.8
LTU       Lithuania                              477      482                  502           486     506      477.9
LUX       Luxembourg                   37.9                          446              493    490              464.1
MAC       Macao-China                                                                 527    525              526.0
MKD       Macedonia                                       447        381       435                            415.1
MYS       Malaysia                                        519                  508                   474      483.8
MLT       Malta                                                                                      488
MEX       Mexico                                                     387              385    406              399.8
MDA       Moldova, Rep.                                   469                  460                            453.0
MNE       Montenegro                                                                         399
MAR       Morocco                                         337                  387                   381      332.7
NLD       Netherlands          30.6    58.1      541      540                  536    538    531              511.5
NZL       New Zealand                  46.4      508      491        537       494    523    522              497.8
NGA       Nigeria                      33.4                                                                   415.4
NOR       Norway                                 503                 499       461    495    490     469      483.0
(continued on next page)
Table 3 (continued)
                                            FIMS       SIMS       TIMSS       TIMSS-      PISA        TIMSS       PISA        PISA       TIMSS
Code       Country                                                                                                                                 cognitivea
                                            1964      1980-82      1995      Repeat 99   2000/02       2003       2003        2006        2007
OMN        Oman                                                                                                                           372
PSE        Palestinian Nat. Auth.                                                                      390                                367          406.2
PER        Peru                                                                             292                                                        312.5
PHL        Philippines                                                          345                    378                                             364.7
POL        Poland                                                                           470                    490         495                     484.6
PRT        Portugal                                                 454                     454                    466         466                     456.4
QAT        Qatar                                                                                                               318         307
ROU        Romania                                                  482         472                    475                     415         461         456.2
RUS        Russian Fed.                                             535         526         478        508         468         476         512         492.2
SAU        Saudi Arabia                                                                                332                                 329         366.3
SRB        Serbia                                                                                      477         437         435         486         444.7
SGP        Singapore                                                643         604                    605                                 593         533.0
SVK        Slovak Rep.                                              547         534                    508         498         492                     505.2
SVN        Slovenia                                                 541         530                    493                     504         501         499.3
ZAF        South Africa                                             354         275                    264                                             308.9
ESP        Spain                                                    487                     476                    485         480                     482.9
SWZ        Swaziland                                    33.9                                                                                           439.8
SWE        Sweden                           21.9        43.5        519                     510        499         509         502         491         501.3
CHE        Switzerland                                              545                     529                    527         530                     514.2
SYR        Syrian Arab Rep.                                                                                                                395
TWN        Taiwan (Chinese Taipei)                                              585                    585                     549         598         545.2
THA        Thailand                                     42.7        522         467         432                    417         417         441         456.5
TUN        Tunisia                                                              448                    410         359         365         420         379.5
TUR        Turkey                                                               429                                423         424         432         412.8
UKR        Ukraine                                                                                                                         462
GBR        United Kingdom                   32.9        48.8        502         496         529        498                     495         500         495.0
USA        United States                    25.4        46.0        500         502         493        504         483         474         508         490.3
URY        Uruguay                                                                                                 422         427                     430.0
ZWE        Zimbabwe                                                                                                                                    410.7
Notes: All scores refer to the mathematics test in lower secondary school. (FIMS, SIMS: age 13; TIMSS: grade 8; PISA: age 15).
a. Average score on all international tests 1964-2003 in math and science, primary through end of secondary school (Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a)).
Table 4: An example of an international education production function: PISA 2003
                                                                Coef.      Std. err.

STUDENT CHARACTERISTICS
Age (years)                                                    17.593***    (1.101)
Female                                                        -17.360***    (0.639)
Preprimary education (more than 1 year)                         5.606***    (0.703)
School starting age                                            -3.863***    (0.505)
Grade repetition in primary school                            -35.794***    (1.410)
Grade repetition in secondary school                          -34.730***    (1.646)
Grade
   7th grade                                                  -47.184***    (4.068)
   8th grade                                                  -28.009***    (2.239)
   9th grade                                                  -12.486***    (1.337)
   11th grade                                                  -6.949***    (2.062)
   12th grade                                                   7.030       (4.826)
Immigration background
   First generation student                                    -9.047***    (1.544)
   Non-native student                                          -9.040***    (1.644)
Language spoken at home
   Other national dialect or language                         -23.736***    (2.849)
   Foreign language                                            -8.381***    (1.665)

FAMILY BACKGROUND
Living with
   Single mother or father                                     19.349***    (1.842)
   Patchwork family                                            21.272***    (2.032)
   Both parents                                                27.432***    (1.829)
Parents’ working status
   Both full-time                                              -2.479*      (1.325)
   One full-time, one half-time                                 6.744***    (1.063)
   At least one full time                                      13.753***    (1.173)
   At least one half time                                       8.416***    (1.133)
Parents’ job
   Blue collar high skilled                                     0.431       (0.970)
   White collar low skilled                                     2.864***    (0.933)
   White collar high skilled                                    8.638***    (0.988)
Books at home
   11-25 books                                                  5.554***    (0.978)
   26-100 books                                                22.943***    (1.009)
   101-200 books                                               32.779***    (1.117)
   201-500 books                                               49.834***    (1.219)
   More than 500 books                                         51.181***    (1.399)
Index of Economic, Social and Cultural Status (ESCS)           18.114***    (0.524)
GDP per capita (1,000 $)                                       -1.890*      (1.060)
(continued on next page)
Table 4 (continued)
                                                                                      Coef.          Std. err.

SCHOOL INPUTS
School’s community location
   Town (3,000-100,000)                                                              3.226*           (1.531)
   City (100,000-1,000,000)                                                         10.782***         (1.890)
   Large city with > 1 million people                                                7.895***         (2.378)
Educational expenditure per student (1,000 $)                                        1.174***         (0.405)
Class size (mathematics)                                                             1.474***         (0.067)
Shortage of instructional materials
   Not at all                                                                      -10.180***         (2.576)
   Strongly                                                                          6.720***         (1.300)
Instruction time (minutes per week)                                                  0.035***         (0.005)
Teacher education (share at school)
   Fully certified teachers                                                          9.715***         (3.422)
   Tertiary degree in pedagogy                                                       6.573***         (2.010)

INSTITUTIONS
Choice
   Private operation                                                                57.585***        (8.355)
   Government funding                                                               81.839***       (22.327)
Accountability
   External exit exams                                                              25.338*         (10.054)
   Assessments used to decide about students’ retention/promotion                   12.185***        (1.631)
   Monitoring of teacher lessons by principal                                        4.557***        (1.343)
   Monitoring of teacher lessons by external inspectors                              3.796***        (1.415)
   Assessments used to compare school to district/national performance               2.134*          (1.259)
   Assessments used to group students                                               -6.065***        (1.301)
Autonomy and its interaction with accountability
   Autonomy in formulating budget                                                   -9.609***         (2.178)
   External exit exams x Autonomy in formulating budget                              9.143***         (3.119)
   Autonomy in establishing starting salaries                                       -8.632***         (3.251)
   External exit exams x Autonomy in establishing starting salaries                  5.868            (3.980)
   Autonomy in determining course content                                            0.175            (1.907)
   External exit exams x Autonomy in determining course content                      3.224            (2.858)
   Autonomy in hiring teachers                                                      20.659***         (2.249)
   External exit exams x Autonomy in hiring teachers                               -28.935***         (3.365)
Students                                                                           219,794
Schools                                                                              8,245
Countries                                                                               29
R2 (at student level)                                                                0.390
R2 (at country level)                                                                0.872
Notes: Dependent variable: PISA 2003 international mathematics test score. Least-squares regressions weighted
by students’ sampling probability. The models additionally control for imputation dummies and interaction terms
between imputation dummies and the variables. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the school level in
parentheses (clustering at country level for all country-level variables, which are private operation, government
funding, external exit exams, GDP per capita, and expenditure per student). Significance level (based on clustering-
robust standard errors): *** 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent.
Source: Own calculations based on Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009), who provide additional
background details.
Table 5: Within-country studies on student background and educational achievement
                                                  Topic of      Measure(s) of student Measure of Estimation
Study           Dataset     Countries                                                                                     Results
                                                  investigation background            achievement method
                                             Peer effects         Peers’ mean test score,                 Value-added,
                            Belgium, France,                                                                              Positive peer effect; gains from high-
Zimmer and                                   in private and       share of high-/ low-    Math, age 13-   country and
                SIMS        New Zealand,                                                                                  quality peers stronger for low-ability
Toma (2000)                                  public               ability students in     14              school-type
                            Canada, U.S.                                                                                  students; mixed results on school types
                                             schools              classroom                               fixed effects
Ammermueller,              Czech Rep., Hun-       Educational     Immigration, family                                     Substantial effects of family background;
                                                                                          Math +
Heijke, and                gary, Latvia, Lithu-   production in   status, parental educa-                Cross-section    larger in more (Czech Rep., Slovak Rep.,
              TIMSS                                                                       science, grade
Woessmann                  ania, Slovak Rep.,     transition      tion, books at home,                   WCRLR            Hungary, Slovenia) than in less advanced
                                                                                          7+8
(2005)                     Slovenia, Romania      countries       community location                                      group (Lithuania, Latvia, Romania)
                           Hong Kong, Japan,      Educational     Immigration, family
                                                                                          Math (+                         Strong family-background effects in Korea
Woessmann                  Singapore, South       production in   status, parental educa-                 Cross-section
                TIMSS                                                                     science),                       and Singapore; more equitable outcomes in
(2005a)                    Korea, Thailand;       East Asian      tion, books at home,                    WCRLR
                                                                                          grade 7+8                       Hong Kong and Thailand
                           France, Spain, U.S.    countries       community location
                                                           Books at home, paren-                          Cross-section   Strong associations; aggregate size similar
                                             Educational                           Math (+
Woessmann                   17 West European               tal education, immigra-                        WCRLR,          in Europe and U.S.; France, Flem. Belgium
                TIMSS                        production in                         science),
(2008)                      countries + U.S.               tion, family status,                           quantile        most equitable; Britain, Germany least;
                                             West Europe                           grade 7+8
                                                           community location                             regression      equity unrelated to mean performance
                                         Effects of re-                                  Math +         IV (instrument: Significant and sizeable effects of relative
Bedard and      TIMSS, 10 for grade 3+4,
                                         lative school Relative age                      science, grade age assigned    school starting age on performance at ages
Dhuey (2006)    TIMSS-R 18 for grade 7+8
                                         starting age                                    3+4 + 7+8      by cutoff date) 9 and 13
                            Belgium, Canada,                      No. of siblings, ISEI,                                  Effects of number of siblings relevant in
Wolter and
                            Finland, France, Sibling              parental education +   Reading, age Cross-section       all six countries, but to a different extent;
Coradi Vellacott PISA
                            Germany,         rivalry              employment, immigra- 15             WCRLR               effects concentrated in sub-group low-SES
(2003)
                            Switzerland                           tion + family status                                    families
Schuetz,                                                                                                                  Significant family-background effect in all
                                                                                         Mean math +
Ursprung, and TIMSS,                              Equality of                                           Cross-section     countries; considerable variation; large
                      54 countries                                Books at home          science, grade
Woessmann     TIMSS-R                             opportunity                                           WCRLR             effects in Britain, Hungary, Germany;
                                                                                         8
(2008)                                                                                                                    relatively small effects in France, Canada
                                                                  Books at home, paren-                                   Family background strongly linked to
Peterson and                France, Germany,
                                             Equality of          tal job + employment,              Cross-section        educational performance; largest in
Woessmann       PISA        Great Britain,                                              Math, age 15
                                             opportunity          immigration status,                WCRLR                Germany and U.S., slightly smaller in
(2007)                      U.S.
                                                                  family status                                           Great Britain, even smaller in France
(continued on next page)
Table 5 (continued)
                                              Topic of      Measure(s) of      Measure of Estimation
Study           Dataset    Countries                                                                             Results
                                              investigation student background achievement method
                          Australia, Canada,                                                                     Socio-economic effect highest in Germany,
                          Finland, France,                                                                       U.K., U.S.; lowest in Scandinavia, Canada;
Entorf and                                   Immigration     Immigration status, Reading, age Cross-section
              PISA        Germany, New                                                                           migrant disadvantage larger in Continental
Minoiu (2005)                                policy          ISEI index          15           OLS
                          Zealand, Sweden,                                                                       Europe than in traditional immigration coun-
                          U.K., U.S.                                                                             tries; language spoken at home a key factor
                                              Immigrants’    Immigration status,   math, age                     Immigrants fare best compared to natives in
                PISA,      10 OECD
                                              disadvantage   language spoken at    15; math,                     English-speaking countries and worst in
Schnepf         TIMSS,     countries with                                                       Cross-section
                                              in high        home, measures of     grade 8;                      Continental Europe; language skills, socio-
(2007)          TIMSS-     share of foreign                                                     OLS
                                              immigration    socio-economic        reading,                      economic background, and school
                R, PIRLS   born > 10%
                                              countries      background            grade 4                       segregation as determinants of immigrant gap
                                                                                                                 Between-school segregation high in Austria,
Jenkins,                                                                                        Calculation of
              PISA +                          Social                                                             Belgium, Germany; low in Nordic countries,
Micklewright,                                                                                   summary
              PISA         27 countries       segregation in ISEI index            –                             Scotland; middle in England, U.S.; higher
and Schnepf                                                                                     indices of
              2003                            schools                                                            where student selection by schools, but not
(2008)                                                                                          segregation
                                                                                                                 with more private schools or parental choice
                          Argentina, Colom-                  Immigration, books                 Value-added
                          bia, Turkey, Mace- Educational     at home, parental                  WCRLR model Family background strongly related to student
Woessmann                                                                        Reading,
                PIRLS     donia; Germany, production in      education, job, em-                (controlling for performance; relatively large in Argentina
(2010a)                                                                          grade 4
                          Greece, Italy,     Latin America   ployment, + income,                pre-school       and small in Colombia
                          England                            community location                 performance)
                           France, Germany,                                                     Cross-section WCRLR,
Ammermueller                                                                                                             Modestly large peer effects;
                           Iceland,                          Peers’ index of       Reading,     school fixed effects, IV
and Pischke  PIRLS                          Peer effects                                                                 measurement error important;
                           Netherlands,                      books at home         grade 4      (instrument: students’
(2009)                                                                                                                   selection introduces little bias
                           Norway, Sweden                                                       for parents’ report)
                                                                                                                 Significant effect of relative school starting
                                              Effects of                           Math +       Cross-section,
Sprietsma       PISA                                                                                             age in 10 out of 16 countries; relevant
                           16 countries       relative school Relative age         reading, age school random
(2010)          2003                                                                                             channels are probabilities of starting school
                                              starting age                         15           effects
                                                                                                                 too late, grade retention, and grade skipping
Notes: Student is the level of analysis in all studies. SES = socio-economic status. WCRLR = weighted clustering-robust linear regression. OLS = ordinary
least squares. IV = instrumental variable. ISEI = international socio-economic index of occupational status. See Tables 1 and 2 for acronyms of datasets.
Table 6: Cross-country studies on student background, school inputs, and educational achievement
                                   No. of    Level of Topic of                                           Measure of       Estimation
Study              Dataset                                          Measure of inputs                                                     Results
                                   countries analysis investigation                                      achievement      method
                   FIMS, FISS,                            Production of    Student-teacher ratios,                                        Positive effect of education of parents on
Hanushek and                       70 country-                                                                            Cross-section
                   SIMS, SISS,                 Country    student          expenditure, adult            Math + science                   student performance; no effects of school
Kimko (2000)                       cohorts                                                                                OLS
                   IAEP-I,+II                             achievement      schooling                                                      resources
                   FIMS, FISS,                                             Student-teacher ratios, Math, science +
                                                          Determinants                                               Panel SUR         Strong relation between family
Lee and Barro      FIRS, SIMS,                                             spending per student,   reading,
                                 58          Country      of schooling                                               regression, fixed background and school outcomes; positive
(2001)             SISS, SIRS,                                             teacher salaries, length of
                                                                                                   repetition +
                                                          quality                                                    effects           and significant impact of school resources
                   IAEP-I,+II                                              school year             dropout rates
                                                      Effects on           18 background measures,                                     Strong effects of family background and
Woessmann                                                                                                            Cross-section
                   TIMSS         39          Student student               12 resources + teachers,Math + science                      institutional arrangements; far more
(2003b)                                                                                                              WCRLR
                                                      performance          26 institutional                                            important than resources
Jürges and                                            Sources of           14 groups of student,                     Cross-section     Positive effects of family background,
                                             Student,
Schneider          TIMSS         23                   student              teacher, class, school  Math              OLS, IV, kernel teacher characteristics, and school
                                             country
(2004)                                                achievement          measures, 2 national                      density           resources
                                                      Explaining           Parental education, books                                   30% of achievement gap explained; family
McEwan and                       2 (Cuba,                                                                            Blinder-Oaxaca
                   LLECE                     Student Cuban-                at home, school, teacherMath + Spanish                      and peer characteristics play a role, school
Marshall (2004)                  Mexico)                                                                             decomposition
                                                      Mexican gap          + peer characteristics                                      characteristics not
                                                                                                                                       Class-size estimates get negative and
Fertig and                                            Class-size                                                     Cross-section
                   PISA          30          Student                   Class size                  Reading                             significant only at high aggregation levels,
Wright (2005)                                         effects                                                        OLS
                                                                                                                                       indicating aggregation bias
Gunnarsson,                                                                                        Math +
                                                      Effects of child Intensity of working                          Cross-section, Significant negative effect of child labor
Orazem, and        LLECE         10          Student                                               language, grade
                                                      labor            outside the home                              IV                on student achievement
Sánchez (2006)                                                                                     3+4
                                                                                                   Avg. of math,                       Substantial inefficiencies in most coun-
Afonso and St.                                        Efficiency of Teachers per students,                           DEA, Tobit,
                   PISA 2003     25          Country                                               reading, science,                   tries; non-discretionary inputs (GDP and
Aubyn (2006)                                          expenditure      time spent in school                          bootstrap
                                                                                                   problem solving                     parental education) account for large part
                                                                       13 groups of student                                            Background, resources, teachers, and esp.
Fuchs and                                             Effects on
                                                                       measures, 5 resources + Math, science, + Cross-section          institutions all significantly associated with
Woessmann          PISA          31          Student student
                                                                       teachers, 10 institutional, reading           WCRLR, IV         achievement; models account for >85% of
(2007)                                                performance
                                                                       interactions                                                    between-country variation
                                                                                                                     Oaxaca-Blinder,
                                                      Explaining       Parents’ education, books                                       Finish-German gap not explained by
Ammermueller                     2 (Finland,                                                                         Juhn-Murphy-
                   PISA 2000                 Student Finish-German at home, teacher                Reading                             different backgrounds; Finland uses
(2007)                           Germany)                                                                            Pierce
                                                      gap              characteristics                                                 resources more efficiently
                                                                                                                     decomposition
Dolton and         TIMSS+R                                             Teacher salaries                              Panel with
                                                      Effects of                                   Math, science +                     Absolute and relative teacher salary
Marcenaro-         +03, PISA +03 39          Country                   (absolute, relative), other                   country fixed
                                                      teacher pay                                  reading                             positively related to achievement
Gutierrez (2010)   +06                                                 teacher variables                             effects
Notes: SUR = seemingly unrelated regression. WCRLR = weighted clustering-robust linear regression. OLS = ordinary least squares. IV = instrumental
variable. DEA = data envelopment analysis. See Tables 1 and 2 for acronyms of datasets.
Table 7: Within-country studies on school inputs and educational achievement
                                   Level of Topic of      Measure of              Measure of Estimation
Study        Dataset Countries                                                                                           Results
                                   analysis investigation school inputs           achievement method
           FISS,                             Educational     Up to 20            Science (math    Cross-section          School and teacher quality predominant
Heyneman
           ECIEL,                            production in   measures,           in few           analysis of            influence on student learning; resources
and Loxley          29 countries   Student
           national                          low-income      differing by        countries),      variance explained     more closely related to student
(1983)
           datasets                          countries       dataset             primary school   by sets of measures    performance in developing countries
                                             Educational     Teacher, class-
                 Burkina Faso,                                                    Mean of                                Many measures, such as textbooks and
                                             production in   room, and school
Michaelowa       Cameroon, Cote                                                   math +          HLM, pooled            teacher education, significantly
           PASEC                 Student     Francophone     characteristics,
(2001)           d’Ivoire, Mada-                                                  French,         across countries       associated with student performance; no
                                             Sub-Saharan     national expendi-
                 gascar, Senegal                                                  grade 5                                positive association with smaller classes
                                             Africa          ture per student
           FIMS,                           Change in                                                                     Real expenditure per student increased
Gundlach,                                                                         Math +          Longitudinal
           FISS,                           schooling                                                                     substantially in most countries in 1970-
Woessmann,       11-17 OECD                                  Expenditure per      science,        measurement of
           SIMS,                   Country productivity                                                                  1994; student performance remained
and Gmelin       countries                                   student              different       skills and
           SISS,                           in OECD                                                                       constant at best; productivity decline
(2001)                                                                            grades          expenditures
           TIMSS                           countries                                                                     larger in many countries than in U.S.
                Hong Kong,                                                                                               Real expenditure per student increased
Gundlach                                  Change in                               Math +          Longitudinal
          SIMS, Japan, Singapore,                                                                                        substantially in most countries in 1980-
and                                       schooling          Expenditure per      science,        measurement of
          SISS, South Korea,      Country                                                                                1994, mostly due to decrease in student-
Woessmann                                 productivity       student              different       skills and
          TIMSS Philippines,                                                                                             teacher ratios; student performance did
(2001)                                    in East Asia                            grades          expenditures
                Thailand                                                                                                 not change substantially
                                             Effects of                                                             Limited evidence of effects of school
Hanushek                                                     Class size, teacher
                                   Class-    class size and                      Math, ages                         inputs; cross-country differences hard to
and Luque    TIMSS 37 countries                              experience and                       Cross-section OLS
                                   room      teacher                             9+13                               explain systematically; no evidence of
(2003)                                                       education
                                             characteristics                                                        stronger effects in developing countries
                                                                                                  Cross-section          Sizable beneficial effects of smaller
Woessmann                                                                         Math +          WCRLR, school          classes rejected in 8 countries; only in
                                             Class-size
and West  TIMSS 11 countries       Student                   Class size           science,        fixed effects (using   Greece, Iceland; noteworthy effects only
                                             effects
(2006)                                                                            grades 7+8      between-grade          in countries with low teacher salaries;
                                                                                                  variation), IV         conventional estimates severely biased
(continued on next page)
Table 7 (continued)
                                      Level of Topic of      Measure of school Measure of
Study           Dataset Countries                                                          Estimation method Results
                                      analysis investigation inputs            achievement
                                                                                                  Cross-section              No statistically and economically
                      17 West                                   Class size (shortage
Woessmann                                       Class-size                           Math, grades WCRLR, school              significant class-size effect in any
                TIMSS European +      Student                   of materials,
(2005b)                                         effects                              7+8          fixed effects, IV,         country; small statistically significant
                      U.S.                                      instruction time)
                                                                                                  RD                         effects only in Iceland, Norway, Spain
Ammermueller,                                   Educational                                                                  No causal class-size effects; in some
                    7 East Euro-                                                   Math +            Cross-section
Heijke, and                                     production in Class size, shortage                                           countries, positive association with
              TIMSS pean (see    Student                                           science,          WCRLR, school
Woessmann                                       transition    of materials                                                   teacher experience and education and
                    Table 5)                                                       grades 7+8        fixed effects, IV
(2005)                                          countries                                                                    with sufficient reported materials
                      5 East Asian              Class-size      Class size, shortage Math (+         Cross-section           No causal class-size effects; not much
Woessmann
                TIMSS + 3 (see     Student      effects in      of materials, teacher science),      WCRLR, school           evidence of positive association with
(2005a)
                      Table 5)                  East Asia       background            grades 7+8     fixed effects, IV       other school inputs
                                                Student-                             Math + scie-    Cross-section           Some evidence of positive interaction
Ammermueller TIMSS/
                     England,                   teacher                              nce, grades     WCRLR, student          effects of student and teacher gender in
and Dolton   R/2003,                  Student                   Teacher gender
                     U.S.                       gender                               4+8; reading,   fixed effects (across   8th-grade math in England in 2003, but
(2006)       PIRLS
                                                interaction                          grade 4         subjects)               not U.S. and most other specifications
                                                Educational     Class size,                          Value-added
                      2 Latin Ame-                                                                                         No consistent evidence of association
Woessmann                                       production in   instructional time, Reading,         WCRLR model
                PIRLS rican + 6 (see Student                                                                               between student performance and
(2010a)                                         Latin           shortage of materials grade 4        (controlling for pre-
                      Table 5)                                                                                             schools’ resource endowments
                                                America         or staff                             school performance)
                                                              OECD index of                          Pooled cross-           Positive association with individual
                                                Cooperative
Bratti, Checchi,                                              students’ reports of                   section CRLR with       competitive learning attitude (higher in
                 PISA                           vs. competi-
and Filippin             24 countries Student                 cooperative and       Math, age 15     country fixed           comprehensive systems) and with
                 2003                           tive learning
(2008)                                                        competitive attitudes                  effects, quantile       school-average cooperative learning
                                                approach
                                                              towards learning                       regressions             attitude (higher in tracked systems)
                                                                                                     Cross-section           Few class-size effects; small
Altinok and                                                                          Math +          WCRLR, school           significant negative effects only in 10
                TIMSS 33-45                     Class-size      Differences in class
Kingdon                               Student                                        science,        and student fixed       countries, positive in 6; larger in
                2003  countries                 effects         size across subjects
(2009)                                                                               grade 8         effects (across         developing countries and with low
                                                                                                     subjects), IV           teacher quality
Notes: WCRLR = weighted clustering-robust linear regression. HLM = hierarchical linear model. OLS = ordinary least squares. IV = instrumental variable.
RD = regression discontinuity. See Tables 1 and 2 for acronyms of datasets.
Table 8: Within-country studies on institutions and educational achievement
                                        Level of   Topic of             Measure of      Measure of Estimation
Study          Dataset Countries                                                                              Results
                                        analysis   investigation        institutions    achievement method
                                                   Effect of                                                        External exams positively associated with
Bishop (1995),                                                          Central exams, Math +         Cross-
               IAEP-II Canada, U.S.     Student    curriculum-based                                                 student achievement; also with student,
ch. 6                                                                   type of school science        Section
                                                   external exams                                                   parental, and teacher behavior
                        Belgium,                                                        Math,                     Positive effect of private schools; funding
                                                   Effects of public                                  Value-added
                        France, New                                    Type of school beginning                   not significantly associated with
Toma (1996)    SIMS                      Student   funding and private                                achievement
                        Zealand, Onta-                                 (public/private) and end of                performance; governmental control over
                                                   schools                                            model
                        rio (Can.), U.S.                                                school year               private schools negative factor
                                                                                                      Cross-
Vandenberghe                                                                             Math,        section IV,   Significant positive association of private
                                                   Private vs. public   Type of school
and Robin    PISA       9 countries     Student                                          science, +   Heckman       schools with achievement in some but not
                                                   education            (public/private)
(2004)                                                                                   reading      two stages,   all countries
                                                                                                      PSM
                                                                                                                    Slight advantage of private government-
Corten and                                                             Governance
               PISA                                Low-SES students                   Math +                        dependent schools, no significant
Dronkers                19 countries    Student                        and funding of                 MLM
               2000                                and private schools                reading                       differences between public and private-
(2006)                                                                 school.
                                                                                                                    independent schools
                                                                      Governance                      MLM           Better performance of government-
Dronkers and PISA                                  Public and private
                        22 countries    Student                       and funding of Reading                        dependent private schools explained by
Robert (2008) 2000                                 schools
                                                                      school.                                       better school climate
                                                   Age profile of                     Share of
Cascio, Clark,                                                          Average years                               High correlation between literacy gains
                                                   literacy and                       population     Cross-
and Gordon     IALS     13 countries    Country                         of university                               into adulthood and university graduation
                                                   university                         with high-     section
(2008)                                                                  education                                   rate
                                                   education                          level literacy
Notes: SES = socio-economic status. IV = instrumental variable. PSM = propensity score matching. MLM = multilevel modeling. See Tables 1 and 2 for
acronyms of datasets.
Table 9: Cross-country studies on institutions and levels of educational achievement
                       No. of    Level of Topic of              Measure of      Measure of Estimation
Study        Dataset                                                                                           Results
                       countries analysis investigation         institutions    achievement method
                                                                                Math,                       Student achievement and teacher salaries higher in
Bishop                                                                                        Cross-section
             IAEP-II 15-21       Country Effects of CBEEE CBEEE                 science, +                  CBEEE countries; differences in qualifications and
(1995), ch 4                                                                                  OLS
                                                                                geography                   spending not significant
Bishop       TIMSS, 39,          Country,                                       Math +        Cross-section Large effect of CBEEE on student achievement;
                                          Effects of CBEEE CBEEE
(1997)       IAEP-II Canada      School                                         science       OLS           effects on parent, teacher, administrator behavior
                                                                                                            Large effects of institutional arrangements such as
Woessmann                                  Effects on student Seven different Math +          Cross-section
          TIMSS        39        Student                                                                    external exit exams, school autonomy, and private
(2003b)                                    performance        categories      science         WCRLR
                                                                                                            competition; far more important than resources
Woessmann TIMSS+ 39, 38                    Effects of central   Central exit    Math +        Cross-section Performance of students higher in systems with
                                 Student
(2003a)   TIMSS-R (54)                     exit exams           exams           science       WCRLR         central exams; positive interaction with autonomy
          TIMSS+                         Heterogeneity of       Central exit                  Cross-section
Woessmann          39, 38                                                     Math +                         Substantial heterogeneity of central exam effects
          TIMSS-                 Student central exam           exams, school                 WCRLR,
(2005c)            (54), 32                                                   science                        along student, school, and time dimension
          R + PISA                       effect                 autonomy                      quantile regr.
Bishop                                     Effects of MCE                      Math, science Cross-section Positive effects of CBEEE on student
              PISA     41        Country                        CBEEE
(2006), ch. 3                              and CBEEE                           + reading     OLS           achievement; do not affect school attendance
                                                                                                            Institutional variation accounts for a quarter of
Fuchs and                                                   CBEEE,          Math,
                                         Effects on student                                   Cross-section between-country achievement variation; external
Woessmann PISA         31        Student                    autonomy,       science, +
                                         performance                                          WCRLR, IV exams interact positively with autonomy; positive
(2007)                                                      private schools reading
                                                                                                            effect of private operation
                                         School choice,         School choice,                Cross-section,   Regional intensity of school choice and school
                                                                               Math,
Sprietsma    PISA                        school selectivity,    schools’                      MLM,             selectivity positively related to student
                       8         Student                                       reading +
(2008)       2003                        and student            student                       quantile         achievement; similar effect for low and high
                                                                               science
                                         performance            selection                     regression       performing students
                                         Public vs. private Private
Woessmann                                                                       Math +        Cross-section Negative effects of public operation on student
          PISA         29        Student school funding     operation and
(2009b)                                                                         reading       WCRLR         achievement; positive effect of public funding
                                         and operation      funding
Woessmann,
                                                                Several measu-                              Positive effects of several accountability measures
Luedemann,                               Accountability,
             PISA                                               res of accoun- Math           Cross-section on student performance and on role of autonomy;
Schuetz, and           29, 37    Student autonomy, and
             2003                                               tability, auto- +science      WCRLR         positive effects of share of privately operated
West (2009),                             choice
                                                                nomy, choice                                schools and of government funding
ch. 2-6
(continued on next page)
Table 9 (continued)
                         No. of    Level of Topic of            Measure of     Measure of
Study         Dataset                                                                      Estimation method Results
                         countries analysis investigation       institutions   achievement
                                           Effect of                                      Cross-section WCRLR,
                                                                Share of
West and                                   competition from                    Math,      IV (instrumenting       Positive causal effect of share of privately
              PISA                                              privately
Woessmann                29        Student private schools on                  science, + private school share by operated schools on student achievements,
              2003                                              operated
(forthcoming)                              student                             reading    historical Catholic     negative effect on costs
                                                                schools
                                           achievement                                    share)
                                                                                                                 Positive association of pre-primary
                                           Effect of pre-pri-   Characteristics                                  attendance with test scores; systematically
                                                                                          Cross-section WCRLR,
Schuetz       PISA                         mary education on    of pre-primary                                   stronger in countries with higher spending,
                         38        Student                                      Math      country fixed effects,
(2009)        2003                         later educational    education                                        larger shares of privately managed
                                                                                          (DiD)
                                           achievement          system                                           institutions, and higher training and relative
                                                                                                                 pay of educators in pre-primary system
Notes: CBEEE = curriculum based external exit exams. MCE = minimum competency exams. WCRLR = weighted clustering-robust linear regression. OLS =
ordinary least squares. IV = instrumental variable. MLM = multilevel modeling. DiD = differences in differences. See Tables 1 and 2 for acronyms of datasets.
Table 10: Cross-country studies on institutions and equity of educational achievement
                            No. of    Level of Topic of      Measure of                 Measure of Measure of              Estimation
Study          Dataset                                                                                                                     Results
                            countries analysis investigation institutions               achievement equity                 method
Hanushek and PISA,                                                                                                                        Significant effect of early tracking
                                                  Early tracking                       Math, science, Standard deviation Pooled data,
Woessmann    PIRLS,         45          Country                  Age of first tracking                                                    on inequality; no clear effect on
                                                  and inequality                       + reading      in test scores     DiD
(2006)       TIMSS                                                                                                                        mean performance
                                                                                                                                          Late tracking and pre-school
Schuetz,                                                                                                                 Cross-section
                                                               Age of first tracking,                 Dependence of test                  duration reduce impact of family
Ursprung, and TIMSS+                 Student, Equality of                              Mean math +                       WCRLR,
                           54                                  pre-school enroll-                     scores on books at                  background; inverted U-shaped
Woessmann       TIMSS-R              country opportunity                               science                           country fixed
                                                               ment and duration                      home                                effect of pre-school enrollment; no
(2008)                                                                                                                   effects
                                                                                                                                          tradeoff with efficiency
                                                               Number of school                       Dependence of test               Significant negative effect of number
                                              Institutions and                                                           Pooled data,
Ammermueller PISA,                                             types, instruction                     scores on student                of school types and share of private
                           14        Student educational                               Reading                           WCRLR,
(2005)          PIRLS                                          time, private school                   background                       schools on equality of opportunity;
                                              opportunities                                                              DiD
                                                               share, autonomy                        variables                        positive effect of instruction time
                                                                                                      Dependence of test
                                              School           Age of first selection,                                   Cohort study, Mixed results; tracking reinforces
Brunello and                                                                           Competences scores on parental
                IALS, PISA                    tracking and     length of tracking,                                       OLS, probit, family-background effects on
Checchi                    17, 32    Student                                           and other      education; coeffi-
                2003                          equality of      share of vocational                                       multinomial      formal education but weakens them
(2007)                                                                                 indicators     cient of variation
                                              opportunity      education                                                 logit            on learning on the job
                                                                                                      in test scores
                PISA       8-14                                                                       Dependence of test                  Tracking does not increase impact
                                              Tracking and                                                               Pooled cross-
Waldinger       +2003,     (DiD), 29                           Grade of first                         scores on parental                  of family background after
                                     Student family                                    Math + reading                    section data,
(2006)          TIMSS,     (cross-                             tracking                               background                          controlling for pre-tracking
                                              background                                                                 DiD
                PIRLS      section)                                                                   variables                           differences; but small samples
Guiso, Monte,                                                  Cultural attitudes,
                                     Student/ Gender                                                  Gender gap in test                  Girls’ lag in math eliminated in
Sapienza, and PISA 2003 32-37                                  female political        Math + reading                    Cross-section
                                     Country differences                                              scores                              more gender-equal societies
Zingales (2008)                                                empowerment
                                                               Ethnic segregation,                                       Blinder-Oaxa- Institutions account for 20% of
                TIMSS,                        Educational
                           62, 167                             pre-primary enroll-                    Unexplained test ca decomposi- immigrant disadvantage; esp. pre-
Schneeweis      TIMSS-R,             Student/ institutions and
                           country-                            ment, school starting Math + science score gap of         tion, pooled     primary education, young school
(2010)          +2003,               Country integration of
                           years                               age, instruction time,                 immigrants         WLS, country starting age, low classroom
                PISA +2003                    migrants
                                                               external exams                                            fixed effects    segregation, instruction time
Woessmann,                                                     Several measures of                                                        Public funding, private operation,
                                              Accountability,                                         Dependence of test
Luedemann,         PISA                                        accountability, auto-                                     Cross-section and later tracking reduce impact of
                           27        Student autonomy, and                             Math           scores on PISA
Schuetz, and West 2003                                         nomy, choice, and                                         WCRLR            family background; accountability
                                              choice                                                  index of ESCS
(2009), ch. 7                                                  tracking                                                                   measures mostly equity-neutral
Notes: ESCS = economic, social, and cultural status. WCRLR = weighted clustering-robust linear regression. OLS = ordinary least squares. DiD = differences
in differences. See Tables 1 and 2 for acronyms of datasets.
Table 11: Studies on cognitive skills and individual labor-market outcomes
                                                                       Measure of
                                Topic of         Measure of                         Estimation
Study          Countries                                               labor-market                      Results
                                investigation    achievement                        method
                                                                       outcome
Denny,         Great Britain,   Impact of                                                Cross-section
                                                 Prose, document,                                        Literacy has a role, but formal education dominant factor
Harmon, and    Ireland,         functional                             Hourly            log-linear
                                                 and quantitative                                        in determining earnings; positive interaction between
Redmond        Northern         literacy on                            earnings          maximum
                                                 literacy                                                literacy and years of schooling in Great Britain
(2000)         Ireland          earnings                                                 likelihood
Denny,                          Impact of years
                                                 Mean of prose,                                         Skills have significant effect on earnings, highest in
Harmon, and                     of schooling and                       Hourly            Cross-section
            21 countries                         document, and                                          English-speaking countries; excluding skill measures
O’Sullivan                      basic skills on                        earnings          log-linear OLS
                                                 quantitative literacy                                  significantly biases return to years of schooling upwards
(2004)                          earnings
Leuven,                         International                          Differing ear-
                                                                                Demand and
                                                 Mean of prose,                                  Model of skill supply and demand successfully explains
Oosterbeek,                     differences in                         nings concepts,
                                                                                supply
            15 countries                         document, and                                   cross-country differences in wage differentials between
and Ophem                       skill wage                             mostly gross
                                                                                analysis, cross-
                                                 quantitative literacy                           skill groups
(2004)                          differences                            annual   section
                                                                                                 Immigrants had lower cognitive skills than natives in
            Canada, New
                            Skills of       Mean of prose,                                       each country, largest gaps in U.S., small in Canada and
            Zealand,                                              Employment
Kahn (2004)                 immigrants and document, and                        Cross-section New Zealand; controlling for skills, male immigrants in
            Switzerland,                                          probability
                            employment      quantitative literacy                                U.S. no less likely to be employed than natives, while
            U.S.
                                                                                                 other immigrants less likely to be employed
            Canada,                                                             Cross-section,
                            Impact of                                                            Controlling for skill levels, employment protection laws
            Finland, Italy,                 Mean of prose,                      differences-in-
                            employment                            Permanent or                   do not interact with probability to have a job, but
Kahn (2007) Netherlands,                    document, and                       differences
                            protection laws                       temporary job                  decrease probability to have a permanent rather than
            Switzerland,                    quantitative literacy               multinomial
                            on employment                                                        temporary job for low-skilled workers
            U.K., U.S.                                                          logit
                                                 Quality-adjusted                                        Cognitive skills and quality-adjusted years of schooling
                                Returns to years
                                                 years of schooling; Annual                              both have significant positive effects on earnings; returns
Hanushek and                    education after                                      Cross-section
             13 countries                        mean of prose,        earnings from                     to quality-adjusted education higher than traditional
Zhang (2009)                    adjusting for                                        log-linear OLS
                                                 document, and         employment                        Mincer estimate, but bias more than offset by accounting
                                school quality
                                                 quantitative literacy                                   for non-school influences
Notes: IALS is the dataset used in all studies. OLS = ordinary least squares.
Table 12: Studies on cognitive skills and distribution of labor-market outcomes
                                                                       Measure of
                               Topic of          Measure of                         Estimation
Study          Countries                                               labor-market                Results
                               investigation     achievement                        method
                                                                       outcome
                          Skill
Freeman and                                                                                        More compressed distribution of skills in Germany
                          compression and Quantitative literacy Income,             Cross-section
Schettkat   Germany, U.S.                                                                          explains only modest proportion of higher wage
                          wage            (numeracy)            employment          log-linear OLS
(2001)                                                                                             compression compared to U.S.
                          distribution
                               Inequality in
Devroye and Germany,                             Mean of prose,
                               skills and                              Annual       Cross-section Skill inequality explains only small part of cross-country
Freeman     Netherlands,                         document, and
                               inequality in                           earnings     log-linear OLS differences in inequality
(2001)      Sweden, U.S.                         quantitative literacy
                               earnings
                               Inequality of                                        Cross-section,
                                                 Mean of prose,
Blau and                       skills and                              Weekly       Juhn-Murphy- Greater skill dispersion in U.S. plays a part in explaining
            9 countries                          document, and
Kahn (2005)                    inequality of                           earnings     Pierce         higher wage inequality, but relatively modest
                                                 quantitative literacy
                               earnings                                             decomposition
Notes: IALS is the dataset used in all studies. OLS = ordinary least squares.
Table 13: Studies on cognitive skills and macroeconomic growth
                               No. of    Topic of        Measure of            Measure of macro-
Study         Dataset                                                                            Estimation method           Results
                               countries investigation   achievement           economic outcome
                                                                                                                        Strong and robust effect of
Hanushek      FIMS, FISS,     31         Effect of labor- Average score of all Growth rate of real Cross-section growth quality of labor force on growth;
and Kimko     SIMS, SISS,     (projected force quality tests, math + science, GDP per capita,      regressions with     strong increase in explained
(2000)        IAEP-I, IAEP-II to 80)     on growth        different age levels 1960-90             different controls   growth variance; school quantity
                                                                                                                        tends to lose significance
                                                                                                   Cross-section growth      Significant effect of student
                                         Effect of                             Growth rate of real
Lee and Lee                                              Science, secondary                        regressions,              achievement score on growth
            FISS               17        education on                          GDP per worker,
(1995)                                                   school                                    controlling for initial   rate, ratio of physical investment
                                         growth                                1970-85
                                                                                                   GDP                       to GDP, and lower fertility rate
                                                                                                  10-year-interval panel
                                                                                                  regressions by 3SLS
             FIMS, FISS,                                 Average score of all Growth rate of real                            Significant effect of test scores,
                                         Effect of                                                with lagged instru-
             FIRS, SIMS,                                 tests, math, science + GDP per capita,                              esp. science, on growth; quality
Barro (2001)                 23-43       education on                                             ments (but scores as
             SISS, SIRS,                                 reading, different age 1965-95 (10-year                             of schooling much more
                                         growth                                                   single cross-section,
             IAEP-I, IAEP-II                             levels                 averages)                                    important than quantity
                                                                                                  not instrumented),
                                                                                                  with several controls
                                                                                                                             Quality-adjusted measure of
Gundlach,     Hanushek and               Accounting for                                              Development
                                                        Average score of all                                                 human capital accounts for 45%
Rudman, and   Kimko (2000),              differences in                        Output per worker,    accounting
                               (131)                    tests, math + science,                                               of variation in output per worker
Woessmann     with extended              level of                              1990                  (covariance
                                                        different age levels                                                 in global sample, and for whole
(2002)        imputations                development                                                 decomposition)
                                                                                                                             variation in OECD sample
              Hanushek and               Comparison of                                               Development             Quality-adjusted human capital
                                                       Average score of all
Woessmann     Kimko (2000),              different                            Output per worker,     accounting              accounts for 60% of variation in
                               29 (-132)               tests, math + science,
(2003c)       with extended              measures of                          1990                   (covariance             output per worker in 64-country
                                                       different age levels
              imputations                human capital                                               decomposition)          sample with non-imputed data
             Hanushek and                                                                                                 Significant effect of educational
Bosworth and                   31,       Determinants    Average score of all Log change in real     Cross-section growth
             Kimko (2000),                                                                                                quality on growth, but sensitive
Collins                        projected of economic     tests, math + science, output per worker,   regressions with
             with extended                                                                                                to conditioning on quality of
(2003)                         to 84     growth          different age levels   1960-2000            several controls
             projections                                                                                                  government institutions
(continued on next page)
Table 13 (continued)
                               No. of    Topic of            Measure of                 Measure of macro-
Study          Dataset                                                                                    Estimation method                  Results
                               countries investigation       achievement                economic outcome
                                                             Synthetic time series of
                                                                                                                 5-year-interval panel
                                                             literacy of labor-market
                                                                                                                 regressions with country
                                                             entrants 1960-1995,        Growth rate of real                                  Significant effect of literacy scores
Coulombe and                                                                                                     (and time) fixed effects
                                          Effect of literacy derived from age           GDP per capita/                                      on growth; outperform years of
Tremblay     IALS              14                                                                                and different controls;
                                          scores on growth distribution of IALS test;   worker, 1960-95 (5-                                  schooling; stronger effect of
(2006)                                                                                                           test scores instrumented
                                                             prose, document, and       year averages)                                       women’s than men’s literacy
                                                                                                                 by years of schooling in
                                                             quantitative literacy,
                                                                                                                 some specifications
                                                             mean and separately
Ramirez, Luo,                             Student         Average score of all          Growth rate of real   Cross-section growth           Some effects of achievement on
              Hanushek and
Schofer, and                   38         achievement and tests, math + science,        GDP per capita, 1970- regressions with               growth, but sensitive to East Asian
              Kimko (2000)
Meyer (2006)                              growth          different age levels          90 and 1980-2000      controls                       countries and time period
                                                                                                                                             Strong and robust effect of cognitive
             FIMS, FISS,                                                                                                                     skills on growth, both in developing
                                                             Average score of all
             FIRS, SIMS, SISS,                                                                                                               and developed countries; positive
Hanushek and                              Effect of          tests, math + science,      Growth rate of real   Cross-section growth
             SIRS, TIMSS,                                                                                                                    interaction with economic
Woessmann                      50         cognitive skills   different age levels; also, GDP per capita, 1960- regressions with
             TIMSS-R, PISA,                                                                                                                  institutions; strong increase in
(2008)                                    on growth          share of students           2000                  different controls
             PIRLS, TIMSS                                                                                                                    explained variance; years of
                                                             reaching thresholds
             2003, PISA 2003                                                                                                                 schooling lose significance; separate
                                                                                                                                             effects of low- and high-achievers
                                                                                                                 Cross-section growth        Mechanism by which education
Jamison,                                  Effect of                                     Growth rate of real      regressions with            affects per-capita income is likely
               Hanushek and                                  Average score of all
Jamison, and                              education                                     GDP per capita, 1960-    different controls; HLM     through increasing rate of
               Woessmann       43-54                         tests, math, different age
Hanushek                                  quality on                                    2000; infant mortality   of 10-year interval panel   technological progress; significant
               (2008)                                        levels
(2007)                                    growth                                        rates, 1960-2000         level model (but time-      effect of education quality on rate of
                                                                                                                 invariant test scores)      decline in infant mortality
               FIMS, FISS,
                                                                                                                 10-year-interval panel
               SIMS, SISS,
                                          Effect of                                     Growth rate of real      regressions with time
               IAEP-I+II,                                    Math + science,                                                             Positive effect of schooling quality
Altinok                        “Approx.   schooling                                     GDP per capita, 1965-    fixed effects and
               TIMSS/-R+ 2003,                               secondary school,                                                           on growth in panel framework with
(2007)                         120”       quality on                                    2005 (10-year            different controls, OLS
               LLECE, PASEC,                                 averaged and as panel                                                       large number of countries
                                          growth                                        averages)                with country fixed
               PISA+ 2003,
                                                                                                                 effects and GMM
               SACMEQ
(continued on next page)
Table 13 (continued)
                                 No. of    Topic of           Measure of                Measure of macro-
Study           Dataset                                                                                   Estimation method                Results
                                 countries investigation      achievement               economic outcome
                                                                                                                Cross-section growth       Positive interaction between
                                                                                                                regressions at industry    schooling quality and industry-level
                Hanushek and                                                            Growth rate of value
                                             Effect of                                                          level with country and     schooling intensity in predicting
Ciccone and     Kimko (2000), as                              Average score of all      added and
                                             education on                                                       industry fixed effects,    industry growth, indicating that
Papaioannou     extended in      21-41                        tests, math + science,    employment at
                                             structure of                                                       effects identified by      countries with greater schooling
(2009)          Bosworth and                                  different age levels      country-industry level,
                                             production                                                         interaction with           quality shifted production structure to
                Collins (2003)                                                          1980-1999
                                                                                                                industry-level schooling   schooling-intensive industries; effect
                                                                                                                intensity                  stronger in open economies
                                                                                      Growth rate of real      Growth regressions
Appleton,       FIMS, FISS, FIRS,            Effect of                                                                                     Significant effect of lagged test
                                                                                      GDP per capita over      using lagged test scores,
Atherton, and   SIMS, SISS, SIRS,            schooling        Average math, science +                                                      scores on subsequent 5-year growth,
                                  24-41                                               differing 5-year         with controls, pooled
Bleaney         IAEP-I+II,                   quality on       reading, as panel                                                            quantitatively smaller than in
                                                                                      periods between 1960     cross-section; country
(2008)          TIMSS/-R                     growth                                                                                        averaged long-run models
                                                                                      (?) and 2004             fixed effects
                                                                                                              Cross-section growth         Remarkably stable association
                                                                                                              regressions with             between cognitive skills and growth
                                                                                                              different controls; IV       across specifications, time periods,
                                                              Average score of all
                                                                                                              and LIML (instru-            and country samples; IV and DiD
                                                              tests, math + science
                                                                                                              menting test scores by       models confirm causality: significant
Hanushek and Hanushek and                    Causal effect of (jointly + separately,     Growth rate of real
                                                                                                              institutional features of    growth effects of cognitive skills that
Woessmann Woessmann              50-52       cognitive skills also reading), different GDP per capita, 1960-
                                                                                                              school systems); DiD         stem from institutional features of
(2009a)      (2008)                          on growth        age levels; also, share of 2000 and sub-periods
                                                                                                              comparing earnings of        school systems; home-country
                                                              students reaching
                                                                                                              home-educated to U.S.-       cognitive skills affect earnings of
                                                              thresholds
                                                                                                              educated immigrants in       U.S. immigrants; effect of change in
                                                                                                              U.S.; model in changes       cognitive skills over time on change
                                                                                                              over time                    in growth paths
                                                                                                                                       Low cognitive skills account for poor
                                                             Average score of
             LLECE, SERCE,       59, 16      Reasons for                                                                               Latin American growth in global
Hanushek and                                                 different tests, math +    Growth rate of real   Cross-section growth
             Hanushek and        Latin       disappointing                                                                             perspective; significant effect of
Woessmann                                                    science, different age     GDP per capita, 1960- regressions with several
             Woessmann           American    growth in Latin                                                                           cognitive skills measured by regional
(2009b)                                                      levels; math + reading,    2000                  controls
             (2008)              countries   America                                                                                   tests on intra-regional growth
                                                             grades 4+6
                                                                                                                                       variation

Notes: GDP = gross domestic product. HLM = hierarchical linear model. GMM = general method of moments. IV = instrumental variable. LIML = limited
information maximum likelihood. DiD = differences in differences. See Tables 1 and 2 for acronyms of datasets.
Table 14: Cognitive skills versus years of schooling in growth regressions
                                     (1)                       (2)                      (3)a                      (4)b                      (5)c
Cognitive skills                                             1.980                     1.975                     1.666                     1.239
                                                             (9.12)                    (8.28)                    (5.09)                    (4.12)
Years of schooling 1960            0.369                     0.026                     0.024                     0.047                     -0.049
                                   (3.23)                    (0.34)                    (0.78)                    (0.54)                    (0.66)
GDP per capita 1960                -0.379                    -0.302                    -0.298                    -0.255                    -0.310
                                   (4.24)                    (5.54)                    (6.02)                    (3.12)                    (5.73)
No. of countries                     50                        50                        50                        50                        45
R2 (adj.)                          0.252                     0.728                     0.728                     0.706                     0.797
Notes: Dependent variable: average annual growth rate in GDP per capita, 1960-2000. Regressions include a constant. Test scores are average of math and
science, primary through end of secondary school, all years (divided by 100). t-statistics in parentheses.
a. Measure of years of schooling refers to the average between 1960 and 2000.
b. Specification includes dummies for the eight world regions depicted in Figure 1.
c. Specification includes additional controls for openness, property rights, fertility, and tropical location.
Source: Hanushek and Woessmann (2009a).
Table 15: Studies on IQ and macroeconomic growth
                               No. of    Topic of        Measure of           Measure of macro-
Study         Dataset                                                                           Estimation method          Results
                               countries investigation   achievement          economic outcome
              Predecessor of
Weede and     Lynn and                                                        Growth rate of real Cross-section growth Significant effect of IQ measure
Kämpf         Vanhanen         97        IQ and growth Average national IQ    GDP per capita,     regressions with     on growth; outperforms
(2002)        (2002) IQ                                                       1965-1990           controls             quantitative measures
              database
                                                                                                  Bayesian Averaging
              Lynn and                                                                            of Classical Estimates   Significant and robust effect of
Jones and                                                                     Growth rate of real
              Vanhanen                                                                            of 1330 cross-section    IQ measure on growth;
Schneider                      51        IQ and growth Average national IQ    GDP per capita,
              (2002) IQ                                                                           growth regressions       outperforms quantitative
(2006)                                                                        1960-1992
              database                                                                            using 21 control         measures
                                                                                                  variables
              Lynn and                                                        Growth rate of real
                                                                                                  Cross-section growth Significant effect of IQ measure
              Vanhanen                                                        GDP per working
Ram (2007)                     98        IQ and growth Average national IQ                        regressions with     on growth; outperforms
              (2002) IQ                                                       age person, 1960-
                                                                                                  controls             quantitative measures
              database                                                        1985
                                                                                                  Cross-section wage
                                                                                                                           Country-average IQ measure
              Lynn and                                                                            regressions;
Jones and                                IQ, wages, and                       Immigrant wages in                           predicts immigrant wages in
              Vanhanen                                                                            coefficient used in
Schneider                      59, 87    levels of      Average national IQ   the U.S. by country                          U.S.; differences in average IQ
              (2006) IQ                                                                           cross-country
(2010)                                   development                          of origin                                    account for 1/6 of international
              database                                                                            development
                                                                                                                           differences in log GDP
                                                                                                  accounting
Notes: GDP = gross domestic product.
