NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN AUTOPSY OF THE U.S. FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Ross Levine
Working Paper 15956
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15956

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

I thank James Barth, John Boyd, Gerard Caprio, Peter Howitt, Glenn Loury, Yona Rubinstein, Andrei
Shleifer, Joe Stiglitz, David Weil, and Ivo Welch for helpful conversations and communications. Seminar
participants at the Boston and Chicago Federal Reserves and the IMF provided insightful comments.
I bear full responsibility for the views expressed in the paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Autopsy of the U.S. Financial System
Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 15956
April 2010
JEL No. E60,G01,G20,G28,H1
ABSTRACT
In this postmortem, I find that the design, implementation, and maintenance of financial policies during
the period from 1996 through 2006 were primary causes of the financial system’s demise. The evidence
is inconsistent with the view that the collapse of the financial system was caused only by the popping
of the housing bubble and the herding behavior of financiers rushing to create and market increasingly
complex and questionable financial products. Rather, the evidence indicates that regulatory agencies
were aware of the growing fragility of the financial system associated with their policies during the
decade before the crisis and yet chose not to modify those policies.

Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

1
1. Introduction
Influential policymakers emphasize that the financial crisis was largely precipitated

by a series of unforeseeable events that conspired to produce a bubble in the housing

market. In particular, Ben Bernanke (2009b), Alan Greenspan (2010), Henry Paulson

(2009), Christina Romer (2009), and Robert Rubin (2010) stress that large capital inflows

to the United States lowered interest rates, fueled a boom in mortgage lending, a reduction
in loan standards, and financial innovations that produced an unsustainable explosion of

credit. This view characterizes the collapse of the financial system as reflecting “accidents,”
such as the bursting of the housing bubble, and “suicide,” such the herding behavior of

financiers rushing to create and market increasingly complex and toxic financial products. 1
Greenspan (2010), for example, depicts the financial crisis as a once in a “hundred years

flood” and a “classic euphoric bubble.” From this perspective, policymakers responded to a
crisis that happened to them.

This view, however, is arguably incomplete and could impede the development of

beneficial financial reforms. While large international capital flows to the United States
fueled speculative investments in real estate and while financial shenanigans helped

destabilize the global financial system, a different view holds that policies caused this crisis.
According to this view, the Federal Reserve, Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC),
Congress, and other official agencies implemented policies that spurred excessive risk

taking and the eventual failure of the financial system. Thus, when policymakers highlight
the global savings glut and “irrational exuberance,” this deflects attention from the
potential policy determinants of the crisis.
1

Citigroup’s former CEO, Charles O. Prince, noted to the Financial Times in 2007, “When the music stops …
things will be complicated. But as long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing.”

2
In this autopsy, I assess whether key financial policies during the period from 1996

through 2006 contributed to the financial system’s collapse. I analyze the decade before the
cascade of financial institution insolvencies and bailouts and hence before policymakers

shifted into an “emergency response” mode. Thus, I examine a comparatively calm period
during which the regulatory authorities could assess the evolving impact of their policies

and make adjustments. Specifically, I study five important policies: (1) SEC policies toward
credit rating agencies, (2) Federal Reserve policies that allowed banks to reduce their
capital cushions through the use of credit default swaps, (3) SEC and Federal Reserve

policies concerning over-the-counter derivatives, (4) SEC policies toward the consolidated
supervision of major investment banks, and (5) government policies toward two housingfinance entities, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. From this examination, I draw tentative
conclusions about the determinants of the crisis.

The evidence indicates that senior policymakers repeatedly designed, implemented,

and maintained policies that destabilized the global financial system in the decade before
the crisis. The policies incentivized financial institutions to engage in activities that

generated enormous short-run profits but dramatically increased long-run fragility.
Moreover, the evidence suggests that the regulatory agencies were aware of the

consequences of their policies and yet chose not to modify those policies. On the whole,
these policy decisions reflect neither a lack of information nor an absence of regulatory

power. They represent the selection -- and most importantly the maintenance -- of policies
that increased financial fragility. The crisis did not just happen to policymakers.

The evidence does not reject the impact of international capital flows, asset bubbles,

herd behavior by financiers, or excessively greedy financiers on financial instability, which

3
have been carefully analyzed by, for example, Acharya and Richardson (2009),

Jagannathan, Kapoor, and Schaumburg (2009), Kamin and DeMarco (2010), Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2009), and Rose and Spiegel (2009). Rather, this paper documents that financial

regulations and policies created incentives for excessive risk and the financial regulatory
apparatus maintained these policies even as information became available about the
growing fragility of the financial system.

Although I do not make policy recommendations here, the analyses are relevant for

those designing reforms (e.g., Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2010, and Levine, 2010). Since

technical glitches, regulatory gaps, and insufficient regulatory power played only a partial role in
fostering the crisis, reforms that rectify these conditions represent only a partial and thus
incomplete step in establishing a stable financial system that promotes growth and expands
economic opportunities. The entire system of financial regulation -- the system associated with

evaluating, reforming, and implementing financial policies – played a key role in the crisis.

It is worth highlighting three limitations with this paper. First, I draw on a wide

array of insightful examinations of the crisis from newspaper articles, books, regulatory

agency documents, and research papers. I do not provide new examples or data. A second,
related, limitation is that I do not conduct a comprehensive examination of all policies

related to the crisis. In particular, corporate governance, as well as regulatory governance,
contributed to the crisis. The board of directors of many financial institutions did not

effectively induce management to act in the best interests of shareholders and others with
financial claims on the firms as shown by Bebchuk (2010a, b). Rather, in reexamining

selective pieces of evidence, I show that an enduring breakdown of the financial regulatory
system was a primary factor in the financial crisis.

4
Third, financial regulators and policymakers do not share a uniform view of the

financial crisis. Officials acknowledge that regulatory mistakes were made. While they tend
to focus on an absence of regulatory power to cope with failing institutions and regulatory
gaps in which shadow financial institutions operated with little oversight, there are also
cases in which the major agencies acknowledge deficient supervisory and regulatory

practices (e.g., Geithner, 2009). For example, the Federal Reserve noted that it failed to

monitor Citibank adequately as far back as 2005 and did not correct this shortcoming even
after Citibank’s financial condition deteriorated in 2008. 2 As other examples, the Inspector

General of the Federal Reserve and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) provided
detailed evidence that regulators failed to implement their own rules to rein in the
excessively risky behavior of banks. Thus, my characterization of “the” view of

policymakers could be criticized as an unhelpful caricature. However, my goal is to provide
a simple, but relevant, summary of the public view of the most senior policymakers as a
mechanism for framing and motivating my assessment of what went wrong.

In the remainder of the paper, I discuss how the financial crisis was shaped by

policies toward credit rating agencies (Section 2), credit default swaps and commercial

banks (Sections 3 and 4), investment banks (Section 5), and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
(Section 6). Section 7 concludes.

2

See (1) “Fed Reviews Find Errors in Oversight of Citigroup,” Sewell Chan and Eric Dash, The New York Times,
4/8/2010, (2) the Material Loss Reviews by the Office of the Inspector General of the FDIC, which are available at
http://www.fdicig.gov/, (3) the reports by the Office of the Inspector General of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, http://www.federalreserve.gov/oig/, and (4) “U.S. Faults Regulators Over a Bank,”, Sewell
Chan, The New York Times, 4/12/2010.

5
2. The Credit Rating Agencies
“These errors make us look either incompetent at credit analysis or like we
sold our soul to the devil for revenue, or a little bit of both.”
A Moody’s managing director responding anonymously to an internal
management survey, September 2007. 3

2.1 Background
Credit rating agencies were indispensable to the crisis. To appreciate their role,

consider the following sequence of transactions underlying the vast misallocation of global
credit. Mortgage companies routinely provided loans to borrowers with little ability to

repay those debts because (1) they earned fees for each loan and (2) they could sell those
loans to investment banks and other financial institutions. Investment banks and other
financial institutions gobbled-up those mortgages because (1) they earned fees for

packaging the mortgages into new securities and (2) they could sell those new mortgage
backed securities (MBSs) to other financial institutions, including banks, insurance

companies, and pension funds around the world. These other financial institutions bought
the MBSs because credit rating agencies said they were safe. By fueling the demand for

MBS and related securities, credit rating agencies encouraged a broad array of financial

institutions to make the poor investments that ultimately toppled the global financial

system. Thus, an informed postmortem of the financial system requires a dissection of why
financial institutions relied unquestionably on the assessments of credit rating agencies.
How did they become so pivotal?

Until the 1970s, credit rating agencies were comparatively insignificant, moribund

institutions that sold their assessments of credit risk to subscribers. Given the poor
3

From “Debt Watchdogs: Tamed or Caught Napping?” by Gretchen Morgenson, New York Times, 12/7/2008.

6
predictive performance of these agencies, the demand for their services was limited for

much of the 20th century (Partnoy, 1999). Indeed, academic researchers found that credit

rating agencies produce little additional information about the firms they rate; rather, their
ratings lag stock price movements by about 18 months (Pinches and Singleton, 1978).
2.2 The creation of NRSROs
Credit rating agencies experienced a major change in 1975. The SEC created the

Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organization (NRSRO) designation, which it

granted to the largest credit rating agencies. The SEC then relied on the NRSRO’s credit risk
assessment in establishing capital requirements on SEC-regulated financial institutions.
The creation of -- and reliance on -- NRSROs by the SEC triggered a cascade of

regulatory decisions that increased the demand for their credit ratings. Bank regulators,
insurance regulators, federal, state, and local agencies, foundations, endowments, and

numerous entities around the world all started using NRSRO ratings to establish capital

adequacy and portfolio guidelines. For example, bank regulators used NRSRO ratings to set

capital requirements. Federal agencies used the risk designations of the NRSROs to

establish asset allocation restrictions for several organizations, including government-

sponsored entities like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Furthermore, given the reliance by

prominent regulatory agencies on NRSRO ratings, private endowments, foundations, and
mutual funds also used their ratings in setting asset allocation guidelines for their

investment managers. NRSRO ratings shaped the investment opportunities, capital

requirements, and hence the profits of insurance companies, mutual funds, pension funds,
and a dizzying array of other financial institutions.

7
Unsurprisingly, NRSROs shifted from selling their credit ratings to subscribers to

selling their ratings to the issuers of securities. Since regulators, official agencies, and

private institutions around the world relied on NRSRO ratings, virtually every issuer of

securities was compelled to purchase an NRSRO rating if it wanted a large market for its
securities.

Indeed, Partnoy (1999) argues that NRSROs essentially sell licenses to issue

securities; they do not primarily provide assessments of credit risk. 4 A firm issuing a

security without obtaining an NRSRO rating will face a limited market for its securities. Due
to regulations and legal restrictions, the degree to which financial institutions deem

particular securities appealing is powerfully shaped by NRSRO ratings. As long as the

financial regulatory authorities rely on -- and hence endorse -- NRSRO ratings, there will be
an enormous demand for NRSRO services.

2.3 Conflicts of interest in credit rating agencies
There are clear conflicts of interest associated with credit rating agencies selling

their ratings to the issuers of securities. Issuers have an interest in paying rating agencies

more for higher ratings since those ratings influence the demand for and hence the pricing
of securities. And, rating agencies can promote repeat business by providing high ratings.

Interestingly, the vice president of Moody’s explained in 1957 that, “[W]e obviously cannot
ask payment for rating a bond. To do so would attach a price to the process, and we could
not escape the charge, which would undoubtedly come, that our ratings are for sale.” 5
4

See Hill (2010a, 2010b) for insight examinations of credit-ratings firms.

5

From “Debt Watchdogs: Tamed or Caught Napping?” by Gretchen Morgenson, New York Times, 12/7/2008.

8
While recognizing the conflicts of interest, credit rating agencies convinced

regulators and Congress that reputational capital reduces the pernicious incentive to sell
better ratings. If a rating agency does not provide sound, objective assessments of a
security, the agency will experience damage to its reputation with consequential

ramifications on its long-run profits. Purchasers of securities will reduce their reliance on
this agency, which will reduce demand for all securities rated by the agency. As a result,

issuers will reduce their demand for the services provide by that agency, reducing the

agency’s future profits. From this perspective, reputational capital is vital for the long-run
profitability of credit rating agencies and will therefore contain any short-run conflicts of

interest associated with “selling” a superior rating on any particular security.

Reputational capital will reduce conflicts of interest, however, only under particular

conditions. First, decision makers at rating agencies must have a sufficiently long-run profit
horizon, so that the long-run costs to the decision maker from harming the agencies

reputation outweigh the short-run benefits from selling a bloated rating. Second, the

demand for securities must respond to poor rating agency performance, so that decision

makers at rating agencies are punished for issuing bloated ratings on even a few securities.
These conditions do not hold; indeed, regulations weakened the degree to which a

decline in the reputation of a credit rating agency reduced demand for its services. First,

capital regulations induce the vast majority of the buyers of securities to use NRSRO rating
in selecting assets. These regulations hold regardless of NRSRO performance, which

moderates the degree to which poor ratings performance reduces the demand for NRSRO
services. Such regulations mitigate the positive relation between rating agency

performance and profitability. Second, the feedback from the quality of an NRSRO’s ratings

9
to its profits has been further weakened by the inability of those using credit ratings to sue
NRSROs. Rating agencies claim that their ratings are opinions, which are protected by the

right of free speech. The agencies and executives claim that they bear no responsibility for
the quality of those ratings.

2.4 Securitization and the intensification of conflicts of interest
Any remnants of a disciplining effect of reputational capital on the conflicts of

interest plaguing NRSROs were essentially eliminated by the explosive growth of

securitized and structured financial products from the late-1990s onward. Securitization
and structuring involved the packaging and rating of trillions of dollars worth of new

financial instruments. Huge fees associated with processing these securities flowed to

banks and NRSROs. Impediments to this securitization and structuring process, such as the
issuance of low credit rating on the securities, would gum-up the system, reducing rating

agency profits.

In fact, the NRSROs started selling ancillary consulting services to facilitate the

processing of securitized instruments, increasing NRSRO incentives to exaggerate ratings

on structured products. Besides purchasing ratings from the NRSROs, the banks associated

with creating structured financial products would first pay the rating agencies for guidance

on how to package the securities to get high ratings and then pay the rating agencies to rate
the resultant products. The short-run profits from these activities were mind bogglingly

large and made the future losses from the inevitable loss of reputational capital irrelevant.

10
Thus, rating agencies faced little market discipline, had no significant regulatory

oversight, were protected from competition by regulators, and enjoyed a burgeoning
market for their services. 6 It was good to be an NRSRO.

The regulatory community did not adapt to these well-known developments.

Distressingly, the intensification of conflicts of interest through the selling of consulting

services by rating agencies closely resembles the amplification of conflicts of interest when
accounting firms increased their sales of consulting services to the firms they were

auditing. This facilitated the corporate scandals that emerged less than a decade ago,

motivating the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Yet, still, regulators did not respond as rating
agencies pursued these increasingly profitable lines of business.

Given the regulatory-induced protections enjoyed by NRSROs, their behavior and

profitability were unsurprising. Lowenstein’s (2008) excellent description of the rating of a
mortgage backed security by Moody’s demonstrates the speed with which complex

products had to be rated, the poor assumptions on which these ratings were based, and the
profits generated by rating structured products. Other information indicates that if the
rating agencies issued a lower rating than Countrywide (a major purchaser of NRSRO
ratings) wanted, a few phone calls would get this changed. 7 Indeed, internal e-mails

indicate that the rating agencies lowered their rating standards to expand business and

boost revenues. A Standard and Poor’s employee noted in 2004, “We are meeting with your

group this week to discuss adjusting criteria for rating C.D.O.s of real estate assets this week
because of the ongoing threat of losing deals. Lose the C.D.O. and lose the base business — a

The 2006 Credit Rating Agency Reform Act specifically prohibited the SEC from regulating an NRSRO’s
rating methodologies.
7
See “Debt Watchdogs: Tamed or Caught Napping?” by Gretchen Morgenson, The New York Times 12/7/2008.
6

11
self reinforcing loop.” (Quoted from “Documents Show Internal Qualms at Rating
Agencies,” Sewell Chan, The New York Times, 4/23/2010). A collection of documents
released by the U.S. Senate suggests that NRSROs consciously adjusted their ratings to
maintain clients and attract new ones.

The profit margins enjoyed by NRSROs were extraordinary. For example, the

operating margin at Moody’s between 2000 and 2007 averaged 53 percent. This compares

to operating margins of 36 and 30 percent at Microsoft and Google, or 17 percent at Exxon.
It is true that the performance of the rating agencies played a central role in the crisis. But,
it is also true that the financial regulators established the privileged position of rating
agencies and protected them from the discipline of the market.
2.5 Conclusions
While the crisis does not have a single cause, the behavior of the credit rating

agencies is a defining characteristic. It is impossible to imagine the current crisis without
the activities of the NRSROs. And, it is difficult to imagine the behavior of the NRSROs
without the regulations that permitted, protected, and encouraged their activities.

In terms of a postmortem of the financial system, the role of NRSROs is not an

example of “accidental” death or “suicide.” The conflicts of interest within NRSROs have

been known for decades and the further perversion of incentives due to securitization was
predicted over a decade before the crisis. Moreover, regulators had seen the accounting

debacle of 2001-2002, when corporations paid accounting firms both to structure and then
to audit financial statements. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 prohibited accounting firms
from simultaneously performing these activities. So, when banks started paying the

12
NRSROs both to structure and then to rate securities, the associated conflicts of interest
were no surprise. Similarly, it is difficult to view the NRSROs as suicidal. The decision

makers at NRSROs made enormous amounts of money. It was a logical, rational, and legal

decision. As noted in an internal e-mail by an S&P employee, “Let’s hope we are all wealthy
and retired by the time this house of cards falters.” (Chan, NYT, 4/23/2010) Rather the

evidence is most consistent with the view that regulatory policies and Congressional laws
protected and encouraged the behavior of NRSROs.
3. Credit default swaps and bank capital
3.1. Background
The standard narrative of the financial crisis emphasizes the role of complex

derivative contracts, including credit default swaps. According to this view, financiers used
newly designed financial instruments to boost profits, with the systemic risks of these

financial innovations largely unknown. When the housing market faltered, triggering a

devastating reduction in the price of derivative securities, this shocked both markets and
regulators. But, is this an accurate, complete characterization? Let’s consider just one,
albeit enormously popular, derivative contract.

A credit default swap (CDS) is an insurance-like contract written on the

performance of a security or bundle of securities. For example, purchaser A buys a CDS

from issuer B on security C. If security C has a predefined “credit related event,” such as

missing an interest payment, receiving a credit downgrade, or filing for bankruptcy, then
issuer B pays purchaser A. While having insurance-like qualities, CDSs are not formally

insurance contracts. Neither the purchaser nor the issuer of the CDS needs to hold the

13
underlying security, leading to the frequently used analogy that CDSs are like buying fire
insurance on your neighbor’s house. Moreover, since CDSs are not insurance contracts,

they are not regulated as tightly as insurance products. CDSs are financial derivatives that

are transacted in unregulated, over-the-counter (OTC) markets.

In principle, banks can use credit default swaps to reduce both their exposure to

credit risk and the amount of capital held against potential losses. For example, if a bank
purchases a CDS on a loan, this can reduce its credit risk: if the loan defaults, the

counterparty to the CDS will compensate the bank for the loss. If the bank’s regulator

concludes that the counterparty to the CDS will actually pay the bank if the loan defaults,

then the regulator typically allows the bank to hold less regulatory capital. This regulatory

decision allows the bank to reallocate capital to higher-expected return, higher-risk assets.
CDSs grew dramatically from the mid-1990s until the beginning of the financial

collapse in 2007. In 1994, building on early efforts at Merrill Lynch and Bankers Trust, J.P
Morgan further developed CDSs and supporting vehicles, so that they could be employed

on a massive scale. Gillian Tett (2009) entertainingly and insightfully describes the series of
financial innovations and regulatory decisions that allowed the CDS market to flourish,
reaching a notional value $62 trillion in 2007 according to Barth et al (2009).
3.2. The Fed, CDSs, and bank capital
The explosive growth of CDSs was abetted by the Fed’s 1996 decision permitting

banks to use CDSs to reduce capital reserves (Tett, 2009, p.49). Regulators treated

securities guaranteed by a seller of CDSs as having the risk level of the seller – or more
accurately, the counterparty – of the CDS. For example, a bank purchasing full CDS

14
protection from American International Group (AIG) on collateralized debt obligations

(CDOs) linked to sub-prime loans would have those CDOs treated as AAA securities for

capital regulatory purposes because AIG had an AAA rating from a Nationally Recognized
Statistical Rating Organization, i.e., from a SEC-approved credit rating agency.

Given the pricing of CDSs and the Fed’s regulatory decision, banks found CDSs

valuable tools for reducing capital and investing in more lucrative, albeit more risky, assets.
For example, a bank with a typical portfolio of $10 billion of commercial loans could reduce
its capital reserves against these assets from about $800 million to under $200 million by
purchasing CDSs for a small fee (Tett, 2009, p. 64). By 2007, the largest U.S. commercial
banks had purchased $7.9 trillion in CDS protection (Barth et al., 2009).

There were, however, serious problems associated with allowing banks to reduce

their capital via CDSs. Given the active trading of CDSs, it was sometimes difficult to
indentify the actual counterparty legally responsible for compensating a bank if an

“insured” security failed. Furthermore, some bank counterparties developed massive

exposures to CDS risk. For example, AIG had a notional exposure of about $500 billion to

CDSs (and related derivatives) in 2007, while having a capital base of about $100 billion to

cover all its traditional insurance activities as well as its financial derivatives business. The
growing exposure of AIG and other issuers of CDSs should have – and did -- raise concerns
about their ability to satisfy their obligations in times of economic stress.

15
3.3. The Fed maintains its policy despite growing risks
The Fed was aware of the growing danger to the safety and soundness of the

banking system from CDSs. 8 For instance, Tett (2009, p. 157-163) recounts how Timothy

Geithner, then President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, became concerned in 2004
about the lack of information on CDSs and the growing counterparty risk facing banks.

Barth et al (2009, p. 184-193) demonstrates through the use of internal Fed documents

that it knew by 2004 of the growing problems associated with subprime mortgage related
assets, on which many CDSs were written. Indeed, the FBI publicly warned in 2004 of an

epidemic of fraud in subprime lending. In terms of the sellers of CDSs, detailed accounts by
Lewis (2009) and McDonald (2009) illustrate the Fed’s awareness by 2006 of AIG’s
growing fragility and the corresponding exposure of commercial banks to CDS

counterparty risk. 9 Between 1996 and 2007, accumulating evidence increased concerns
about capital adequacy.

There is a longer history. In 1992, the President of the NY Federal Reserve Bank, Jerry Corrigan, expressed
grave concerns that derivatives, primarily interest rates swaps, threatened the stability of banks and
threatened the banks with tighter regulations (Tett, 2009, 17-18). But, Alan Greenspan, the Chairman of the
entire Federal Reserve System, supported the International Swaps and Derivatives Association and
successfully convinced Congress in 1994 to keep derivatives largely unregulated (Tett, 2009, 39-40).
8

Furthermore, although the demise and government conservatorship of AIG in the September of 2008 is
sometimes discussed as a complete surprise, it was not a surprise to the Fed or to Time magazine, which ran
an article on March 17, 2008 titled, “Credit Default Swaps: The Next Crisis.” The article reported that AIG had
recently taken an $11 billion write-down on its CDS holdings and that loses on CDS holdings severely
damaged Swiss Reinsurance Co. and monoline bond insurance companies, including MBIA and AMBAC
Financial Group Inc. The article noted explicitly that these developments could be devastating for the
financial institutions that purchased credit protection from these insurers. Yet, on March 16, 2008 on CNN,
Treasury Secretary Paulson noted that, “I have great, great confidence in our capital markets and in our financial
institutions. Our financial institutions, banks and investment banks, are strong.” (Quoted from Barth et al., 2009, p.
1). Why didn’t the Fed prepare for the potential failure of AIG or other major sellers of CDSs in the spring of
2008? So far, U.S. taxpayers have handed over about $180 billion to AIG.

9

16
Yet, the Fed did not adjust its policies regarding bank capital and CDSs. 10 This

response is surprising because ensuring capital adequacy is the mainstay of bank

regulatory policies for two reasons. First, when capital falls, banks have less of a capital
cushion to weather potential loses. Second, and perhaps more importantly, when bank
owners have less of their own money at risk, this encourages bank risk taking. Thus,

reducing capital through the purchase of CDSs can have a multiplicative effect on bank
fragility.

The Fed’s initial decision in 1996 permitting banks to reduce capital through the

purchase of CDSs was founded on straightforward economic principles. If the bank’s

borrowers do not pay their loans, the bank will not suffer a loss because the seller of the

CDSs will compensate the bank. Under these premises, the bank could maintain its safety
with a smaller capital cushion against potential loses on these loans, because the CDS, in
principle, hedges that risk.

The key question is why the Fed maintained its capital regulations with respect to

CDSs as it learned of the growing fragility of the banking system due to the mushrooming
use of increasingly suspect CDSs. Bank purchases of CDSs boomed immediately after the

1996 regulatory decision allowing a reduction in bank capital from the purchase of CDSs.
Why didn’t the Fed respond by demanding greater transparency before granting capital

relief and conducting its own assessment of the counterparty risks facing the systemically
important banks under its supervision? Why didn’t the Fed adjust in 2004 as it learned of
10

Timothy Geithner created a taskforce in 2004 headed by Jerry Corrigan (a partner at Goldman Sachs and the
former President of the NY Federal Reserve), which identified the array of risks posed by CDS to the stability of the
banking system. Although the taskforce convinced the banks to improve their back office handling of CDS trading,
the Fed did not attempt to limit reductions in bank capital from the purchase of CDSs. In fact, Alan Greenspan
(2005) argued that credit default swaps “… have enabled the largest and most sophisticated banks in their
credit-granting role to divest themselves of much credit risk by passing it to institutions with far less
leverage.”

17
the opaque nature of the CDS market and as the FBI warned of the fraudulent practices

associated with the issuance of the sub-prime mortgages underlying many CDS securities,
or in 2006 as information became available about the fragility of AIG, or in 2007 when

hedge funds warned the Fed, the Treasury, and G8 delegates about the growing fragility of

commercial banks (Tett, 2009, p. 160-3)? Why didn’t the Fed prohibit banks from reducing
regulatory capital via CDSs until the Fed had confidence in the financial viability of those
selling CDSs to banks? The Fed’s decision to maintain its regulatory stance toward CDSs

was neither a failure of information, nor a shortage of regulatory power. 11 It was a choice.
3.4. Postmortem
I am not suggesting that the Fed’s decision to allow banks to reduce their regulatory

capital through the purchase of CDSs was the major cause of the global financial crisis. It is
quite difficult to quantify the degree to which this policy increased risk-taking at any
individual bank or the fragility of the financial system as a whole.

I am suggesting that the evolution of the CDS market, the fragility of the banks, and

the Fed’s capital rules illustrate a key feature of the financial crisis that is frequently

ignored. The problems with CDSs and bank capital were not a surprise in 2008; there was
ample warning that things were going awry. Senior government policymakers created

policies that encouraged excessive risk taking by bankers and adhered to those policies
over many years even as they learned about the ramifications of their policies.

As argued by Barth et al (2009, p. 184): “… even if the top officials from these regulatory agencies did not
appreciate or wish to act earlier on the information they had, their subordinates apparently fully understood
and appreciated the growing magnitude of the problem.” Also, see the Fed’s 2004 Interpretive Letter #998,
which reiterates the Fed’s capital regulatory policy with respect to CDSs.
11

18
4. Transparency vs. The FED, SEC, and Treasury
Powerful regulators and policymakers thwarted efforts to make the CDS market

more transparent. The Fed (under Alan Greenspan), the Treasury (under Robert Rubin and
then Larry Summers), and the SEC (under Arthur Levitt) squashed attempts by Brooksley
Born of the Commodity Future Trading Commission (CFTC) to shed light on the multi-

trillion dollar OTC derivatives market, which included credit default swaps, at the end of
the 1990s.

Incidents of fraud, manipulation, and failure in the OTC derivatives market began as

early as 1994, with the sensational bankruptcy of Orange County and court cases involving
Gibson Greeting Cards and Proctor and Gamble against Bankers Trust. Numerous

problems, associated with bankers exploiting unsophisticated school districts and

municipalities, plagued the market. Further, OTC derivates played a dominant role in the

dramatic failure of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in the summer of 1998. Indeed,

no regulatory agency had any warning of LTCM’s demise, or the potential systemic
implications of its failure, because it traded primarily in this opaque market.

In 1998, the CFTC issued a “concept release” report calling for greater transparency

of OTC derivatives. The CFTC sought greater information disclosure, improvements in

record keeping, and controls on fraud. The CFTC did not call for draconian controls on the
derivatives market; it called for more transparency.

The response by the Fed, the Treasury, and the SEC was swift: They stopped the

CFTC. First, they obtained a six month moratorium on the CFTC’s ability to implement the
strategies outlined in its concept release. Second, the President’s Working Group on

Financial Markets, which consists of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the

19
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Chairman of the SEC, and the

Chairman of the CFTC, initiated a study of the OTC derivatives market. Finally, they helped
convince Congress to pass the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000, which
exempted the OTC derivates market – and hence the CDS market – from government
oversight.

The point of this addendum is to emphasize that senior regulators and policymakers

lobbied hard to keep CDSs and other derivatives in opaque markets. Thus, a comprehensive
assessment of the causes of the crisis must evaluate why policymakers made choices like

this. Indeed, Nick Timiraos and James R. Hagerty argue in The Wall Street Journal on February
9, 2010,

“Nearly a year and half after the outbreak of the global economic crisis, many of
the problems that contributed to it haven’t been tamed. The U.S. has no system in
place to tackle a failure of its largest financial institutions. Derivatives contracts
of the kind that crippled American International Group Inc. still trade in the
shadows. And investors remain heavily reliant on the same credit-ratings firms
that gave AAA ratings to lousy mortgage securities.”

20
5. Investment Bank Capital, Risk-Taking, and the SEC
“We have good deal of comfort about the capital cushions at
these firms at the moment.” 12
Christopher Cox, chairman of the Securities and Exchange
Commission, March 11, 2008.
5.1. Total failure
All five of the major investment banks that had been supervised by the SEC in 2008

experienced major transformations. Only three days after the SEC Chairman expressed

confidence in the financial soundness of the investment banks on March 11, 2008, the New
York Federal Reserve provided an emergency $25 billion loan to Bear Stearns in a vain

attempt to avert Bear’s failure. A few days later, with additional financial assistance from

the Fed, a failed Bear Stearns merged with the commercial bank JP Morgan Chase & Co. Six
months later, Lehman Brothers went bankrupt, and a few months later, at the brink of

insolvency, Merrill Lynch merged with Bank of America. In the autumn of 2008, Goldman

Sachs and Morgan Stanley were “pressured” into becoming bank holding companies by the
Federal Reserve and arguably rescued from failure through an assortment of public
programs. The SEC’s fingerprints are indelibly imprinted on this debacle.
5.2. Three Coordinated SEC Policies
Consider three interrelated SEC decisions regarding the regulation of investment

banks. First, the SEC in 2004 exempted the five largest investment banks from the net

capital rule, which was a 1975 rule for computing minimum capital standards at broker12

Quoted from the Stephan Labaton, The New York Times, 10/3/2008.

21
dealers. 13 The investment banks were permitted to use their own mathematical models of

asset and portfolio risk to compute appropriate capital levels. The investment banks
responded by issuing more debt to purchase more risky securities without putting

commensurately more of their own capital at risk. Leverage ratios soared from their 2004
levels, as the bank’s models indicated that they had sufficient capital cushions.

Second, in a related, coordinated 2004 policy change, the SEC enacted a rule that

induced the five investment banks to become “consolidated supervised entities” (CSEs):
The SEC would oversee the entire financial firm. Specifically, the SEC now had

responsibility for supervising the holding company, broker-dealer affiliates, and all other
affiliates on a consolidated basis. These other affiliates include other regulated entities,

such as foreign-registered broker-dealers and banks, as well as unregulated entities such as

derivatives dealers (Colby, 2007). The SEC was charged with evaluating the models

employed by the broker-dealers in computing appropriate capital levels and assessing the

overall stability of the consolidated investment bank. Given the size and complexity of
these financial conglomerates, overseeing the CSEs was a systemically important and
difficult responsibility.

Third, the SEC neutered its ability to conduct consolidated supervision of major

investment banks. With the elimination of the net capital rule and the added complexity of

consolidated supervision, the SEC’s head of market regulation, Annette Nazareth, promised

to hire high-skilled supervisors to assess the riskiness of investment banking activities. But,
13

As the SEC Commissioners debated the policy, they noted that it could lead to a “potential catastrophe” and
questioned whether “we really will have investor protection.” Yet, they ultimately voted for it, with one
commissioner noting that he would “keep my fingers crossed for the future.” For an illuminating video of the actual
meeting, see “The Day the SEC Changed the Game” at
http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/news/business/series/the_reckoning/index.html

22
the SEC didn’t. In fact, the SEC had only seven people to examine the parent companies of
the investment banks, which controlled over $4 trillion in assets. Under Christopher Cox,

who became chairman in 2005, the SEC eliminated the risk management office and failed to
complete a single inspection of a major investment bank in the year and a half before the
collapse of those banks (Labaton, 2008). Cox also weakened the Enforcement Division’s

freedom to impose fines on financial firms under its jurisdiction.
5.3. The effects of these decisions

The combination of these three policies contributed to the onset, magnitude, and

breadth of the financial crisis. The SEC’s decisions created enormous latitude and

incentives for investment banks to increase risk, and they did. The SEC has correctly argued
that the net capital rule never applied to the holding company in defending the 2004 net
capital rule. But, this defense is narrowly focuses on the net capital rule alone. It is the

combination of SEC policies that helped trigger the crisis, not only the change in the net
capital rule. 14

In easing the net capital rule, adopting a system of consolidated supervision, but

failing to develop the capabilities to supervise large financial conglomerates, many experts
suggest that the SEC became willfully blind to excessive risk-taking.

Indeed, the current Chairwomen of the SEC, Mary Schapiro, and a court appointed

investigator make such an assessment. Ms. Schapiro noted: “I think everybody a few years
14

The SEC also correctly notes that leverage ratios at the CSE holding companies were higher during some years in
the 1990s than in 2006. But, the nature of financial markets and risk-taking shifted markedly from the 1990s to the
mid-2000s due to the explosion of structured products and the increased use of OTC derivatives. Thus, comparing
leverage ratios in the 1990s to those in 2006 is much less informative than comparing leverage ratios from 2004 to
2006, when leverage ratios boomed after the SEC changed its policies. In assessing why the major financial firms
under the SEC’s purview failed, it is critical to examine the combination of policy responses, not only the net capital
rule change.

23
ago got caught up in the idea that the markets are self-correcting and self-disciplined, and

that the people in Wall Street will do a better job protecting the financial system than the
regulators would. I do think the SEC got diverted by that philosophy.” (From “SEC Puts
Wall St. On Notice,” Edward Wyatt, The New York Times, 4/19/2010). Anton Valukas’s

2,200-page report on the causes of the Lehman Brothers failure to the bankruptcy court is

even more pointed. It notes that Lehman "was significantly and persistently in excess of its
own risk limits." More importantly, he adds that the SEC "was aware of these excesses and
simply acquiesced."

To conclude, consider the testimony of The SEC’s Deputy Director, Robert Colby,

before the U.S. House of Representatives Financial Services Committee on April 25, 2007: 15
… the bill as introduced would subject the CSEs that already are highly
regulated under the Commission's consolidated supervision program to an
additional layer of duplicative and burdensome holding company oversight. The
bill should be amended to recognize the unique ability of the Commission to
comprehensively supervise the consolidated groups … Because the Commission
has established a successful consolidated supervision program based on its
unique expertise...

Eighteen months after the SEC argued that it was successfully supervising the five major

investment banks, they had either gone bankrupt, failed and merged with other firms, or

were forced to convert to bank holding companies, with billions of taxpayer dollars spent
on facilitating these arrangements.

15

See: http://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/2007/ts042507rc.htm

24

6. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
6.1. Background
The government took over the two regulated housing-finance giants, Fannie Mae

and Freddie Mac, on September 7, 2008 that together owned or guaranteed almost $7

trillion worth of mortgages. 16 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are Congressionally-chartered,
stockholder-owned corporations.

These government-sponsored entities (GSEs) were designed to facilitate housing

finance. They purchase mortgages from banks and mortgages companies that lend directly

to homeowners, package the mortgages into mortgage-backed securities (MBSs), guarantee
timely payment of interest and principal, and sell the MBSs to investors. Besides this core

securitization activity, the GSEs also buy and hold mortgages and MBSs. By increasing the
demand for, and hence the price of, mortgages in the secondary market, the GSEs can
reduce the interest rates the homebuyers pay on mortgages in the primary market,
fostering home ownership.

While facilitating housing is a raison d'être, the GSEs also use their privileged

positions to earn substantial profits. Specifically, the GSEs borrow cheaply: the debt issued
by these two financial institutions enjoyed an implicit government guarantee, which was
made explicit when the government placed them into conservatorship. Thus, the GSEs

could borrow at low interest rates and buy mortgages with higher interest rates. Over time,
the GSEs increased the degree to which they bought and held mortgages relative to their

securitization role, in which they bought, packaged, guaranteed, and sold MBSs. As long as
16

More precisely, the Federal Housing Finance Agency placed into conservatorship both the Federal National
Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac).

25
there were not too many defaults, the GSEs made enormous profits. Indeed, profits were
limited primarily by the size of the mortgage market and threatened by regulatory

interventions that might force GSEs to funnel more of their earnings into lowering primary
mortgage rates, with a concomitant lowering of GSE profits. Fortunately for the GSEs,

Congress and other policymakers helped expand the mortgage market and kept regulatory
interventions to a minimum.

6.2. Policy changes and effects
Two policies combined to expand the mortgage market for GSEs: the expansion of

the affordable housing mission of GSEs and the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) as
discussed in Barth et al (2009), Joint Center for Housing Studies (2008), and Wallison and

Calomiris (2008). Enacted in 1977, the CRA was designed to boost lending to disadvantaged
areas by prohibiting discrimination. In the mid-1990s, under the CRA, regulators started

using quantitative guidelines to induce greater lending to low- and moderate-income (LMI)

areas and borrowers. The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in the

mid-1990s put corresponding pressure on the GSEs to adjust their financing standards to

facilitate the flow of credit to LMI borrowers, encouraging the GSEs to finance lower quality
mortgages. Furthermore, Congress also added an affordable housing mission to the GREs.
In 1991, Fannie Mae announced a $1 trillion affordable housing initiative, and in 1994,

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac initiated an additional $2 trillion program for LMI borrowers.
These policies permitted and encouraged the GSEs to accept lower quality

mortgages and hence spurred primary market lenders to lend more to more suspect

borrowers. For example, by 2001, the GSEs were purchasing mortgages that had no down

26
payment; between 2005 and 2007, they bought approximately $1 trillion of mortgages with
subprime characteristics; which accounted for about 45% of their mortgage purchases. 17
By signaling to mortgage lenders that they would purchase mortgages with subprime

characteristics -- such as mortgages with low FICO credit scores, high loan-to-value ratios,
negative amortization, low documentation -- Fannie and Freddie triggered a massive

movement into the issuance of lower quality mortgages. Mortgage companies were more

willing to accept the fees for making loans to questionable borrowers if they knew that the
GSEs would purchase the loan.

The push into lower quality mortgages created a complex “mutual dependency”

between Congress and the GSEs, fueling their increasingly risky investments (Wallison and
Calomiris, 2008). Congress relied on the GSEs to both promote housing policies and to
provide campaign donations. The GSEs relied on Congress to protect their profitable

privileges and refrain from regulatory interventions. Each satisfied its side of the bargain.

The GSEs provided generous campaign contributions and greatly expanded their funding of LMI

borrowers. Profits and bonuses soared. In turn, policymakers limited regulatory oversight of

the GSEs. Indeed, even after the House Banking Subcommittee and the GSE’s regulator

(Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) accused them of serious accounting fraud

in 2000, 2003, and 2004 and even as evidence emerged of their financial fragility, Congress
did not pass a proposed bill that would have strengthened supervision of the GSEs and

prohibited the GSEs from buying and holding MBSs. Such a policy shift would have limited
GSE exposure to low-quality mortgages, which ultimately led to their bankruptcy.

17

See the Fannie Mae publication, “2008 Q2 10-Q Summary,” the Freddie Mac publication from August 2008,
“Freddie Mac Update,” and the calculations by Wallison and Calomiris, 2008, p. 7-8.

27
6.3. Postmortem
Deterioration in the financial condition of the GSEs was not a surprise. The New York

Times warned in 1999 that Fannie Mae was taking on so much risk that an economic

downturn could trigger a “rescue similar to that of the savings and loan industry in the

1980s,” and again emphasized this point in 2003. 18 From 2003 through 2007, the GSE’s

regulator warned of excessive risk-taking; the Treasury acknowledged ineffective oversight
of the GSEs; Congress discussed the fragility of GSEs and their illusory profits; Alan

Greenspan testified before the Senate Banking Committee in 2004 that the increasingly
large and risky GSE portfolios could have enormously adverse ramifications; and Taleb

(2007) warned that the GSEs “seem to be sitting on a barrel of dynamite, vulnerable to the
slightest hiccup.” 19

But, Congress did not respond and allowed increasingly fragile GSEs to endanger the

entire financial system. It is difficult to discern why. Some did not want to jeopardize the

increased provision of affordable housing. Many received generous financial support from
the GSEs in return for their protection. For the purposes of this paper, the critical issue is

that policymakers did not respond as the GSEs became systemically fragile. Again, I am not

arguing that the timing, extent, and full nature of the housing bubble were perfectly known.
I am arguing that policymakers created incentives for massive risk-taking by the GSEs and

then did not respond to information that this risk-taking threatened the financial system.
18

See Steven A. Holmes, “Fannie Mae Eases Credit to Aid Mortgage Lending,” New York Times, September 30,
1999 and Alex Berenson, “Fannie Mae’s Loss Risk is Larger, Computer Models Show,” New York Times, August 7,
2003.
19

See Zachary A. Goldfarb, “Affordable-Housing Goals Scaled Back,” Washington Post, September 24, 2008,
Stephen Labaton, “New Agency Proposed to Oversee Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae,” New York Times, September
31, 2003, and Alan Greenspan, “Proposals for Improving the Regulation of the Housing Government Sponsored
Enterprises,” testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 24,
2004.

28
7. Conclusion
Finance is powerful. As the last few years demonstrate, the malfunctioning of the

financial system can trigger economic crises, harming the welfare of many. As the last few
centuries demonstrate, the functioning of the financial system affects long-run economic

growth. If financial systems funnel society’s savings to those with the best projects, this
helps promote and sustain economic progress (Levine, 2005). Getting financial policies

right is a first-order priority in creating an environment conducive to economic prosperity.
This paper has examined the determinants of the recent crisis. Without denying the

importance of capital account imbalances and herd behavior, my analyses suggest that this
is not the entire story. Similarly, while a confluence of surprises helped trigger the crisis,
the evidence is inconsistent with the view that poor information about financial

institutions was the sole cause of the crisis. Thus, the evidence is inconsistent with

testimonies before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission by Robert Rubin (former

Treasury secretary and former director of Citigroup), Charles O. Prince III (former CEO of

Citigroup), and Alan Greenspan (former Chairman of the Fed), who claim that the crisis was
an unprecedented and unpredictable accident. The crisis did not just happen. Policymakers
and regulators, along with private sector coconspirators, helped cause it.

The evidence indicates that financial sector policies during the period from 1996

through 2006 precipitated the crisis. Either by becoming willfully blind to excessive risk
taking or by maintaining policies that encouraged destabilizing behaviors, policymakers

and regulatory agencies contributed to the financial system’s collapse. As noted by Senator
Carl Levin, “The recent financial crisis was not a natural disaster; it was a manmade
economic assault. It will happen again unless we change the rules.”

29
References
Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew Richardson. 2009. Restoring Financial Stability: How to
Repair a Failed System. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine. 2006. Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till
Angels Govern. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine. 2010. Guardians of Finance: How to
Make them Work for Us. Forthcoming.

Barth, James R., Tong Li, Wenling Lu, Tiphon Phumiwasana, Glenn Yago. 2009. The Rise and
Fall of the U.S. Mortgage and Credit Markets. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Bebchuk, Lucian A. 2010a. Regulating Bankers Pay. Georgetown Law Journal 98: 247-287.

Bebchuk, Lucian A. 2010b. The Wages of Failure: Executive Compensation at Bear Stearns
and Lehman 2000-2008. Yale Journal on Regulation Summer: forthcoming.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2010. Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble. Speech at the Annual
Meeting of the America Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia (January 3).

Bernanke, Ben S. 2009b. Four Questions about the Financial Crisis. Speech at Morehouse
College, Atlanta, Georgia (April 14).

Bernanke, Ben S. 2009a. Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk. Speech at the Council
of Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C. (March 10).
Brunnermeier, Markus K. 2009. Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-08.
Journal Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.
Caprio, Gerard, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Edward Kane. 2008. The 2007 Meltdown in
Structured Securitization: Searching for Lessons not Scapegoats, World Bank
mimeo.

Cecchetti, Stephen G. 2009. Crisis and Responses: The Federal Reserve in the Early Stages
of the Financial Crisis. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 51-75.

Colby, Robert. 2007. Testimony Concerning the Consolidated Supervision of U.S. Securities
Firms and Affiliated Industrial Loan Corporations. The U.S. House of Representatives
Financial Services Committee, April 25, 2007.
Coffee, John C. 2008. Analyzing the Cried Crisis: Was the SEC Missing in Action? New York
Law Journal, December 5.

30
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levine. 2009. Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence.
Annual Review of Financial Economics 1.
Geithner, Timothy. 2009. Written Testimony, House Financial Services and Agriculture
Committees Joint Hearing on Regulation of OTC Derivatives, July 10, 2009.

Greenspan, Alan. 2005. Economic Flexibility. Speech given to the National Association for
Business Economics, Annual Meeting, Chicago, Illinois,
September 27, 2005.
Greenspan, Alan. 2010. The Crisis. Brookings Institution. Forthcoming.

Hill, Claire A. 2010a. Why Did the Rating Agencies Do Such a Bad Job Rating Subprime
Securities? University of Pittsburgh Law Review 71 (forthcoming)

Hill, Claire A. 2010b. Who Were the Villains in the Subprime Crisis, and Why It Matters, 4
Entrepreneurial Business Law Journal 14: 323-350.
Jagannathan, Ravi, Mudit Kapoor, Ernst Schaumburg. 2009. Why are We in a Recession?
The Financial Crisis is the Symptom not the Disease! NBER Working Paper No.
15404.

Joint Center for Housing Studies. 2008. The State of the Nation’s Housing. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Kamin, Steven B. and Laurie Pounder DeMarco. 2010. “How Did a Domestic Housing Slump
Turn into a Global Financial Crisis?” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System. International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 994.
Kane, Edward J. 2009a. “Incentive Roots of the Securitization Crisis and Its Early
Mismanagement,” Yale Journal of Regulation, 26, (summer), 405-416.

Kane, Edward J. 2009b. Regulation and Supervision: An Ethical Perspective. In: Oxford
Handbook of Banking. Eds: Allen Berger Phil Molyneux, and John Wilson. London:
Oxford University Press.

Labaton, Stephen. 2008. Agency’s ’04 Rule Let Banks Pile Up New Debt. New York Times,
October 3, 2008.
Levine, Ross. 1997. Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda.
Journal of Economic Literature 35, 688-726.

Levine, Ross. 2005. Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence. In: Handbook of Economic
Growth, Eds: Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Elsevier North-Holland
Publishers, p. 866-934.

31
Levine, Ross. 2010. The Sentinel: Improving the Governance of Financial Policies. In The
International Financial Crisis: Have the Rules of Finance Changed? Eds: Asli
Demirguc-Kunt, Douglas D. Evanoff and George G. Kaufman, World Scientific
Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd, New Jersey.
Lewis, Michael. 2009. The Man Who Crashed the World. Vanity Fair August.
Lowenstein, Roger. 2008. Triple-A Failure. New York Times, April 27.

McDonald, Lawrence G. and Patrick Robinson. 2009. A Colossal Failure of Common Sense:
The Inside Story of the Collapse of Lehman Brothers. New York, NY: Crown Publishing
Company.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:
Products of Common Causes. Paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Asia Economic Policy Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, October 18-20, 2009.
Paulson, Henry 2009. Financial Times, January 1, 2009 (Krishna Guha).
Partnoy, Frank. 1999. The Siskel and Ebert of Financial Markets: Two Thumbs Down for the
Credit Rating Agencies. Washington University Law Quarterly 77, 619-712.
Pinches, George E. and J. Clay Singleton. 1978. The Adjustment of Stock Prices to Bond
Rating Changes. Journal of Finance 33, 29-44.

Romer, Christina D. 2009. Back from the Brink. Paper presented at Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago Conference, The International Financial Crisis: Have the Rules of Finance
Changed? September 24-25, 2009.
Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel. 2009. “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the
2008 Crisis: Early Warning. CEPR Discussion Paper 7354.

Rubin, Robert. 2010. Testimony Before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, April 9,
2010.
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. 2007. The Black Swan. New York: Penguin.
Tett, Gillian. 2009. Fool’s Gold. New York, NY: Free Press.

Wallison, Peter J. and Charles W. Calomiris. 2009. The last Trillion-Dollar Commitment: The
Destruction of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Journal of Structured Finance Spring,
71-80.

