                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      AN ALTERNATIVE THEORY OF THE PLANT SIZE DISTRIBUTION WITH AN
                         APPLICATION TO TRADE

                                         Thomas J. Holmes
                                          John J. Stevens

                                        Working Paper 15957
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15957


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




The research presented here was funded by the National Science Foundation under Grant SES 0551062.
We thank Brian Adams, Steve Schmeiser, and Julia Thornton Snider for their research assistance on
this project. We have benefited from working at the Center for Economic Studies at the Census Bureau,
and particularly thank Shawn Klimek, Arnie Reznek, and Lynn Riggs. The statistics reported in this
paper that were derived from Census Bureau micro data were screened to ensure that they do not disclose
confidential information. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve System,
the U.S. Bureau of the Census, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Thomas J. Holmes and John J. Stevens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size Distribution with an Application to Trade
Thomas J. Holmes and John J. Stevens
NBER Working Paper No. 15957
April 2010
JEL No. F10,L11

                                              ABSTRACT

There is wide variation in the sizes of manufacturing plants, even within the most narrowly defined
industry classifications used by statistical agencies. Standard theories attribute all such size differences
to productivity differences. This paper develops an alternative theory in which industries are made
up of large plants producing standardized goods and small plants making custom or specialty goods.
It uses confidential Census data to estimate the parameters of the model, including estimates of plant
counts in the standardized and specialty segments by industry. The estimated model fits the data relatively
well compared with estimates based on standard approaches. In particular, the predictions of the model
for the impacts of a surge in imports from China are consistent with what happened to U.S. manufacturing
industries that experienced such a surge over the period 1997--2007. Large-scale standardized plants
were decimated, while small-scale specialty plants were relatively less impacted.


Thomas J. Holmes
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
holmes@umn.edu

John J. Stevens
Industrial Output Section, Mail Stop 82
Division of Research and Statistics
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington, DC 20551
John.J.Stevens@frb.gov
1     Introduction
There is wide variation in the sizes of manufacturing plants, even within the most narrowly-
defined industry classifications used by statistical agencies.     For example, in the wood
furniture industry in the United States (NAICS industry code 337122), one can find plants
with over a thousand employees and other plants with as few as one or two employees. The
dominant theory of such within-industry plant-size diﬀerentials models plants as varying in
terms of productivity. (See Lucas (1978), Jovanovic (1982), and Hopenhayn (1992).) In
this theory, some plants are lucky and draw high productivity at startup, whereas others
are unlucky and draw low productivity.       The size distribution is driven entirely by the
productivity distribution.
    The approach has been extremely influential. It underpins recent developments in the
international trade literature. Melitz (2003) and Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003,
hereafter BEJK) use the approach to explain plant-level trade facts. In Melitz, plants with
higher productivity draws have large domestic sales and also have the incentive to pay fixed
costs to enter export markets. In this way, the Melitz model explains the fact–documented
by Bernard and Jensen (1995)–that large plants within narrowly-defined industries are more
likely to be exporters than small plants. Relatedly, in BEJK, more productive plants have
wider trade areas. Both the Melitz and the BEJK theories have a sharp implication about
the impact of increased exposure to import competition on a domestic industry: The smaller
plants in the industry–which are also the low productivity plants in the industry under these
theories–are the first to exit.
    In our view, the dominant approach to modeling plant-size diﬀerentials goes too far in
attributing all variation in plant size within narrowly-defined census industries to diﬀerences
in productivity. It is likely that plants that are dramatically diﬀerent in size are performing
diﬀerent functions, even if the Census happens to put them in the same industry. Moreover,
these diﬀerences in function may be systematic and may very well be directly related to how
increased import competition would aﬀect the plants.
    Take wood furniture.     The large plants in this industry with more than a thousand
employees are concentrated in North Carolina, particularly in a place called High Point.
These plants make the stock bedroom and dining room furniture pieces found at traditional
furniture stores. Also included in the Census classification are small facilities making custom
pieces to order, such as small shops employing Amish skilled craftsman. Let us apply the
standard theory of the size distribution to this industry.       Entrepreneurs that enter and


                                              1
draw high productivity parameters would likely open up megaplants in High Point, North
Carolina; those that get low draws might open Amish shops in other locations. The Melitz
model and the BEJK model both predict the large North Carolina plants will have large
market areas, while the small plants will tend to ship locally. So far so good, because this
result is consistent with the data, as we will show. But what happens when China enters
the wood furniture market in a dramatic fashion as has occurred over the past ten years?
While all of the U.S. industry will be hurt, the Melitz and BEJK theories predict the North
Carolina industry will be relatively less aﬀected, because it is home to the large, productive
plants. In fact, the opposite turns out to be true in the data.
   To address this shortcoming, our theory takes into account that most industries have some
segment that provide specialty goods, often custom-made goods, the provision of which is
facilitated by face-to-face contact between buyers and sellers.     This specialty segment is
the province of small plants.    Large plants tend to make standardized products.         Here
we follow the ideas of Piore and Sable (1984) and a subsequent literature distinguishing
between the mass production of standardized products taking place in large plants and the
craft production of specialty products taking place in small plants.      When China enters
the wood furniture market, naturally it follows its comparative advantage and enters the
standardized segment of the market, making products similar to the stock furniture pieces
produced in North Carolina. Thus, in our theory, the North Carolina industry is hurt the
most by China’s entry into the industry, as actually happened.
   Our starting point is the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model of geography and trade as
further developed in BEJK. In its basic form, plants in this model vary in productivity and
location but are otherwise symmetric in terms of transportation costs and underlying con-
sumer demand. We take this model “oﬀ the shelf” as our model of the standardized segment
of an industry, and we fold in a simple model of a specialty segment. We explore two issues
in the model. First, how is the size distribution of plants connected to the geographic dis-
tribution of plants (call this the plant size/geographic concentration relationship)? Second,
if there is a surge in imports, what is the relative impact of the trade shock across locations
that vary by geographic concentration and mean plant size?
   We estimate the model separately for individual industries, using Census data that in-
cludes survey information from the Commodity Flow Survey on the origins and destinations
of shipments. The shipment information is critical for our analysis, because it enables us to
recover parameters related to the transportation cost structure in the BEJK framework.
   We obtain four main empirical results. First, we estimate that in most industries, more

                                              2
than half of the plants in an industry can be classified as being in the specialty segment;
the specialty segment dominates plant counts. Second, the pure BEJK model fails to quan-
titatively match the plant size/geographic concentration relationship, whereas the general
model that includes the specialty segment fits this relationship well. For example, in High
Point where the wood furniture industry concentrates, average plant size (as measured by
sales revenue) is 6.6 times the national average. The pure BEJK model predicts a diﬀerence
of only a factor 1.6, but the general model comes in quite close with a factor 6.9. The third
empirical result concerns industries negatively aﬀected by a surge of imports from China.
We examine the period between the 1997 and 2007 Economic Census years. Our estimated
pure BEJK model predicts that those locations with high industry concentration and high
average plant size should have experienced a small increase in relative share of the domestic
industry; e.g., High Point’s market share in wood furniture should have risen relative to
the rest of the country.   Instead these areas experienced sharp declines over the period,
consistent with our hypothesis.    Indeed, we show that the High Point region went from
having 14 wood furniture plants with more than 500 employees to only 3. For our fourth
emprical result, we use our general model and estimate the distribution of plant counts by
standardized and specialty segments for 1997 and 2007 and analyze the changes over time.
Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that those industries facing a surge of imports from
China experienced a dramatic decline in the number of standardized plants.       In these in-
dustries, standardized plants numbered in 2007 only about one third of their 1997 level. In
contrast, changes in counts of specialty segment plants were much less pronounced.
   We find it particularly revealing to analyze what has happened in large metropolitan
areas.   Generally speaking, in recent decades large cities have not been home to huge
manufacturing plants in the kinds of industries, like furniture and clothing, that China now
dominates. In the United States, large plants in these industries have been concentrated
in smaller, manufacturing-oriented areas, like High Point.   We show that over the period
1997 to 2007, in industries where exports from China have surged, the domestic industry has
shifted toward large metropolitan areas, places where average plant size has typically been
small. These are places where we expect to see a large demand for specialty and custom
goods. And we also expect to find there a large supply of inputs suited for specialty and
niche products.   These are diﬀerent from the low skill inputs used in mass production of
standardized products in large plants–inputs readily available in China and places like High
Point. Our theory with a specialized good sector can account for how import pressure from
China shifts industries from places like High Point to places like New York City. Without

                                             3
the specialized-good segment in the model, the shift goes the other way.       An interesting
analogue to recent experience is found in an early case study of the garment industry circa
1960 (Hall, 1959).   That study explained how large plants in places like North Carolina
tended to mass produce standardized garments like nurses uniforms, while the small plants
in New York city tended to produce fashion items. The new development is that China has
entered to play the role of North Carolina, while New York still plays New York (albeit in a
relative sense given the overall decline of manufacturing as a share of the domestic economy).
   There is an emerging new literature that allows for richer forms of heterogeneity across
plants than the first generation of trade models with heterogeneous firms found in Melitz
(2003) and BEJK. Hallak and Sivadasan (2009) allow plants to diﬀer in the standard way
regarding cost structure, but also in a second dimension in terms of a plant’s ability to
provide quality. Their theory can explain why sometimes smaller plants export more than
larger plants. (This outcome can happen in their model if the smaller plant has suﬃciently
higher quality). Bernard, Redding and Schott (2009) develop a multi-product model of a
firm with diﬀerences not only in an overall firm productivity levels, but also heterogeneity
in product-specific attributes as well. Our paper is in the spirit of these papers in that it
allows for richer heterogeneity. One diﬀerence is that we are adding heterogeneity within
narrowly-defined industries in the extent to which the goods being produced are tradable,
with customized versions of goods being more diﬃcult to trade. Holmes and Stevens (2004)
include a margin like this in a regional model linking plant size and geographic concentration.
This paper is diﬀerent from our earlier paper because it (1) uses BEJK to develop an entirely
diﬀerent modeling structure, (2) takes the model to the data and estimates its parameters,
and (3) examines the impact of a trade shock.
   The theory developed here is consistent with a variety of empirical findings in the liter-
ature.   First, there is conflicting evidence in the trade literature on how tariﬀ reductions
aﬀect domestic plant sizes. (See Head and Ries (1999).) When we take into account that
plants vary in productivity as well as in function (with small plants specializing in specialty
goods), we cannot tell a priori whether a given large plant will be more likely to survive a
trade onslaught than a small plant. Second, the theory provides a new explanation for the
well-known findings discussed earlier that exporters tend to be larger than other plants in
the same narrowly defined industry.     Third, the theory is consistent with the well-known
fact that the size distribution of plants is highly skewed–there are many more small plants
than large plants. The most prominent explanation in the literature for this skewness is the
random growth theory. See Luttmer (2007) for a recent treatment. In this literature, a big

                                              4
plant is a lucky one that gets, say, “heads” fifty times in a row in a series of coin flips. This
event is unlikely, of course, so big plants are rare. In our theory, the little plants are doing
diﬀerent things than the big plants. In particular, in providing a custom service that is hard
to trade, there will need to be many such plants diﬀused across all local markets.2



2         Theory
The first part of this section presents the model. The second part derives analytic results.


2.1         Model
There is a fixed set of  locations, indexed by . Each location typically produces goods in a
variety of industries. When we go to the data, we will take into account that industries diﬀer
in their model parameters. Here we describe the model in terms of a particular industry
and leave implicit the industry index.
        Consumers have Cobb-Douglas utility for industry composites. Assume  is the spending
share on the particular industry we are looking at. For this industry, let  be the composite
industry price index and  be the composite industry quantity, at location . Given the
Cobb-Douglas assumption, spending  =   on the industry at the location equals


                                                      =  ,


given income  
        The industry has two segments, the standardized segment indexed by “” and the specialty
segment indexed by “b” (where “b” can be remembered as “boutique”).               The industry
composite  is made up of a standardized segment  composite and a specialty (or boutique)
segment composite  in the usual CES way,

                                          ³        −1      ¡  ¢ −1 ´ −1
                                                                         
                                                       
                                       =  ( )     +        
                                                                            ,                (1)


where  is the elasticity of substitution between the two segments and the segment weights
sum to one,   +   = 1. We next describe each segment in turn.
    2
        See Hsu (2008) for related ideas regarding the city size distribution.



                                                          5
2.1.1     The Standardized Segment

We use the BEJK model as our model of the standardized segment. There is a continuum of
diﬀerentiated standard goods indexed by  ∈ [0 1]. For example, if the industry is the wood
furniture industry, then  specifies a particular kind of wood furniture, such as a kitchen
table of a particular size, finish, shape, and kind of wood. The diﬀerent standardized goods
 are aggregated to obtain the standardized segment composite  in the usual CES way.
Let  be the elasticity of substitution and let  () be the price of good  at location . (For
simplicity we leave the ““ superscript implicit here as the  index only refers to tradable
goods.)    Then the expenditure at location  for good  equals

                                                          µ            ¶1−
                                                               ()
                                     () =        
                                                               

where  is spending on the standardized segment composite at location  and  is the price
index,
                                          ∙Z    1                      ¸ 1−
                                                                          1


                                   =              ()1−                .
                                            0

   As in BEJK, there are potential producers at each location with varying levels of technical
eﬃciency. Let  () index the eﬃciency of the th most eﬃcient producer of good  located
at . This index represents the amount of good  made by this producer, per unit of input.
   There is an “iceberg” cost to ship tradable segment goods across locations. Let  be
the amount of good that must be shipped to location  from location  in order to deliver
one unit. There is no transportation cost for delivering to the location where the good is
produced, i.e.,  = 1. Otherwise,  ≥ 1, for  6= . Assume that the triangle inequality
 ≤   holds.
   The distribution of eﬃciencies is determined as follows.                        Let  denote a parameter
governing the distribution of eﬃciency of the standard segment at location . Suppose the
maximum eﬃciency 1 is drawn according to

                                                                  −
                                           () = −  .


The parameter  governs the variance of productivity draws.
   Eaton and Kortum (2002) show that for a given standard segment good , the probability



                                                          6
location  is the lowest cost producer to location  is

                                                 
                                         = P          ,                                   (2)
                                               =1   


for


                                           ≡  −                                         (3)
                                         = ( )− ,


where  is the cost of inputs at location  We refer to   as the cost eﬃciency index for
location  and  as the distance adjustment between  and . Let Γ = ( 1   2    ) be the
cost eﬃciency vector and  (with elements  ) be the distance adjustment matrix. We can
think of    as an index of the competitiveness of origin  at destination . It starts with
location ’s overall cost eﬃciency and adjusts for distance to . Location ’s probability  
of getting the sale at  equals its own competitiveness at  relative to the sum of all the other
locations’ indexes of competitiveness at .
      BEJK consider a rich structure with multiple potential producers at each location who
each get their own productivity draws. Then firms engage in Bertrand competition for
consumers at each location. The equilibrium may feature limit pricing, where the lowest
cost producer matches the second lowest cost. Or the lowest cost may be so low relative
to rivals’ costs that the price is determined by the inverse elasticity rule for the optimal
monopoly price.     The very useful result of BEJK is that allowing for all of this does not
matter. Conditional on a location  landing a sale at  (i.e. that location  is the low cost
producer for ), the distribution of prices to  is the same for all originations . This implies
that the sales revenues from  are allocated according to  . That is, total sales revenue of
origin  to destination  is
                                            =   .

Total sales revenues on standardized segment goods originating in  across all destinations is

                                                   X
                                                   
                                            =            .
                                                   =1


      Like BEJK, we associate a plant with a particular good  produced at . The measure of


                                                    7
standardized segment goods produced at  equals   , the measure of goods location  sells to
itself.3 We allow for a scaling factor   , so that the number of standardized segment plants
at location  is
                                                  =                                               (4)


2.1.2      Specialty Segment

We oﬀer two ways to model the specialty segment.                         Conceptually the two cases are very
diﬀerent. Yet for much of what we do in this paper, the results for the two cases are similar.
       Our first case is the specialty-segment-as-nontradable-goods model.                  As an example of
this case, consider the wood furniture industry.                    This industry includes plants that look
like retail stores in a shopping center. A consumer can go into such an establishment and
meet face to face with designers to come up with a design for a custom piece. When the
furniture is actually made on the premises, the Census Bureau classifies the establishment
as being a wood furniture manufacturer. This kind of specialty establishment is aimed at a
local market, as consumers do not want to drive long distances to meet with a designer. For
simplicity, we assume for this case that the transportation cost across locations is infinitely
high precluding trade.        For this first model then, total sales by specialty segment plants
(also called boutique plants) at  equals expenditure at ,


                                                    =  .


Next we simplify by assuming average plant size in terms of revenue volume is constant
across locations and equals ̄ . Define   ≡ 1̄ as inverse size. The number of specialty
plants at  equals
                                                      
                                               =      
                                                           =    .                                     (5)
                                                      ̄
The idea here is that there tends to be some eﬃcient size of retail-like, specialty establish-
ments. If specialty-good expenditure doubles at a location, all expansion of the industry at
the location occurs on the extensive margin of a doubling of the number of establishments,
rather than any increase in size of establishments.                      Implicitly, there are diseconomies of
scale when plants get too big. This modeling assumption is plausible for retail-like, custom
operations.
   3
    On account of the triangle inequality  ≤   , if a particular plant is the most eﬃcient producer at
any location, it is also the most eﬃcient producer at its own location


                                                        8
       Our second case is the specialty-segment-as-high-end-niche model. For this, we go the
other extreme and treat the specialty goods as being perfectly tradable.                   The products
have high value-to-weight ratios and–if face-to-face contact between buyer and seller is not
important–transportation costs are then immaterial. The price  for these goods is the
same at all locations . The amount of high-end niche activity at a location depends on the
supply of factors specific to the segment at the location. We think of this as creative talent
or artisanship that is likely unrelated to the factor  determining suitability for standardized
goods. The total value of production  at  depends implicitly on the supply of creativity.
Again, assume average plant revenue volume is constant at ̄ across locations with inverse
  ≡ 1̄ . The number of specialty plants at origin  then equals


                                                 =    .                                         (6)


       This high-end-niche model of the specialty segment can be regarded as the limiting case
of the BEJK model where transportation cost is zero (or  = 1). As we will see below,
average plant size is constant across locations in this limiting case of BEJK. In particular,
as comparative advantage increases, the resulting expansion of output is met entirely on the
extensive margin of more plants.4
       We limit ourselves to these two extreme cases for technical tractability. We expect that
in many cases the specialty good sector will be some combination of these two extreme cases.
That is, it will have a hard-to-trade element (because face-to-face contact between the buyer
and producer is desirable) and a high-end fashion element (because comparative advantage
for the segment depends upon the supply factors like creative talent that is diﬀerent from
the supply of factors used to produced standardized goods).


2.2       Results
This subsection uses the model to examine two issues.                First, how is average plant size
at a location related to the concentration of industry at a location? Second, what is the
eﬀect of an import surge on the distribution of domestic production? We begin the analysis
discussing what happens with only standardized goods. Then we discuss how adding the
   4
    It is worth noting that the specialty-segment-as-nontradable-goods model is not a limit case of the BEJK
model with no transportation costs. In that limit case, as local demand expands, sales volume expands on
the intensive margin of larger average size plants. In our model of the nontradable segment, an expansion
of demand is met on the extensive margin of more plants.


                                                      9
specialty segment aﬀects the results.


2.2.1   The Plant Size/Geographic Concentration Relationship

To relate average size to industry concentration, we use the location quotient at  to measure
industry concentration at . Recall that  is total sales revenue of producers located at  and
 is total expenditure of consumers located at . Letting  and  be the aggregate totals,
the revenue location quotient 
                                  is a location’s share of sales revenue (i.e., production)
over its share of expenditure (i.e., consumption),

                                                    
                                         
                                             ≡          .                                  (7)
                                                    

If the distribution of production exactly follows expenditure, it equals one everywhere and
no locations specialize in the industry. Otherwise, if there are locations where this is greater
than one, we say the location specializes in the industry and is a net exporter.
   Following Holmes and Stevens (2002), we can think of there being two margins over
which a location can specialize in an industry: the extensive margin of more plants and the
intensive margin of higher average plant size. To highlight these two margins, we decompose
the revenue location quotient as the product of a count quotient and a size quotient,

                                                
                               
                                   ≡         =         ×                                   (8)
                                                  
                                               
                                      =       ×  .                                      (9)


recalling that  is the plant count at  and letting  be the aggregate plant count. The
count quotient is a location’s share of plant counts relative to its expenditure share. The
size quotient is a location’s average plant size (in sales revenue) relative to the aggregate
average plant size.
   For now, suppose there is only a standardized good segment so the model reduces to an
oﬀ-the-shelf BEJK model. For the benchmark case with no transportation costs we have
   Proposition 1. With only standardized goods and no transportation costs ( = 1 all
 6= ), then 
                   = 1 for all  so average plant size (in sales volume) is identical at all
locations. All variation in 
                                is through the extensive margin 
                                                                       .




                                              10
   Proof. With  = 1 for all  6= , the probability  serves  in (2) reduces to

                                                        
                                                  = P 
                                                         


which is independent of destination . From BEJK this also equals the sales share at each
location. So average plant size (in sales revenue) at each location is
                                         P               P                     P
                                                                     
                                 ̄ =               =                     =                  (10)
                                                                        

which is constant across locations. Q.E.D.
   Following intuition about the Eaton-Kortum setup in Alvarez and Lucas (2007), the
productivity at a location has an interpretation of being a function of the first-order statistic
of draws from the exponential distribution. A location  with productivity  twice as high
as another location can be interpreted as having twice as many underlying draws.            With
transportation costs that are zero, it is intuitive that a location with twice as many underlying
draws will produce twice as many products.
   When transportation cost is positive, the BEJK model delivers diﬀerences in average plant
size across locations.    Analytical results are diﬃcult to come by, but some basic patterns
can be readily discerned with numerical examples. Table 1 illustrates a numerical example
with two locations. For all the parameters considered, 
                                                        2 = 4, so location 2 specializes in

the industry to a substantial degree, at a rate of four times its expenditure. For location
1,                             
    1  1, and the exact value of 1   depends on the expenditure shares 1 and 2 . We
consider three possibilities for the expenditure distribution: In the first, expenditure is equal
across the two locations, in the second it is three times higher in location 2, in the third
it is three times higher in location 1.           We also vary the distance adjustment parameter
           −
12 = (12 ) . For diﬀerent levels of 12 , we back what the ratio  2  1 must be that would
result in                                          
           2 = 4 and then calculate the corresponding 2     and 
                                                                  2 .

   We start by discussing the equal expenditure case. Note that as 12 is decreased as we
move down the table (so the distance adjustment becomes more important), the productivity
advantage of location 2 must be increased to hold constant the net trade between the two
locations (i.e. to keep 
                         2   = 4).           At the limiting case where  = 1, average size is the
same in both places,     
                          2      = 1, consistent with Proposition 1. For this limiting case, the
expansion in revenue at location 2 comes entirely through the count margin,   
                                                                             2 = 2     .


                                                         11
As 12 is decreased, average size in location 2 increases, so both the size margin and the count
margin play a role. But even as  shrinks to extreme levels (and the implied  2  1 goes
to extreme levels), the establishment count margin is always greater than the size margin.
This result holds more generally in other numerical examples with 1 = 2 . This discussion
gives a sense of how the the BEJK model has trouble accounting for large diﬀerences in
average plant size across locations, particularly if transportation costs are relatively small.
   If expenditure is larger in location 2 and if trade is suﬃciently diﬃcult, the size margin
will be significant. It is intuitive that when trade is diﬃcult in the BEJK model, plants in
locations with high local expenditure will tend to be big, as most sales are local. In what
we discuss below, high local demand will not be a relevant explanation for the large average
size plants to be found in industrial centers like High Point, North Carolina. These places
are relatively small cities with low local demand.


2.2.2   Response to an External Trade Shock

We next examine the impact of a trade surge in the standardized segment on the distribution
of the production of standardized goods across locations. We model trade in a simple fashion.
As above, suppose there are two domestic locations.             Now add a third location that we
call location  (China).      We assume location  does not have any expenditure,  = 0.
Assume the transportation cost is the same from location  to both domestic locations,
1 = 2 =   1 and let  = −
                                  . Let  ≡    be the China Surge parameter. It
is ’s competitiveness index (which is the same at locations 1 and 2). Finally, we allow for
there to be a general equilibrium impact of China on the input prices at each location. Let
 () be the input price at location  given China Surge , and let   () =   ()− be the
cost eﬃciency parameter at  as a function of .
   Assumption 1. Assume the wage ratio 2 ()1 () weakly decreases in , and that the
ratio  1 () strictly increases in .
   This assumption is sensible, because the industry is disproportionately represented at
location 2, so any impact on wages from the imports should disproportionately aﬀect location
2. (And  1 () increasing just means China is becoming relatively more competitive than
location 1 as  increases.)
   Using (3) and (2), we can write the probability location 2 sells at 1 as

                                                   12  2 ()
                                   12 =                                                    (11)
                                            1 () + 12  2 () + 

                                                  12
and the general formula for  is analogous. In the location quotients below, only domestic
sales are used to calculate sales share (the aggregate  excludes sales from ).
       Proposition 2. Suppose: (a) There are only standardized goods (the pure BEJK model);
(b) the parameters are such that location 2 is the high concentration location (formally,
 2   1 so 
              2    1  
                         1 ); (c) there is symmetric distance adjustment between locations

1 and 2 (12 = 21  1); and (d) Assumption 1 holds. Then (i) plant size is bigger at the
high concentration location (
                              2     1                                           
                                          1 ); and (ii) the revenue location quotient 2

of the high concentration location strictly increases in the China Surge parameter .
       Proof. See appendix.
       The expansion of the foreign location  hurts sales at both locations. But in the BEJK
model, it hurts sales relatively less in location 2, where the industry is concentrated. Note
that taking into account general equilibrium eﬀects through Assumption 1 makes the result
stronger. Any relative input price decline at location 2 increases its domestic share.


2.2.3      How Introducing the Specialty Segment Changes the Results

It is straightforward to see how introducing the specialty segment changes the results. Con-
sider first average plant size at a location. It equals the weighted average of the mean plant
size in the standardized segment and specialty segments.

                                                         
                                ̄   =    =              + 
                                             +      +  
                                                        
                                      =    ̄ +    ̄
                                         +         + 

It is plausible that average size of standardized plants ̄ is typically much larger than the
average size ̄ of specialty plants.       So diﬀerences in mean plant size across locations can
be driven by diﬀerences in the composition of types of plants. High Point can have a large
average plant size if it has a large share of standardized plants.
       Next consider the impact of the trade shock. For simplicity, assume the elasticity of sub-
stitution  between the two segments equals one (Cobb-Douglas) fixing the spending shares
on the two segments.5 To discuss the impact of the shock, we need to distinguish between
the two models of the specialty segment oﬀered above. We begin with the nontradable case.
   5
    It is possible to generalize the argument to allow standardized goods to substitute for specialty goods.
But then assumptions have to be added to make standardized goods better substitutes for each other than
they are for specialty goods.


                                                    13
The emergence of the new foreign location  is irrelevant for the nontradable specialty sector
because the infinite transportation precludes imports from location . Suppose there are
two domestic locations as in Proposition 2 and the standardized segment lies completely
within location 2. The nontradable segment is distributed across the two locations following
expenditure.      Assume the Census combines the standardized and specialty segments into
one industry. Then location 2 will be measured as specializing in the overall industry. If
average plant size of standardized plants is greater than specialty plants, then location 2 will
have larger plants than the domestic average. So part (i) of Proposition 2 continues to hold.
But now consider an increase in the China Surge parameter for standardized goods. This
displaces sales of standardized goods at location 2, but has no impact on sales of specialty
goods at location 1 (the only type of products produced at 1). Location 2 with high industry
concentration and the large plants loses share relative to location 1 on account of the surge
from location . This is the opposite of the result for the pure BEJK model (i.e., Part (ii)
of Proposition 2).
    In the alternative model where the specialty goods are high-end niche goods, but very
tradable, the outcome depends upon the emerging trade partner’s ability to compete in the
specialty segment as well as the standardized segment. It is likely that the circumstances
that make location  a strong competitor in the standardized segment (e.g. an abundance
of unskilled labor) are unrelated to its competitiveness in the specialty segment. If that is
the case, the specialty segment is not aﬀected and part (ii) of Proposition 2 will not hold in
this case either.



3     The Data and Some Descriptive Results
The first part of this section discusses data sources and industry and geographic classifica-
tions. The second part provides some initial descriptive results.


3.1     The Data
We analyze the confidential micro data for two programs of the U.S. Census Bureau. The
first is the 1997 Census of Manufactures (CM), The data are collected at the plant level, e.g.
at a particular plant location, as opposed to being aggregated up to the firm level. For each
plant, the file contains information about employment, sales revenue, location, and industry
classification.

                                              14
       The second data file is the 1997 Commodity Flow Survey (CFS). The CFS is a survey
of the shipments that leave manufacturing plants.6              Respondents are required to take a
sample of their shipments (e.g. every 10 shipments) and specify the destination, the product
classification, the weight, and the value of the shipment at origin.              On the basis of this
probability weighted survey, the Census tabulates estimates of figures such as the total ton
miles shipped of particular products. There are approximately 30,000 manufacturing plants
with shipments in the survey.
       While we have access to the raw confidential Census data, in some instances, we report
estimates based partially on publicly-disclosed information rather than entirely on the confi-
dential data. These are cases where we want to report information about narrowly-defined
geographic areas, but strict procedures relating to the disclosure process for the micro-data
based results get in our way.        In these cases, we make partial use of the detailed public
information that is made available about each plant in the Census of Manufactures. Specif-
ically, the Census publishes the cell counts in such a way that for each plant, we can identify
its six-digit NAICS industry, its location, and its detailed employment size class (e.g., 1-4
employees, 5-9 employees, 10-19 employees, etc.).            We use this and other information to
derive sales and employment estimates for narrowly-defined geographic areas.                    The data
appendix provides details.
       Plants are classified into industries according to the North American Industry Classifica-
tion System or NAICS. The finest level of plant classification in this system is the six-digit
level, and there are 473 diﬀerent manufacturing industries at this level. When we estimate
the model, we focus on a more narrow set of 172 manufacturing industries.                      These are
industries with diﬀuse demand that approximately follows the distribution of population,
which allows us to use population to proxy demand when we estimate the model. Specifi-
cally, through use of the input-output tables, we selected industries that are final goods for
consumers. In addition, we included intermediate products used in things like construction
and health services that have diﬀuse demand.              We excluded intermediate products used
downstream for further manufacturing processing. See the data appendix for additional
details.
       We use Economic Areas (EAs) as defined by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) as
our underlying geographic unit.7 There are 177 EAs that form a partition of the contiguous
   6
     Hillberry and Hummels (2003, 2008) are the first economics papers to use this confidential micro data.
See U.S. Bureau of the Census (1999) for public tabulations.
   7
     We use the 2004 definition; see Johnson and Kort (2004).



                                                    15
United States. (We exclude Alaska and Hawaii throughout the analysis.) The BEA defines
EAs to construct meaningful economic geographic units, using counties as building blocks.
There are 3,110 counties in the contiguous United States that are aggregated to construct
the EAs. A metropolitan statistical area (MSA) is typically an EA. In addition, rural areas
not part of MSAs get grouped into an EA. As an example, the EA containing the center
of the wood furniture industry in North Carolina consists of 22 counties and is called the
“Greensboro—Winston-Salem—High Point, NC Economic Area.” For ease of exposition, in
the discussion in the text we will simply refer to this as “High Point.” Finally, to calculate
distances between EAs, we take the population centroids of each EA and use the great circle
formula.



4       Some Descriptive Results
This subsection presents descriptive evidence that sheds light on the plausibility of our thesis.
We begin by looking at a selected set of seven industries for which we are able to exploit
additional information about what the plants do beyond the NAICS code. We then discuss
evidence for a broader set of industries.
    In 1997, the Census changed its industry classification from the SIC system to the NAICS
system. Seven NAICS manufacturing industries were redefined to include plants that had
previously been classified as retail under SIC. For example, under the SIC system, estab-
lishments that manufactured chocolate on the premises for direct sale to consumers were
classified as retail. Think here of a fancy chocolate shop making premium chocolate by
hand.      These were moved into NAICS 311330, ”Confectionery Manufacturing from Pur-
chased Chocolate.” This industry also includes candy bar factories with more than a thou-
sand employees. This situation–where retail candy operations are lumped into the same
industry as mass-production factories making standardized goods–epitomizes what we are
trying to capture in our model. Analogous to chocolate, facilities making custom furniture
and custom curtains in storefront settings were moved from retail under SIC to manufac-
turing under NAICS. The logic underlying these reclassifications was an attempt under the
NAICS system to use a “production-oriented economic concept” (Oﬃce of Management and
Budget, 1994) as the basis of industry classification. The concept is that plants that use the
same production technology should be grouped together in the same industry. The previous
SIC system sometimes followed this logic but was inconsistent in its application.


                                               16
   Table 2 shows the seven NAICS manufacturing industries that were aﬀected this way.
We will refer to these industries as the 1997 Reclassification Industries and sometimes as the
Seven Industry Sample. All are consumer goods industries, some kind of candy, textiles, or
furniture. We do not regard these reclassifications in 1997 as a “mistake” by the statistical
authority or any kind of deviation from normal philosophy about how to aggregate plants
into industries. It is infeasible for the Census to define industry boundaries at extremely
narrow detail because otherwise cells become so thin in tabulations that disclosure issues
preclude publication. The Census must aggregate in some way and its general procedure
is to group standardized versions and specialty versions of the same product into the same
industry.
   The reclassification of these plants is fortunate for our purposes as it yields additional
information that can be exploited. The data for 1997 contains a plant’s SIC code in addition
to its NAICS code, because tabulations were published both ways for this switchover year.
We refer to the plants that are in retail under SIC as SIC/Retail plants and the remaining
plants as SIC/Man.
   The first thing to note in Table 2 is that the SIC/Retail plants are significantly smaller
than the SIC/Man plants.        Next look at exports by type.   A well known result due to
Bernard and Jensen (1995) is that large plants are relatively likely to export compared with
small plants. There is a consistent pattern that the SIC/Man plants (which are large on
average) have a 3 percent export share while the SIC/Retail plants (which are small) don’t
export at all. Furthermore, we can think of retail status as an extreme form of non-exporter
status; retailers (typically) do not sell to domestic destinations outside their own immediate
vicinity, let alone foreign destinations. So the connection reported here between plant size,
export status, and retail status can be interpreted as a variant of a well-known empirical
pattern.
   Suppose we take the specialty-segment-as-nontradable-good variant of our model and use
SIC/Retail status as a proxy indicator for our specialty, nontradable good. An immediate
implication of the model is that the geographic distribution of the SIC/Retail segment will
closely track the distribution of demand.     The last column of Table 2 provides evidence
consistent with this pattern.     It reports a measure of the distribution of industry sales
which shows that plants in the SIC/Retail segment tend to closely follow population (as
retail does more generally) while plants in the SIC/Man segment tend to be geographically
concentrated.
   To explain the measure, recall the definition of the location quotient 
                                                                              (7) at location

                                              17
 for a given industry, but now use population share to approximate expenditure share in the
denominator. Analogous to Holmes and Stevens (2004b), for each industry we sort locations
(economic areas) by the location quotient from lowest to highest and then aggregate locations
into ten approximately equal-sized population-decile classes. This aggregation helps smooth
the data. Let 
                  be the location quotient of decile . By definition, 
                                                                            ≤ 
                                                                                +1 . If
all sales are concentrated in the top decile then 
                                                   10 = 10, as 100 percent of the industry is

concentrated among 10 percent of the population.
       We are interested in comparing the geographic dispersion of diﬀerent groups of plants
within the same industry. Let  index a particular group of plants. (For example, for what
we do in Table 2, the index  signifies whether a plant is SIC/Retail or SIC/Man.) Suppose
plants located in decile  of type  are indexed by  and let  be the sales of plant 
of type  at decile . Let ̄ be the sales-weighted overall mean location quotient across
plants from all locations of all types. Then

                             P P P                    P      
                                                                    " 10 µ ¶ #
                                              
                                                           1       X  2
                                      
                   ̄   ≡  P   P   P             =        10
                                                                = 10            .
                                                            =1
                                                                           


Hence, the mean location quotient ̄ is exactly the standard Herfindahl index of concen-
tration, times a factor of 10. If the entire industry is concentrated in the top decile, then
̄ = 10. If it is spread equally across the ten deciles then ̄ = 1. The main interest
for this subsection is the conditional mean location quotient of plants of type ,
                                                P P             
                                                       
                                       ̄
                                         
                                                 
                                               = P   P              .
                                                        


Note that conditioning on type  enters only through the weights; plants of all types in
decile  are used to define the 
                                    associated with a sale.8             Conceptually, we are taking
each dollar of sales in the data and associating it with the location quotient of its origin and
taking means.
       The last column of Table 2 presents the mean location quotients conditional on SIC/Retail
or SIC/Man status. There is a clear pattern in the table that the SIC/Man segments tend
to have significantly higher geographic concentration than the corresponding SIC/Retail seg-
   8
    In Holmes and Stevens (2002) we calculate an analogous measure that for each plant excludes the plant’s
own contribution to the location quotient and only uses the neighboring plants. This correction makes little
diﬀerence in what we do here.



                                                      18
ments. Moreover, the measures for the SIC/Retail segments are close to one. For example,
in the wood furniture industry, the mean is 1.17 for SIC/Retail and 4.42 for SIC/Man.
       The SIC/Retail plants in these industries are clearly what we have in mind by specialty
plants. But what about the many small plants in the SIC/Man segment in these industries?
We address this issue for the furniture plants by exploiting unique information available for
these plants. The Census of Manufactures asks a sample of plants to itemize their shipments
in various product categories. In most cases, the product definitions are unrelated to the
specialty product versus standardized product distinction that would be useful for our paper.
However, for the furniture industries, new product definitions were created as part of the
1997 reclassification that get directly at what we want. Specifically, across all the various
furniture products, a distinction is made between products that are custom made and those
not custom made, and custom products are an example of what we have in mind for specialty
products.9 For each plant with the requisite data, we define the custom share for the plant to
be the share of product shipments in the custom category. (Not all small plants are required
to fill out the detailed survey of shipments and we throw out imputed values, so our data here
is for a sample of plants rather than for the universe.) Table 3 reports unweighted means
of this variable for the three furniture industries from Table 2 together, and with Kitchen
Cabinets separated out from Household Furniture (where Household Furniture combines
Wood and Upholstered).
       The first thing to note at the top of the table, where the three industries are grouped
together, is that plants in the SIC/Retail category on average have a significantly higher
custom share than plants in the SIC/Man category, .82 versus .42. Second, within plants
classified as SIC/Man, the share falls sharply with plant size, from .59, to .30, to .09, across
the three size categories.
       Third, looking at the breakdown where Kitchen Cabinets are separated out, we see that
Kitchen Cabinets are much more likely to be custom made than is Household Furniture.
This is not surprising, since a kitchen cabinet is “built in” and has to fit a particular spot in
a kitchen. In contrast, a wood bureau or dresser can be pushed up against a bedroom wall.
Note from Table 2 that Kitchen Cabinet plants tend to be smaller than Household Furniture
plants.     Hence, looking at the top of the table with all the industries combined, part of
the reason for the sharp decline in custom share with plant size is the industry composition
   9
    The distinction is made in the text defining the product category. For example, product code 3371107121
is defined as “Wood vanities and other cabinetwork, custom.“ This is distinguished from another product
where “stock line“ is used in place of “custom.“



                                                    19
eﬀect that kitchen cabinet plants make up a disproportionate fraction of the small plants.
But a key point to note is that the size relationship in the custom share persists even after
controlling for industry at a narrow level. Within SIC/Man plants making kitchen cabinets,
the share falls sharply from .70, to .56, to .28 across the size classes.           Within SIC/Man
plants making household furniture, it falls from .08 to .05, to .03.
       Naturally, our interest extends beyond the seven reclassification industries in Table 2.
Outside these seven industries, we do not have useful product and SIC code distinctions to
work with. We do have plant size for each establishment and our last descriptive exercise
makes use of it, extending earlier results in Holmes and Stevens (2002). We break plants
down into four employment size categories and calculate the conditional mean location quo-
tient ̄
         for each size category . These values are in the column labeled “raw” in Table 4.

Next we add six-digit NAICS fixed eﬀects and report how the fitted values vary with plant
size, holding industry eﬀects fixed (at the mean level).10          These go in the column labeled
“fixed eﬀects.”
       As a reference point, we begin with the seven reclassification industries and the results
are in the top panel of Table 4.         In the column labeled raw, we see the mean location
quotient is only 1.36 in the smallest size category and it rises all the way to 6.13 for the
largest category.     We expect that part of this relationship stems from the fact that some
industries (like Kitchen Cabinets) tend to have small plants and be geographically disperse.
While the inclusion of 6-digit NAICS fixed eﬀects does attenuate the relationship, it remains
quite large, going from 2.46 in the smallest plant size category to 5.83 at the top.               This
pattern is consistent with the pattern established in Table 2 for these industries. There, the
category with large plants on average (SIC/Man) is more geographically concentrated than
the category with small plants (SIC/Retail).
       In the second panel we do the same exercise for the 165 other industries with diﬀuse
demand for which we will estimate the model.               The same pattern holds.         Using fixed
eﬀects, the mean location quotient increases from 3.72 in the smallest plant size category to
5.41 in the largest category. The spread found here, 3.72 to 5.41 (a diﬀerence of 1.69), is
half the spread of 2.46 to 5.83 (3.37) found with the seven reclassification industries. The
attenuation of the eﬀect is not surprising, as the seven are a selected sample that exemplify
that factors we are highlighting. However, the very same qualitative relationship that holds
in our selected sample of 7 industries also holds in the broad sample.              We obtain similar
  10
    We regress plant LQs on the size categories and industry fixed eﬀects, weighting by sales.   We then
construct fitted values by plant size category evaluated at the mean fixed eﬀects.


                                                   20
results in the bottom panel for the remaining 302 industries that do not have diﬀuse demand.
    We conclude by noting related results in Holmes and Stevens (2010). Using CFS data
and the same plant size categories as in Table 4, we show that small plants ship shorter
distances within the United States than large plants. In summary, small plants tend to be
more geographically diﬀuse, they tend to not export, and they tend to ship short distances
within the United States, compared with their large plant counterparts.



5     Estimation of the Model
This section estimates the model. The first subsection considers a constrained version of
the model where the standardized goods segment is the entire industry.                  This subsection
serves the role of providing first-stage estimates that are used later. The next subsection
brings the specialty-goods segment into the analysis.


5.1     First-Stage Estimates: The Constrained Model with Only

        Standardized Goods
In what we call the first-stage estimates, the model is estimated under the assumption that
each six-digit NAICS is a distinct standardized-product industry, i.e. each industry has its
own BEJK model parameters. This procedure pins down distance adjustment parameters
that will be used throughout the paper.
    For each industry , the data generating process for the industry is summarized by a
vector Γ = ( 1   2    ) that parameterizes the relative cost eﬃciencies of the various loca-
tions and an  ×  matrix  , with elements  , that parameterize the distance adjustments
in (3). We normalize so the   sum to one across locations .
    Assume the distance adjustment for industry  takes the form


                             =  (dist  ) = exp(−1 dist  −  2 dist 2 )               (12)


so that ln  is quadratic. If  2 = 0, then 1 can be interpreted as the decay rate per mile
for industry .
    We have restricted attention to the 172 industries for which demand is diﬀuse, approxi-
mately following population. For simplicity, we assume this is exactly true, so that expendi-


                                                      21
                                                                                             P
ture  at location  in industry  is proportional to population and normalize so                 = 1.
The Census of Manufactures (CM) covers the universe of all plants in the United States.
Subtracting out the exports of each plant, we can aggregate the plant-level sales revenue
data to get  , the value of domestic shipments originating at location  in industry .
       Other than export information, there is no destination information in the CM. However,
the CFS provides survey information on shipments and their destinations that we can link
to plants (and thereby determine industry). A concern we have with the CFS data is that
local shipments may be over-represented in the data. These seem too high, more than can
be absorbed by local demand. We expect that sometimes shipments intended for far away
destinations get there by way of a local warehouse In cases like these, the destination found
in the CFS may be the local warehouse rather than the ultimate destination. The appendix
discusses this issue further and provides some evidence on the importance of wholesaling for
the manufacturing industries in our sample.
                                                                                   ¡         ¢
       The form of our data leads us to the following strategy for estimating   = 1  2 and
the productivity vector Γ for each industry.            We pick (   Γ ) that perfectly match the
distribution of sales at originating locations, as we directly observe the universe of sales at
each location.      Because of our concern about excessive local shipments, we throw out all
local shipments in the CFS that are less than one hundred miles and fit the conditional
distribution of the longer shipments. Formally, set dist = 100 and let ( dist) be the set of
all destinations at least dist from an originating location . The conditional probability that
an industry  shipment originating in location  goes to a particular destination  ∈ ( dist)
equals
                                                         
                                      
                                            =P                             .
                                                    0 ∈(dist)   0 

For each value of   , we solve for the vector Γ such that the predicted total sales of the
industry at a given location equals total sales in the CM data. The appendix outlines our
algorithm for finding a solution Γ ( ) to the 177 nonlinear equations for the 177 locations.
We can then write the conditional probability above as a function of  . We pick  to
maximize the conditional likelihood of the destinations observed in the shipment sample.11
       Table 5 reports estimates of ̂1 and ̂2 for several selected industries and summary sta-
tistics of the estimated parameters across the entire set of 172 industries.              (See the web
  11
     The sample of plants selected for the CFS is stratified. We use the establishment sampling weights to
reweight the cell count realizations and follow a pseudo-maximum likelihood approach. In writing down the
likelihood, we condition on the origination of a given shipment.



                                                   22
document, Holmes and Stevens (2010a), for detailed estimates by industry.) The reported
industries are those at the 25th percentile points in the distribution of the implied value
of (100), the distance adjustment at 100 miles.              The bottom industry in this dimension
is “Ready-Mix Concrete,” a well-known example of an manufacturing industry for which
shipments are overwhelming local. (See Syverson (2004).) For this industry and four other
industries where shipments are overwhelming local (such as “Ice” and “Concrete Blocks”)
we included shipments less than one hundred miles in the estimation.12 We see in the table
that the estimate of (100) for ready mix concrete is .01. For ice (not shown in the table),
(100) = 06 and for asphalt paving it equals (100) = 09. These industries are essen-
tially nontradable beyond one hundred miles.              Butter is the 25th percentile industry. For
this industry there is a high degree of tradability at one hundred miles ((100) = 74), but
things drop oﬀ steeply at five hundred miles ((500) = 27). The highest ranked tradability
industry is “Other Hosiery.” We truncate the () function at one in a few industries
like this where the unconstrained value exceeds one. Imposing this constraint makes little
diﬀerence; unconstrained, the distance adjustment for “Other Hosiery” at one hundred miles
is (100) = 106
       Table 5 also reports the mean values of the parameter estimates across all industries. On
average,  1 = 003 meaning that if we look only at the linear component of (12), the average
drop-oﬀ in  is .3 percent per mile. The fact that the coeﬃcient 2 on the quadratic term is
negative adds a convexity element to the relationship; the drop-oﬀ decreases with distance
at a decreasing rate.
       We have also reestimated the model using the data from the 1992 Census of Manufactures.
We call this the 1992 SIC sample because industry classification was based on SIC that year.
We use the same selection criterion to identify industries with diﬀuse demand and arrive at
175 industries. The mean values of the estimates are similar to the baseline 1997 NAICS
case.      For those industries with no change in definition between the 1992 SIC and 1997
NAICS there is a very high correlation in the implied values of (). The CFS survey
for the earlier period was a larger, better-funded survey, with many more observations. In
particular, the average number of shipments used to estimate the parameters of each industry
is 8,500 for the earlier period and about 4,000 in the later period. Thus, estimates for the
1992 SIC sample are more precise.
  12
     If, after exlcuding shipments below 100 miles, the implied value of (100) turned out to satisfy (100) ≤
2, we reestimated the model with all the shipments and used this estimate instead. For the five industries
aﬀected this way, we constrained  2 = 0 and just allowed for the linear term  1 .



                                                     23
   Table 5 also shows what happens to the estimates when the distance threshold for includ-
ing shipments in the analysis is varied. As discussed above, CFS manufacturing shipments
may overstate local shipments, as some local shipments may end up in the wholesale sector to
be ultimately shipped to far oﬀ destinations. When we set dist = 0, so that no observations
are excluded, the average value of (100) falls from the baseline level of .80 to .71. With
local shipments included, the model is accounting for the high relative likelihood of local
sales by making transportation costs higher. If we go in the other direction and raise the
cutoﬀ to dist = 200, the average value of (100) rises from .80 to .85.
   The last topic of this subsection is goodness of fit. Recall that by construction, the total
shipments originating in each location in the estimated model perfectly fit the data. For
a notion of goodness of fit, we look at the distance pattern of shipments.      We break the
shipments above 100 miles into three distance categories, (1) 100 to 500 miles, (2) 500 to
1000 miles, and (3) over 1000 miles. For industry , let  be the share of the shipments
above 100 miles that are in distance category  ∈ {1 2 3} in the data. Let d  be the
                                                                                      

fitted value in the estimated model. Table 6 presents descriptive statistics. In the data, on
average across the industries, a share .44 of the 100-mile-plus shipments are in the 100 to 500
mile category. This figure compares to an average share of .38 in the estimated model. The
model has a tendency to somewhat understate the shortest distance category and somewhat
overstate the two longer distance categories. By construction, the destination of shipments
in the model exactly follows the distribution of population.        So locations far away from
any producers will nevertheless be required in the model to receive their share of shipments.
The last part of Table 6 shows that the fitted values of the model do a very good job in
accounting for the cross-industry variation in the distance distribution. The slope of 
                    d  is approximately one for all three categories.
in a regression on  




5.2    Second Stage Estimates: The General Model with Specialty

       Goods
We now consider the general model that includes the specialty segment.         Our estimation
strategy focuses on determining the specialty-segment share of plant counts in an industry,
rather than the specialty-segment share of revenue. Both targets are interesting, but the
first target is easier to get at, so that is where we aim for a first paper.
   Specialty plants are small compared to standardized plants. Thus, the count share of


                                               24
the specialty segment is large compared with the revenue share. To explain our procedure,
it is easiest to begin by outlining how it works in a limiting case, when the revenue share
of the specialty segment is zero.13 Next we explain what we actually do, in allowing for a
positive specialty-segment revenue share.
       In the limiting case where the specialty-segment revenue share is zero, the first stage
procedure explained above delivers the correct estimates of the productivity vector Γ of the
standardized segment.        (At this point, it is convenient to leave out the superscript  for
industry.) This holds because the industry revenue used to construct the estimates exactly
equals standard-segment revenue, for this limiting case. With estimates of  and Γ from
the first stage, we can determine the plant counts for the standardized segment, subject to
the scaling normalization   . Recall from (4) that standardized segment plant counts equal
 =     ( Γ). Next consider plant counts for the specialty segment. In the nontradable
case, using equation (5), specialty plant counts equal  =    . In the high-end niche case,
counts depend on supply of specialty-specific factors through (6).                     As a first cut, assume
supply is proportional to population. This delivers                     
                                                                        =   for this case as well. So for
either case, the total number of plants in the given industry–standardized plus specialty–
equals


                                          =     ( Γ) +    .                                 (13)

       To take (13) to the data, we introduce an error term. Suppose the observed total number
of plants in the given industry at location  equals the above expression plus an error term
 +  ,
                                    ̃ =     ( Γ) +    +  +  ,                            (14)

where the error term has variance proportional to location ’s population  .                       We use
                                                                                  
weighted least squares to construct estimates of the slopes ̂ and ̂ and the constant ̂ for
each industry. (Given the results of the first stage,   ( Γ) is data for the industry at this
point.)
       We now explain the modification of the above procedure to allow for positive specialty-
segment revenues. Take as given a value ̄ of specialty revenue per plant for the industry.
Use ̄ , along with the estimate ̂  from above, to construct an estimate of specialty-segment
  13
    That is, when the standard-segment weight   and specialty-segment weight   , in utility (1), go to
their limits of   = 1 and   = 0.




                                                      25
revenues at location ,
                                                 ̂ = ̄ ̂   ,

and from this construct an estimate of standardized-segment sales at ,


                                           ̂ = max{̂ − ̂  0}.


Go back to the first stage to solve for a new productivity vector Γ0 that exactly fits the new
estimate of the standardized-segment sales distribution ̂ across locations .14                           Using the
new value of Γ0 , run the weighted least squares regression above to produce new estimates ̂ 0
and ̂ 0 of the slopes. Iterate, until convergence on estimates ̂  and ̂  on the plant count
coeﬃcients for the two segments for industry . (It is again convenient to keep track of the
 superscript.) It remains to specify the choice of average specialty-plant sales revenue ̄ .
For each industry , we set ̄ equal to the average sales size of plants in the one to four
employees category. We have experimented with alternative values for ̄ , and it makes
little diﬀerence for the estimates of ̂  and ̂  .15
       Table 7 presents the results.      The individual estimates are reported for the seven re-
classification industries from Table 2; summary statistics are reported for the broader set
of industries. We first note that allowing for the constant term  makes little diﬀerence;
when we reestimate (14) without an intercept we get similar results. Next note that the
coeﬃcient estimate ̂  for specialty goods tends to be quite large. Given the scaling that
the  sum to one, ̂  is an estimate of the total count of specialty plants in the industry.
       Define the implied specialty count share to be

                                                                            
               Specialty Count Share for industry                  =
                                                                         + 
                                                                                    
                                                                    =             P     (   Γ )
                                                                                                         
                                                                          +          


This model statistic is reported in the last column of Table 7.                       It averages 75.8 percent
across the seven reclassification industries and 66.0 percent across the remaining 165 diﬀuse
  14
      We hold fixed , the parameters of the distance discount (·), throughout the procedure at the initial
first-stage estimate. First, it makes little diﬀerence to allow  to vary, since the speciality-segment has a
small revenue share. Second, to estimate , we need the confidential data. But conditioned on , we don’t
need the confidential data, as discussed in the appendix. This makes it possible to replicate the results
outside a secure Census facility, and simplifies the disclosure process.
   15
      Doubling ̄ relative to the baseline, or setting it to zero, makes virtually no diﬀerence in the results.


                                                         26
demand industries.
    Table 8 provides more details about the distribution of the specialty count share by
dividing the 172 industries into quartiles based on the specialty count share.         There is
no mechanical reason why the estimated coeﬃcient   for the regression (14) is necessarily
positive. In fact, we can see in Table 8 that one industry comes in with a negative count
share equal to −37 percent. There is also a second industry with a negative share equal
to −30 percent.     Aside from these two exceptions (which are approximately zero in any
case), the other 170 industries all have strictly positive estimates of the specialty county
share. Moreover, we can see in the table that the 25th percentile equals 57 percent; i.e.,
three quarters of the industries have a specialty count share that exceeds this level. Thus,
the estimates reveal that for the vast majority of industries, specialty plants comprise the
majority of plant counts.
    The last column of Table 8 connects the estimates of specialty count shares in the model
to shares of plants that are small in the data. In the data, a small plant is defined as a plant
with 1 to 19 employees. We do not expect an exact correspondence between specialty plants
in the model and small plants in the data; a small plant in the data could be a specialty plant,
but it could also be a standardized plant with a low productivity draw. While there is not an
exact correspondence, we expect the specialty share in the model would likely move together
with the small plant share in the data and Table 8 confirms this expectation. In particular,
in the bottom quartile of industry specialty shares, the mean small plant share averages 48
percent, and this average increases monotonically across the quartiles to 67 percent for the
top quartile.



6     Analysis of the Estimates
We use the estimated model to analyze two issues. The first is the plant size/geographic
concentration relationship. The second is the impact of the recent surge in imports from
China.


6.1      The Plant Size/Geographic Concentration Relationship
Define a high-concentration industry location to be one where the revenue location quotient is
above 2 and in addition the location has at least 5 percent of the industry’s revenues. Across
the 7 reclassification industries, there are 23 diﬀerent high-concentration industry locations

                                              27
and these are listed in Table 9, sorted for each industry by descending sales quotient. The
breakdown into the count and size quotient is also reported. (Recall 
                                                                         = 
                                                                                  × 
                                                                                          .)
It is clear from inspection of the data that the size margin plays an important role in
contributing to how an industry expands at a location. Consider the wood furniture industry
in the High Point area where the revenue quotient is 27.7. The breakdown is 277 = 42×66.
Thus, average plant size in the area is 6.6 times the national average. A high contribution
from the size margin holds for virtually all the 23 individual industry locations listed in Table
8. Over these 23 cases, the size quotient on average is 5.4 compared with an average count
quotient of 4.3.
      The last two columns contain fitted values of the size quotient for the constrained model
with only a standardized segment (the BEJK model) and the full model that includes the
specialty segment.16           From the theoretical discussion in Section 2, we know that when
transportation costs are not zero (and making further assumptions about the distribution
of demand), the BEJK model implies that average plant size is bigger in locations that
specialize in an industry. With only three exceptions, this qualitative pattern holds for
the fitted BEJK model, in Table 9. However, the BEJK model fails quantitatively as the
predicted size diﬀerences are small. The count margin is doing the main work of driving
variations in 
                , just like in the numerical examples of the BEJK model in Table 1. When

we turn to the full model and allow for the specialty segment, the predicted size quotients
are much larger and close to what they are in the data (though still smaller). The average
size quotient in the full model equals 4.0 compared with an average of only 1.3 in the
constrained model. These diﬀerences between the full and the constrained model are driven
by compositional diﬀerences across locations between standardized and specialty goods in
the full model. In fact, if we just look only at the standardized segment in the full model,
the size distribution is virtually identical to what is it in the constrained model.
      Next consider the broader set of industries (the 165 remaining diﬀuse demand industries).
We see in Table 9 at the same pattern holds with these industries as holds with the seven
reclassification industries. The mean size quotient is 5.3, so the size margin plays a big role
in how locations specialize in an industry. The mean fitted value of the BEJK model of 1.3
is way oﬀ. The corresponding mean in the full model, at 3.3, is still too small but gets much
of the way there. The industry-location level observations in Table 9 suggest some skewness
in the distribution of the size quotients, so it is of interest to also look at the median. The
median size quotient in the full model of 2.5 is close to the median of 2.6 in the data.
 16
      In the constrained model, plant counts are proportational to   (   Γ ).


                                                          28
6.2     Impact of the China Surge
Imports from China have surged in a number of manufacturing industries in recent years.
This subsection identifies a set of “China Surge” industries.17              For this set of industries,
the subsection examines how the geographic distribution of production in the United States
has shifted in response. It compares the results to the prediction of the constrained model
that does not allow for the specialty segment (i.e., the pure BEJK model). The constrained
model is inconsistent with what actually happened.              In contrast, the full model with the
specialty segment fits the data. The last part of the subsection uses the full model to estimate
the specialty count share in 2007, and compares the estimates to 2007. In the China Surge
industries, there is a dramatic decline in standardized segment plant counts.
    We classify an industry as having a China import surge if the industry experienced a 25
percentage point increase in overall imports as a share of shipments over the period 1997 to
2007 and if China’s share of total imports in the industry as of 2007 exceeds 40 percent.18
Of the 172 industries for which we have model estimates, there are 17 China surge industries
and they are listed in Table 10.         The overall import share of these 17 industries rose on
average from 34 percent in 1997 to 70 percent in 2007. The share of imports from China
increased from 26 to 61 percent over this same period. Employment declined 66 percent on
average over the period. In the infant apparel industry, employment declined an astonishing
97 percent.
    It is useful to have a comparison group of industries that (1) unlike the China Surge
industries have not been negatively aﬀected by imports but (2) are similar to the China
Surge industries in being tradable within the United States.               We use food (NAICS=311)
and beverage (NAICS=312) industries for this purpose.                As shown in the bottom row of
Table 9, imports in these industries are relatively small. On average, employment increased
by 5 percent for these industries over the time period.
    The last two columns of Table 10 report mean plant-level employment by industry for
each year. Mean plant employment fell dramatically. On average across all the China Surge
industries, it fell from 63 to 30 employees per plant. In infant apparel, it fell from 178 to 11.
A decrease in average plant size from an import surge is consistent with our theory, which
emphasizes the displacement of large mass production plants by Chinese imports.                        The
  17
     Our focus on the source of the imports is in the spirit of Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006), which
focuses on exposure to low-wage countries.
  18
     Imports as a share of shipments has in the denominator imports of the product plus all shipments of the
product originating from domestic manufacturing plants.



                                                    29
pattern is also consistent with the standard theory. The eﬃcient plants–that would have
been large without the China surge–survive the China surge but at a smaller output level.
(Ineﬃcient plants that would have been small without the surge shut down.) To evaluate
what our theory adds to the analysis, we need to look at more detailed implications.
       We take our first-stage model estimates for 1997 of the pure BEJK model of the stan-
dardized sector for each of these industries and simulate the impact of a large import shock
on the distribution of domestic production in 2007. As discussed in the theory section, the
transportation cost from China is assumed to be the same to all domestic locations. For
each industry , we set the China Surge parameter for 1997 and 2007 to 1997 = 0 and

                                                 P177 ¡P177     
                                                                   ¢
                                                   =1         
                                                          =1  
                                    2007 =                       .                                (15)
                                                         177

The term in parenthesis is the denominator of (2), the sum of competitiveness across orig-
inations. On account of this change in China’s delivered productivity, China’s share goes
from zero to about half of the market.            In the exercises that we do, the results are not
sensitive to alternative values of (15) that we considered, e.g. half the value of (15). The
reason for this is that were looking at the relative impact on the distribution of production
of the shock rather than the absolute impact.19             Finally, we take into account that the
distribution of demand diﬀers time periods, by using population estimates for 1997 and 2007
when calculating the quotients for each year, (this makes little diﬀerence).
       For the sake of illustration, it is useful to start the discussion with a detailed discussion of
the wood furniture industry in High Point. Recall from above that in 1997, the sales revenue
location quotient equaled 
                           1997 = 277 in High Point. Using the estimates of the BEJK model

from stage 1 for 1997, to simulate the impact of a China surge equal to (15), and plugging in
2007 population values, results in a predicted value of ̂
                                                          2007 = 284 for 2007 at High Point.

This predicted increase in our estimated model with 177 locations goes the same way as the
theoretical result in Proposition 2 for the special case with only two domestic locations. The
pure BEJK model is predicting that locations with large plants and large domestic market
share increase domestic share after a shock. The opposite actually happened. The revenue
quotient for High Point fell from 28.4 to 12.8, meaning High Point’s share of the domestic
market fell by more than half. Panel A of Table 11 provides cell counts by plant size for
  19
    We did not take into account the import surge on relative input prices across locations. Given the role
played by Assumption 1 in Proposition 2, we expect taking any input price change eﬀects into account would
only make our point stronger.


                                                    30
the Wood Furniture industry that gives more details about the collapse between 1997 and
2007. The table makes clear that the collapse of the industry is at the high end of the size
distribution.   Looking at the United States as a whole, there are 48 plants in 1997 with
more than 500 employees, and that falls to only 20 for 2007. In contrast, for the smallest
size category, there is virtually no change. Now look the counts for just High Point to get
a sense of the disproportionate way that in the 1997 data large plants are concentrated in
High Point. In particular, 14 out of 48 United States plants with 500 or more employees are
in High Point for 1997, but only 51 out of 3,091 plants with less than 20 employees. Finally,
observe the huge losses in large plants at High Point from 1997 to 2007.
   To examine the broader set of China Surge industries, we find the equivalent of High
Point for these other industries. Define the 1997 Primary Location to be the location with
the highest 1997 location sales quotient, of those locations with at least 5 percent of 1997
sales. Table 12 restates variables just discussed for wood furniture and then presents the
summary statistics about these same variables for the other industries. For the China Surge
industries, simulating the BEJK model for 2007 leads to a predicted increase on average of
the revenue quotient  from 26.9 to 29.4.      (If we look at the 17 individual industries,
there are only two exceptions going the other way.) What actually happened is that the sales
revenue location quotients fell dramatically, on average, from 26.9 to 12.2. (If we look at
the industries individually, there is only one exception to this pattern.) When we look at the
detailed size distribution information for all the China Surge industries in Panel B of Table
11, we see the same thing is true about with the broader set of industries as holds for just
Wood Furniture. The big plants are collapsing and the primary locations are bearing the
brunt of this. Note in particular that the primary locations had 33 plants with more than
500 employees in 1997 while by 2007 this count had plunged to only 3 plants.
   We address an issue regarding the definition of the primary location. It is defined as the
location of first rank in its relative market share  as of 1997. A number one location
can only go down in the ranking. In particular, we expect the well understood mechanism
of “regression to the mean” to play some role, given normal ebb and flow of markets shares
across locations. To gain some perspective on its contribution, we similarly define primary
locations in the Food and Beverage comparison industries. Just as is the case for the China
Surge industries, average plant size is quite high for the Food and Beverage industries at the
primary locations. Also, the average sales revenue quotient is similarly quite high (37.4 in
the Food and Beverage industries, 26.9 in the China Surge industries). Even though these
industries were not actually aﬀected by imports, we can use the estimated model to simulate

                                             31
a hypothetical China surge. For these industries, the predicted BEJK sales revenue quotients
indeed increases on average at the primary locations, just like it does for the China Surge
industries. As we would expect from regression to the mean, in the data there is actually a
decline, from 37.4 to 31.6. The decline is relatively small, only 16 percent, compared with
the average 59 percent decline for the China Surge industries. We get the same conclusion
if we look at the median instead of the mean. We conclude that the sharp observed fall at
the primary locations of the China Surge industries extends substantially beyond anything
we would expect to see from regression to the mean, in the normal ebb and flow of market
shares.
   We next look at what happens in big cities. Big cities are interesting to look at because
in recent decades, in a relative sense, they have not been the home of large mass-production
factories (which have instead concentrated in small factory towns like High Point). Given
the demand for specialty goods in large cities and given the supply of unique skills in big
cities that can serve as inputs for specialty goods, a priori we expect that as China knocks
out standardized goods in places like High Point, the industry will shift toward specialty
goods made in big cites. To examine this issue, we combine the twenty largest economic
areas by population into one group and calculate the various quotients for the group as a
whole. (We get similar results for other groupings of large cities.) Table 13 is the analog
of Table 12, with the big city aggregate serving as the location of interest instead of the
primary location.    Note big city plants do indeed tend to be small, with 
                                                                            1997 = 78, on

average across the industries. As of 1997, sales were slightly underrepresented in big cities,

 1997 = 97. The BEJK model predicts no change going into 2007. What actually happened

is that the sales quotient increased in the big city aggregate, rising to 
                                                                           2007 = 108, to become

over-represented. (Looking at the individual industries, there are only three exceptions to
this pattern of the 17 industries.) By contrast, in the Food/Beverage comparison group,
nothing is happening.
   Thus the predictions of the pure BEJK model for changes in sale shares are inconsistent
with the data. Turning now to predictions of the general model that allows for the specialty
segment, we first reiterate that we have not estimated a model of the division of revenue
between the two segments.       Rather, our estimated model is one of plant counts for the
two segments. We will use the estimated model to examine predictions about changes in
plants counts from a China surge. Before doing that, we note that our general model with
specialty goods is consistent with the qualitative patterns about changes in sales revenues
across locations just documented. Primary industry locations with large plants like High

                                               32
Point are in decline in terms of sales share because these specialize in the standardized goods
that China sells. Locations with small plants, including large cities, are in relative ascent
because these specialize in specialty goods that are poor substitutes for what China is selling.
       Table 14 reports our results, comparing the predictive power for plants counts of the pure
BEJK model and our general model. As in Table 13 and 14, to calculate the fitted values
for 2007, we take the estimated models for 1997 and plug in the China Surge (15) as well as
the 2007 population values. Panel A looks at the primary locations. Analogous to what
happens in Table 12 with sales revenue shares, the pure BEJK model fails with plant counts
as well. The model predicts too many plants at the primary locations (i.e. plants are too
small), but in addition predicts the count shares at these locations will increase from the
China surge, while in actuality they decreased significantly. The predictions of the general
model are roughly in line with what happened.                Across the China surge industries, the
count quotients decrease on average from 6.8 to 5.5 (a decline of 1.3 points) while in the
data the decrease is from 5.8 to 3.9 (a decline of 1.9 points). Panel B considers a prediction
exercise that looks at all 177 Economic Areas together. For each industry, we regress the
change in count quotient ∆
                                =    
                                    2007 − 1997 for location  on the predicted changes

∆̂
        = ̂    
             2007 − ̂1997 for both models.            For the Pure BEJK model, the slope in the
regression is actually slightly negative as changes tend to go in the opposite direction of what
the pure BEJK model predicts. In contrast, for the general model the slope is close to one.
(It equals .93 for Wood Furniture and averages .89 across all 17 industries). This is what
we get when we do this exercise on the industries actually experiencing a China surge. For
the Food and Beverage industries, which didn’t actually experience such a surge, we get a
range of noisy values that on average are relatively close to zero.
       Taking the results of Table 14 as a validation of our general model, our final exercise uses
2007 data to estimate specialty and standardized plant counts for that year and compares
these with the 1997 estimates.          The results are in Table 15.20         We begin as before with
a discussion of Wood Furniture. For 1997, we estimate there are 697 and 3,150 plants in
the standardized and specialty segments of this industry, or shares of 18.1 and 81.9 percent.
For 2007, the respective counts are 213 and 3,215, or 6.2 and 93.8 percent. Thus, according
to these estimates, the standardized segment collapsed to about a third of its initial plant
  20
    We hold fixed the  estimate from 1997 and otherwise run the second stage estimation for 2007 the same
way we did it for 1997. The 2007 CFS data were not available, so we could not use those data to create
a 2007 specific estimate. We think it is sensible to treat the underlying transportation structure governing
the  parameter as relatively constant over period 1997-2007. This justifies our use of the 1997 estimate for
.



                                                     33
counts, while the specialized segment remained relatively stable. This finding is consistent
with the hypothesis of this paper.
    For the China surge industries overall (Panel B of Table 15), there is a collapse of the
standardized segment to about one third its prior level, similar the wood furniture case. The
specialty segment also decreases, but at a much lower rate than the standardized segment.
The situation is quite diﬀerent with the Food and Beverage industries which has experienced
little in the way of import competition. The standardized segment has actually increased
somewhat in plant counts. Finally, when we look at the remaining industries, there is a
downward trend in standardized plant count share. But the impact is small compared with
what is happening to the China surge industries.



7     Conclusion
This paper develops a model in which industries are made up of mass production factories
making standardized goods and specialty plants making custom or niche goods. The paper
uses a combination of confidential and public Census data to estimate parameters of the
model, and in particular, produces estimates of plant counts in the specialty and standard-
ized segments by industry.     The estimated model fits the observed plant size/geographic
concentration relationship relatively well.   The estimates reveal that, for those industries
that have been heavily aﬀected by a surge of imports from China, there has been a dramatic
decline in plant counts for the standardized segment, while the specialty segments have been
relatively stable. The paper also shows that for the China Surge industries, locations with
large concentrations of the industry and large plants, like High Point, North Carolina, have
declined relative to the rest of the country. These results are consistent with the hypothesis
that products made in China are close substitutes to the products of big plants (like those
in High Point), and not so close substitutes to the products of the small plants that are
diﬀuse throughout the country.       The results are inconsistent with standard theories that
assert small plants are just like large plants, except for having a low productivity draw.
    In our theory, if a plant in the U.S. is huge, it is a signal that the plant is potentially
vulnerable to competition from China. A huge plant is likely making something that can
be traded across space–something that can be put in an container and shipped–as a local
market would likely not be able to absorb all the output of a given huge plant.
    To make progress, the paper proceeds under the abstraction that each plant is in one


                                               34
of two discrete categories, standardized or specialty.    To illustrate these categories, the
paper gives the example of a furniture factory with more than a thousand employees and
an Amish shop employing a few craftsman.         In future work, it would be useful to allow
for a continuum of possibilities in between the limiting two-type case.     The logic of our
ideas, which is put in sharp relief with our focus on the limiting case, should extend to
more general approaches. That is, a comparison of a megafactory with a tiny Amish shop
highlights forces that in principle are operative–albeit at a reduced extent–in a comparison
of a two hundred employee plant with a fifty employee plant.




                                            35
Appendix A: Proof of Proposition 2
     For now assume 2 ()1 () is constant, so  2 () 1 () is constant.                      Since  1 ()
strictly increases and since a proportionate change in  1 ,  2 , and  leaves the   the same,
without loss of generality assume  1 is constant in .
     Letting  = 12 = 21 , for this special case we can write the probability location  sells
to location  as

                                                   1
                                     11 =
                                              1 +  2 + 
                                                   2
                                     12   =                ,
                                              1 +  2 + 

where the expressions for  21 and  22 are analogous. Since  2   1 , if follows that  22  11 .

The ratio of sales between the two locations is

                                                            2               2
                         2   12 1 +  22 2         1 + 2 +
                                                                     +    1 + 2 +
                            =                  =           1                 1                              (16)
                         1   11 1 +  21 2         1 + 2 +
                                                                     +    1 + 2 +
                                   2 (1 + 2 )  1 + 2 2 + (1 + ) 
                              =
                                   1 (1 + 2 )  2 + 2 1 + (1 + ) 

where the second line follows from straightforward manipulations. The ratio of plant counts
is
                                  2    22    +  2 + 
                                     =      = 2 1               .
                                  1    11   1  1 +  2 + 
                                                                                        2       2
To prove part (i) of the result that 
                                      2     1  
                                                  1 , we must show                      1
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                    .   This follows
from straightforward calculations using the formulas above and   1.
                                                        2
     To prove part (ii), we need to show the ratio      1
                                                             is increasing in , for fixed  1 and  2 .
From inspection of (16), this holds if

                            ¡      ¢             ¡      ¢
                             1 + 2  1 + 2 2  1 + 2  2 + 2 1


or
                                                   ¡            ¢
                                   0  ( 2 −  1 ) 1 − 2 + 2

which holds since   1 and  2   1 .
     The last step of the proof is to take into account that the relative wage 2 ()1 () is


                                                 36
weakly decreasing in . This implies  2 () 1 () is weakly increasing in . Since, without
                                                                                                    2
loss of generality, we can assume  1 () is constant in , and since we have proven                1
                                                                                                         in (16)
                                                                         2
is increasing in  for fixed  1 and  2 , is suﬃcient to show           1
                                                                              in (16) is increasing in  2 for
fixed  and  1 . This follows from straightforward calculations. Q.E.D.

Appendix B: Data
      This section of the appendix discusses various topics regarding the data. We have posted
on the web a supplementary document, Holmes and Stevens (2010a), that contains links to
data sets and supplementary tables. In particular, we post the first-stage and second-stage
model estimates for all 172 NAICS industries for which we have estimated the model.
A. Joint use of Confidential and Public Data
      The Census cannot disclose results that could potentially comprise the confidentiality of
the Census data. In particular, statistics at a high level of geographic and industry detail
are problematic for getting through the disclosure process.
      It is useful to be able to simulate the estimated model outside a secure Census facility.
This makes it possible to easily replicate findings of the paper. It also makes it possible to
make tables of the predictions of the model at narrow geographic and industry detail. To
accomplish this goal, we made joint use of confidential and publicly available data. First, we
use the confidential micro CFS data to estimate the parameters   = ( 1  2 ) of the distance
adjustment function  () for each industry . The release of these aggregate industry
variables posed no disclosure risk. Second, we used publicly-available data to estimate the
distribution of industry revenue across locations and then used these revenue estimates to
estimate the productivity vector Γ for each industry.
      To construct public revenue estimates by location, we begin with the 1997 Location of
Manufacturing plants (LM) data series.                The LM data is public data of cell counts by
industry, county, and narrowly-defined employment size categories (1-4, 5-9, 10-19, 20-49,
50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, 1,000-2,499, 2,500 and above). This is file E9731e2 from
the 1997 Economic Census CD (U.S. Bureau of Census (2001)). These cell counts are not
considered a disclosure, and no information is held back.                     Thus for each of the 362,829
plants in the Census of Manufactures, we have as public data the plant’s county, industry,
and detailed employment size category. We produce an estimate of average sales revenue
conditioned on industry and employment size and assign this to each plant as an estimate of
its sales.21 We then aggregate up the plant-level sales estimates to the BEA Economic Area
 21
      We used public data on sales by size category to estimate a regression model of log sales, with employment


                                                       37
level for each industry to obtain estimates of the location-level data needed to implement
the second stage of our procedure. We found that in running the second stage procedure, it
made little diﬀerence when we used the estimated revenue data instead of the actual revenue
data. For 2007, we use the analogous cell count data from County Business Patterns, and
we use the same mapping between sales estimate and employment size category that we use
for 1997.

B. Choice of Diﬀuse Demand Industries
    We use the U.S. Benchmark Input-Output Accounts for 2002 (Stewart, Stone, and
Steitwieser (2007)), to classify industries.          We first define a set of downstream demand
(or “use“) of goods that we categorize at “local demand.” These are all uses in the following
categories: structures, transportation, retail trade, information (publishing), finance, insur-
ance, real estate, services, personal consumption expenditures, fixed private investment, and
government services.       Then for each commodity, we determine which of these deliver 75
percent or more of their sales to the local demand categories. We define these to be the dif-
fuse demand industries. We also include borderline cases of Surgical and Dental Equipment
(NAICS 339112) and Dental Equipment (NAICS 339114).

C. More Information about Data Sources used in Tables
    Table 2. The cell counts that cross classify the 1997 Census plants by NAICS and SIC
use public data files E97B1 and E97B2 distributed at the Census web site.                       These files
report employment by SIC and NAICS, from which mean plant size by SIC/NAICS was
derived. The confidential micro data was used to calculate export shares and mean plant
sales location quotients in the table.
    Tables 3 through 6.      These tables use the confidential micro data at the Census. Popu-
lation at the EA level was calculated using Census county-level estimates for 1992 and 1997
(and below for 2007) and aggregating up to the EA level.
    Tables 7 through 9 and 11 through 15 use publicly available data as discussed in Part A
above.
    Table 10 uses import information posted by the U.S. International Trade Commission
at its web site. (For two furniture industries, NAICS 337122 and 337125, we used revised
figures reported at the web site of the International Trade Administration.)                  Imports are
size dummies and industry dummies. (This is file E9731g4 from the above mentioned 1997 Economic Census
CD.) We pooled the data across industries because the sales revenue data for some cells are held back because
of disclosure issues. We scaled the fitted values so the aggregate totals matched published aggregates.



                                                     38
“Customs Value of U.S. Imports for Consumption.” The variables are reported at the 6-
digit NAICS level though in some cases the 5-digit level is used. Imports are reported as a
share of the domestic shipments plus imports, where domestic shipments equal the product
shipments in the given 6-digit NAICS product for the given Economic Census year (1997 or
2007).

D. Local Shipments and Wholesaling
       When estimating the model in the first stage, we condition on sales being greater than
100 miles.      Here we discuss the issue of “excess local shipments” in a little more detail.
Table A1 reports the distribution of shipment shares by distance category, both in the data
and in the estimated models, conditioned on shipments above 100 miles.                     It is like Table
6 before, except it includes a breakdown by industries according to the estimated distance
adjustment, i.e.,  (100) for industry .22 We see in the conditional distribution a tendency
for the model to overstate distance shipped, compared with the data. However, for the most
part, the discrepancy is moderate.
       Table A2 uses the same estimated model (the model optimized to fit the conditional
distribution) and reports how things look in the unconditional distribution. A large discrep-
ancy in the under 100 miles category is readily apparent. In particular, consider the highest
 (100) industries, the ones that are most tradable. In the fitted model, local shipments less
than 100 miles are predicted to be only 5 percent of sales, but in fact make up 19 percent of
sales, a diﬀerence of almost a factor of four. In the limiting case where there is no discount
adjustment (i.e.,  = 1 at all distances), a plant’s shipments to a particular location should
be proportionate to the location’s population. That is, the share of shipments going less
than one hundred miles should equal the share of the United States population within one
hundred miles. Many of the high  industries, like clothing, tend to be outside the major
population centers and that is why predicted shipments within one hundred miles is so low
for these industries.
       In working with the CFS data, Hillberry and Hummels (2008) observe the prevalence
of local shipments and they emphasize the role that intermediate goods might play, as an
explanation. For some immediate goods, it may be eﬃcient to ship to nearby downstream
manufacturing plants for further processing. In our case, we have selected out–through our
use of the input-output tables–those manufacturing industries that tend to ship downstream
  22
    Specifically, Table A1 is calculated from Table A2, i.e., we take the averages across industries in A2 and
then calculate the conditional shares (as opposed to calculating the conditional share for each industry first
and then taking averages).


                                                     39
to other manufacturing plants. So the point about intermediate goods has less relevance for
us than it would be without that selection.
      We believe the wholesaling sector plays some role in the story. Shipments leaving plants
may make stops at nearby warehouses, before arriving to their ultimate destination, which
may thousands of miles away. In such a case, the shipment distance is recorded at less than
one hundred miles, rather than the true distance.
      Table A3 provides evidence on the relevance of the wholesale sector, for our sample of
manufacturing industries. The CFS is a sample of shipments leaving both manufacturing
plants and wholesale plants. To link manufacturing shipments with wholesale shipments,
we exploit the product level information available in the CFS. Each shipment in the 1997
CFS is classified by SCTG product code.23           Define the ton miles of a shipment to be the
shipment’s weight times its distance.       For each SCTG product, we estimate the share of
ton miles originating out of wholesale plants rather than manufacturing plants. Next, for
each NAICS industry, we use the manufacturing plants in the CFS to estimate the revenue
share across diﬀerent SCTGs. Finally, we use the SCTG sales shares to weight the SCTG-
level ton mile shares, to produce a NAICS-level Ton-Mile Wholesale Share.           On average
across the sample industries, about a quarter of ton miles go through the wholesale sector.
We repeat the exercise for the 1992 SIC sample industries and the results are virtually the
same.24     We conclude that for our sample industries, the wholesale sector plays a large
enough quantitative role for it to potentially be a factor in accounting for why there are
more local shipments than are predicted by the model.




Appendix C: First-Stage Estimation Algorithm
      We provide a detail about the first stage estimation algorithm.       As explained in the
text, conditioned on the parameters  of the distance discount, we solve for a vector of cost
eﬃciencies to exactly match the distribution of sales revenues across locations. From the
equations derived earlier, total sales revenue at location  equals

                                            X
                                            
                                                      
                                      =         P           
                                            =1    =1   

 23
    This is the Standard Classification of Transported Goods code.
 24
    For the 1992 CFS, uses the STCC product codes rather than SCTG product codes.    Despite this
diﬀerence, we get no change in results.

                                                   40
where the  depend upon  held fixed here. Given the  ,  ,  , we need to find a vector
Γ = ( 1   2    177 ), with the normalization  1 = 1, that solves these equations.
                         1
   Define  by  ≡     
                              and  = (1 2  3     ). Define the mapping


                                              1X
                                                  
                                                       
                                      () =       P 1        .
                                               =1 =1  
                                                           



If we find a  such that  () =   for all  ≥ 2, then the output equations all hold.
   Note first that  () is strictly increasing. Note second that  () is bounded above by


                                                1 X 
                                                    
                                           ¯
                                            =             ,
                                                 =1 1


which is the limit at  goes to infinity Suppose we have a point  ◦   (◦ ). Define the
sequence { 0   1   2 } by  0 = ◦ , and   = (  ). Since (·) is monotonically increasing
and is bounded from above, this sequence converges to a solution.
   To run the algorithm, we need a starting point  ◦   (◦ ).                In our estimation, the
following procedure worked for finding a starting value. Without loss of generality, we label
locations for a particular industry so that location 1 has the maximum sales revenue share,
                                                     1
1 = max {1  2   177 }. Then we set ◦ =   
                                                           for some small .
   If  () is convex, then any solution  = () is unique. We have shown that  () is
convex for  = 2 or  = 3 locations.




                                                   41
                                      References
Alvarez, Fernando and Robert E. Lucas, Jr, “General equilibrium analysis of the Eaton—
    Kortum model of international trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics (2007) 1726—
    1768.

Bernard Andrew B.; Eaton, Jonathan; Jensen, J. Bradford and Samuel Kortum. “Plants
    and Productivity in International Trade.” American Economic Review, 2003, 93(4),
    pp. 1268-90.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manu-
    facturing, 1976-1987.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1995,
    pp. 67-119.

Bernard, Andrew B, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott, “Survival of the best fit: Ex-
    posure to low-wage countries and the (uneven) growth of U.S. manufacturing plants,”
    Journal of International Economics 68 (2006) 219—237.

Bernard, Andrew, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott “Multi-product Firms and Product
    Switching“ American Economic Review, forthcoming, 2009.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Economet-
    rica, 2002, 70(5), pp. 1741-79.

Hallak, Juan Carlos and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, “Firms’ Exporting Behavior under Quality
    Constraints, NBER Working Paper No. 14928, April 2009

Hall, Max (Editor.), Made in New York: Case Studies in Metropolitan Manufacturing,Cambridge,
    MA, Harvard University Press 1959,

Head, Keith and John Ries, (1999) “Rationalization Eﬀects of Tariﬀ Reductions,” Journal
    of International Economics 47, vol 2, 295-320.

Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels (2008), “Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions:
    A Decomposition Using MicroData,” European Economic Review 52, pp. 527-550.

Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens. “Geographic Concentration and Establishment
    Scale.” Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2002, 84(4), pp.682-90.



                                          42
Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens. “Geographic Concentration and Establishment
    Size: Analysis in an Alternative Economic Geography Model.” Journal of Economic
    Geography, June 2004a, 4(3), pp. 227-50.

Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens “Spatial Distribution of Economic Activities in
    North America,“ Handbook on Urban and Regional Economics, North Holland: (2004b)

Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens, (2010a) “Web Appendix for ‘An Alternative The-
    ory of the Size Distribution with an Application to Trade’ with Data and Programs,”
    http://www.econ.umn.edu/~holmes/data/plantsize

Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens (2010b), “Exports, Internal Shipments, Plant Size,
    and Borders” manuscript in progress.

Hopenhayn, Hugo. (1992), “Entry, Exit, and firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,”
    Econometrica, Vol. 60, No. 5 (Sep., 1992), pp. 1127-1150

Hsu, Wen-Tai, (2008), “Central Place Theory and Zipf’s Law” manuscript.

Johnson, Kenneth P. and John R. Kort (2004), “Redefinition of the BEA Economic Areas,”
    Survey of Current Business, November 2004, 68-75.

Jovanovic, Boyan, (1982), “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica 50, 3,
    649-670.

Lucas, Robert (1978), “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms, Bell Journal of Eco-
    nomics, Vol 9, No. 2, 508-523.

Luttmer, Erzo G.J. (2007), “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122, No. 3, 1103-1144.

Melitz, Marc. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate In-
    dustry Productivity.” Econometrica, November 2003, 71(6), pp. 1695-1725.

Oﬃce of Management and Budget (1994), Federal Register Notice, July 26, 1994, “Eco-
    nomic Classification Policy Committee Standard Industrial Classification Replacement.

Piore, Michael J. and Charles F. Sabel. The Second Industrial Divide, New York: Basic
    Books, 1984.



                                           43
Stewart, Ricky L., Jessica Brede Stone, and Mary L. Streitwieser (2007) “U.S. Benchmark
    Input-Output Accounts, 2002,” Survey of Current Business, October 2007, p 19-48

Syverson, Chad (2004). “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example,” Jour-
    nal of Political Economy, December 2004

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1999), 1997 Commodity Flow Survey, EC97TCF-US.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (2001). 1997 Economic Census. CD-ROM. Washington, DC:
    U.S. Dept. Commerce.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, County Business Patterns, (2007).




                                         44
                                                   Table 1
                                      rev         count
                    Breakdown of Q    2
                                            into Q2
                                                     and Q2size for Various Parameters
                                             (In all cases Q2rev = 4)

Transportation      Equal Size Locations                  Location 2 larger           Location 1 larger
  Structure               (x1 = x2)                          (3x1 = x2)                  (x1 = 3x2)
     a12
                   γ2/ γ1   Q2count     Q2size γ2/ γ1          Q2count    Q2size   γ2/ γ1   Q2count   Q2size
   1.000             4.00     4.00       1.00   12.00            4.00      1.00      1.33     4.00     1.00
   0.990             4.00     3.98       1.01   11.94            3.95      1.01      1.34     4.01     1.00
   0.950             4.00     3.88       1.03   11.71            3.74      1.07      1.37     4.07     0.98
   0.900             4.01     3.77       1.06   11.43            3.49      1.15      1.41     4.14     0.97
   0.800             4.06     3.55       1.13   10.91            3.02      1.32      1.50     4.29     0.93
   0.600             4.32     3.16       1.27   10.18            2.24      1.19      1.76     4.60     0.87
   0.500             4.62     2.98       1.34   10.07            1.92      2.09      1.97     4.75     0.84
   0.200             8.28     2.59       1.54   13.87            1.24      3.23      4.00     5.14     0.78
   0.100           15.41      2.52       1.58   23.88            1.12      3.56      7.63     5.22     0.77
   0.010          150.05      2.50       1.60 225.22             1.08      3.69     75.01     5.25     0.76
   0.001         1501.20      2.50       1.60 2257.89            1.09      3.68    750.11     5.25     0.76
                                                               Table 2
                                  Descriptive Statistics for the 1997 Reclassification Industries
                                                By SIC/Retail and SIC/Man status
                     NAICS Industry Classification Classification      Number        Mean      Export  Mean
                                                     Based on SIC      of Plants     Plant     Share Location
                                                                                   Employ.            Quotient

                     Chocolate Candy                  SIC/Retail             440          8     .00      1.01
                        (NAICS 311330)                SIC/Man                421         70     .03      4.87


                     Nonchocolate Candy               SIC/Retail             349          4     .00      1.01
                        (NAICS 311340)                SIC/Man                276         88     .03      4.61

                     Curtains                         SIC/Retail           1,085          4     .00      1.54
                         (NAICS 312121)               SIC/Man                999         21     .03      3.22


                     Other Apparel                    SIC/Retail             724          3     .00      1.71
                         (NAICS 315999)               SIC/Man                966         25     .03      2.67


                     Kitchen Cabinets                 SIC/Retail           2,055          5     .00      1.25
                         (NAICS 337110)               SIC/Man              5,908         15     .01      2.14

                     Upholstered Household
                     Furniture                        SIC/Retail             576          5     .00      1.52
                         (NAICS 337121)               SIC/Man              1,130         77     .03      7.20


                    Wood Household Furniture         SIC/Retail             815            6    .00      1.17
                         (NAICS 337122)              SIC/Man              3,035          41     .03      4.42
Source: Authors’ calculations with confidential Census data and public Census tabulations.
                                         Table 3
            Mean Custom Share Across Sample Plants in the Furniture Industry
        By SIC/Retail and SIC/Man Status and Within SIC/Man by Employment Size

    Industry Grouping                      Classification          Number     Mean
                                                                      of     Custom
                                                                   Sample     Share
                                                                    Plants
    Kitchen Cabinets and
    Household Furniture (NAICS
    337110, 337121, 337122)        SIC/Retail                          102     .82
                                   SIC/Man                           2,944     .42
                                   Within SIC/Man by Emp. Size
                                       1-19                          1,628     .59
                                       20-99                           877     .30
                                       100 and above                   437     .09

    Kitchen Cabinets
    (NAICS 337110)                 SIC/Retail                           48     .87
                                   SIC/Man                           1,854     .64
                                   Within SIC/Man by Emp. Size
                                       1-19                           1331     .70
                                       20-99                           426     .56
                                       100 and above                    97     .28

    Household Furniture
    (NAICS 337121, 337122)           SIC/Retail                         54     .78
                                     SIC/Man                         1,090     .05
                                     Within SIC/Man by Emp. Size
                                          1-19                         297     .08
                                          20-99                        451     .05
                                          100 and above                340     .03
Source: Authors’ calculations with confidential Census data.
                                          Table 4
             Mean Location Quotient by Plant Size for Three Groups of Industries

             Industry            Plant Size     Number of           Mean
             Grouping            Category     Establishments      Location
                                                                  Quotient
                                                                      NAICS
                                                                        Fixed
                                                                Raw    Effect
             Reclassification
             Industry Sample            All           18,585     4.32      4.32
             (7 Industries)
                                      1-19            15,687     1.36      2.46
                                     20-99             2,073     2.62      3.03
                                   100-499               690     4.18      3.97
                                      500+               135     6.13      5.83



             Other Diffuse
             Demand
             Industries                 All          130,986     4.86      4.86
             (165 Industries)
                                      1-19            91,608     1.73      3.72
                                     20-99            28,291     2.37      4.01
                                   100-499             9,533     3.75      4.60
                                      500+             1,554     6.68      5.41



             Remaining
             Manufacturing
             Industries                 All          211,945     5.13      5.13
             (301 Industries)
                                        1-19          134,044    1.86      3.67
                                       20-99           54,705    2.79      4.14
                                    100-499            20,101    4.38      4.91
                                        500+            3,095    6.92      5.82
Source: Authors’ calculations with confidential Census data.
                                                 Table 5
                                       Model Estimates from Stage 1

                                           Parameter Estimates      Implied value of a(dist) by    Number of
                                            (s.e. in parenthesis)              dist                     CFS
                                                                                                   Shipments
                                                                      100       500       1000      Used for
                                            η1              η2       miles     miles      miles     Estimate
Baseline 1997 NAICS Estimates
using dist  100
Selected Industries by percentile of
implied value of a(100)
                                           .0523       0*
Ready-Mix Concrete (Minimum)              (.0004)                     .01       .00       .00          37,875

Creamery Butter                            .0030      -8.0E-07
(25th percentile)                         (.0003)     (1.1E-07)       .74       .27       .11            586

Wood Television Cabinets                   .0019      -6.4E-07
(50th percentile)                         (.0003)     (1.6E-07)       .83       .45       .28            546

Surgical Appliance & Supplies              .0008      -1.8E-07
(75th percentile)                         (.0001)     (0.3E-07)       .92       .69       .52          11,670

Other Hosiery & Sock Mills
(Maximum)                                 0**          0**           1.00**    1.00**    1.00**         2,967

Baseline Estimates                         .0030      -5.0E-07
(Mean over 172 Industries)                (.0002)     (0.7E-07)       .80       .48       .33           3,968

Alternative Estimates
(Means across industries)
1992 SIC (175 Industries)                  .0030      -5.9E-07        .78       .43       .28           8,500
    with dist  100                       (.0001)     (0.4E-07)

1997 NAICS (172 Industries)***                                        .71       .30       .16
    with dist  0

1997 NAICS (172 Industries)***                                         .85        .57       .42
    with dist  200
    *
      The constraint η2=0 is imposed for this industry.
    **
       This estimate is at the constraint that a(dist)≤1
    ***
        For these alternative specifications that vary dist , we did not run the individual industry
    estimates through the Census disclosure process. Rather, we took only the means of a(100),
    a(500), and a(1000) through the disclosure process.
                                       Table 6
         The Model’s Goodness of Fit of the Distance Distribution of Shipments
                Conditioned upon Shipments being at least 100 miles

Statistic Reported           Category 1       Category 2        Category 3
                             100≤distance<500 500≤distance<1000 1000≤distance
Mean sharech across                .44              .30               .25
industries (data)

Mean ŝharech across               .38                 .33                  .30
industries (model)

Regression of sharech
(data) on ŝharech (model)
Intercept                           .05               -.03                  -.03
                                   (.02)              (.02)                 (.01)

Slope                             1.04                 .99                   .96
                                  (.04)               (.07)                 (.03)

R2                                 .81                 .55                  .83
Number of Observations          167                 167                  167
                                         Table 7
Second Stage Estimates of the Plant Count Parameters and Related Model and Data Statistics

                                            Regression Results                  Estimated
                                            (s.e. in parentheses)               Specialty
                                   Constant      Slope       Slope       R2      Count
                                      λ          (spec)      (stan)               Share
                                                    νb         νs               (Percent)
Reclassification Industries
Chocolate Candy                       .4        621.6          76.7     .69       80.9
    (NAICS 311330)                   (.2)       (52.3)        (13.0)

Nonchocolate Candy                    .1        487.7          61.3     .79       80.3
   (NAICS 311340)                    (.1)       (31.2)         (7.7)

Curtains                             -.9        2184.4         20.0     .92       97.0
    (NAICS 312121)                   (.3)        (56.5)        (7.7)

Other Apparel                       -1.8        1302.6        266.1     .89       62.9
    (NAICS 315999)                   (.4)       (114.4)       (19.9)

Kitchen Cabinets                     1.4        5939.6        185.5     .89       78.2
    (NAICS 337110)                  (1.2)       (231.2)       (19.1)

Upholstered Household Furn.         -1.4        980.0         247.2     .88       49.4
   (NAICS 337121)                    (.5)       (96.6)         (8.0)

Wood household Furniture            -1.2        3355.9        254.8     .85       81.9
   (NAICS 337122)                    (.8)       (138.8)       (23.1)


Means of 7 Reclassification          -.5        2124.5        158.8     .85       75.8
Industries                           (.5)       (103.0)       (14.1)

Means of 165 Remaining               -.3        636.6          86.7     .71       66.0
Diffuse Demand Industries            (.2)       (40.3)         (6.8)
                              Table 8
                 Estimated Specialty Count Share
           By Quartiles of 172 Diffuse Demand Industries

                                                    Data
                                              Mean Small Plant
                    Model                   Count Share in Percent
         Summary Statistics of Specialty    (Small Plants have 19
                  Count Share                 employees or less)
Quartile Minimum Maximum           Mean
1            -3.7       57.2        35.7            47.7
2            58.2       72.0        64.8            53.8
3            72.0       81.9        77.6            63.0
4            81.9     101.2         87.6            67.0
       Table 9 Sales, Count and Size Quotients in Data, Size Quotients for Both Models
                          In High Concentration Industry Locations
                                                                           Data        BEKJ
                                                                                       Only   Full
Industry                                                Revenue                        Model Model
                         BEA Economic Area               share      Qrev Qcount Qsize Qsize   Qsize
Chocolate Candy          Harrisburg, PA                     .07     9.2      1.4  6.4    1.3    4.2
    (NAICS 311330)       Nashville, TN                      .06     6.6       .8  7.9    1.4    3.8
                         Chicago, IL                        .15     4.1      1.2  3.6    1.4    3.0
                         Philadelphia, IL                   .08     3.3      2.1  1.6    1.2    2.5
                         San Francisco, CA                  .08     2.3      1.5  1.6    0.4    1.3

Nonchocolate Candy         Grand Rapids, MI                   .07    11.2      1.2    9.2     1.3    4.5
   (NAICS 311340)          Chicago, IL                        .24     6.8      1.5    4.6     1.4    3.8
                           Atlanta, GA                        .07     3.5       .8    4.5     1.2    2.5

Curtains                   San Antonio, TX                    .07    10.3       .6 16.8       0.6    7.0
  (NAICS 312121)           Raleigh-Durham, NC                 .09    10.1      1.1  8.9       1.3    8.3
                           Charlotte, NC                      .06     7.6      1.7  4.5       1.3    6.7
                           Boston, MA                         .07     2.5      1.4  1.8       1.0    2.4

Other Apparel              New York, NY                       .28      3.5     2.6    1.4     1.4    2.3
  (NAICS 315999)           Los Angeles, CA                    .16      2.5     2.1    1.2     0.9    1.5

Kitchen Cabinets           Harrisburg, PA                     .05      7.4     1.7    4.4     2.9    5.5
    (NAICS 337110)         Dallas, TX                         .05      2.4     1.0    2.4     1.0    1.8

Upholstered Household Tupelo, MS                              .21   107.4     43.4    2.5     1.5    2.9
  Furniture           Charlotte, NC                           .19    23.2     11.3    2.1     1.8    3.3
  (NAICS 337121)      Knoxville, TN                           .09    22.2      2.6    8.6     1.7    3.1
                      High Point, NC                          .12    19.2     11.0    1.8     1.7    3.2

Wood Household Furn.       High Point, NC                     .17    27.7      4.2    6.6     1.6    6.9
   (NAICS 337122)          Charlotte, NC                      .13    15.5      2.9    5.4     1.5    5.8
                           Toledo, OH                         .05    13.5       .8   17.5     1.2    4.8

Summary Statistics
7 Reclassification           N= 23 Industry Locations
   Industries                     Mean                          .11     14.0    4.3    5.4     1.3   4.0
                                  Median                        .08      7.6    1.5    4.5     1.3   3.2
 165 Remaining               N= 566 Industry Locations
    Diffuse Demand                Mean                          .11     18.3    5.9    5.3     1.2   3.3
    Industries                    Median                        .09      9.3    2.9    2.6     1.1   2.5
Note: BEA Economic Areas are a combination of several nearby locations. For simplicity, we
pick just one city to serve as the label. For example, the area labeled “Chicago, IL” above is
actually labeled “Chicago-Naperville-Michigan City, IL-IN-WI “.
                                                                 Table 10
                                 List of Industries Classified as Having a Surge of Imports from China
                                                       Some Descriptive Statistics

                                         Import Share of                                    Employment
                                           Shipments             China Share of Imports        Growth         Mean Plant
                                            (Percent)                  (Percent)             1997-2007       Employment
Industry                                1997         2007         1997           2007         (Percent)   1997         2007
Curtains                                  8           56            38            65            -47        12             9
Other Household Textile Prod.            22           68            25            49            -51        64            36
Women's Cut & Sew Dress                  29           67            21            55            -71        37            22
Women's Cut & Sew Suit,                  48           92            19            49            -91        46            17
Infants' Cut & Sew Apparel               60           99            08            62            -97       178            11
Hat, Cap, & Millinery                    44           80            26            67            -74        44            30
Glove & Mitten                           58           88            50            63            -78        49            26
Men's & Boys' Neckwear                   25           56            02            59            -67        40            37
Other Apparel                            39           80            35            64            -75        14            12
Blankbook, Looseleaf Binder,             18           47            43            52            -51        59            42
Power-Driven Handtool                    28           56            18            46            -56        77            48
Electronic Computer                      12           49            00            56            -68       179            75
Electric Housewares & Fans               52           78            48            76            -54       124            77
Wood Household Furniture                 29           62            18            46            -51        33            18
Metal Household Furniture                29           55            37            85            -48        54            36
Silverware & Plated Ware                 44           91            31            73            -82        39            11
Costume Jewelry & Novelty                31           68            31            67            -63        16            10

Mean of China Surge Industries
    (N=17)                                34            70           26            61           -66        63           30
Mean of Food/Beverage
Comparison Group Industries                8            11           02             7             5        84           81
    (N=35)
Sources: See Data Appendix
                                           Table 11
              Plant Size Distribution of China Surge Industries in 1997 and 2007
     For the United States Overall and for Plants in the Primary Location of Each Industry
            For the Wood Furniture Industry and for All 17 China Surge Industries


Panel A: Wood Household Furniture Industry

                                               Plant Size         Plant Size
                                              Cell Counts       Cell Counts in
                                                   in          Primary Location
                                             United States       (High Point)
               Employment Size Class        1997       2007     1997      2007
               1 to 19                     3,091      3,079       51        29
               20 to 49                      323        278        9         6
               50 to 99                      165         95        6         5
               100 to 249                    130         68        8         3
               250 to 499                     78         28       13         7
               500 to 999                     36         15        9         3
               1000 and above                 12          5        5         0

Panel B: All 17 China Surge Industries

                                               Plant Size
                                                                  Plant Size
                                              Cell Counts
                                                                Cell Counts in
                                                   in
                                                               Primary Location
                                             United States
               Employment Size Class        1997       2007     1997      2007
               1 to 19                     9,692      7,661      768       363
               20 to 49                    1,486        854      164        56
               50 to 99                      753        359       71        26
               100 to 249                    588        249       51        19
               250 to 499                    231         88       28        14
               500 to 999                    126         37       19         3
               1000 and above                 50          9       14         0


Source: The cell counts are based on public tabulations from the Census discussed in the
Appendix. The High Point, NC Area consists of the BEA Economic Area containing High Point,
NC (consisting of 22 counties). For each industry, the Primary Location is the Economic Area
with the highest sales revenue location quotient, among locations with at least 5 percent of
United States sales.
                Table 12: Summary Statistics for 1997 Primary Industry Location
                   Data and Fitted Values in BEJK Model after China Surge

                                                    1997 Data                        2007
                                                  Q  size     rev
                                                            Q1997           BEJK            Data
                                                    1997
                                                                            China            rev
                                                                                            Q2007
                                                                            Surge
 Industry of Industry Group                                                 Qˆ rev
                                                                              2007
 Wood Furniture in High Point, NC                 6.6         27.7         28.4             12.8

 China Surge Industries (N=17)
     Mean                                         7.9         26.9         29.4             12.2
     Median                                       3.8         19.6         21.7.             5.3

 Food/Beverage
 Comparison Group (N=34)
    Mean                                          5.9         35.3         36.7             29.8
    Median                                        3.3         19.0         21.1             12.3

                                                                 rev
Notes: 1997 primary industry location is location with highest Q1997 of those locations with at
least 5 percent of industry sales.

        Table 13: Summary Statistics of Twenty Largest Economic Areas by Population
                   Data and Fitted Values in BEJK Model after China Surge

                                                    1997 Data                        2007
                                                  Q  size     rev
                                                            Q1997           BEJK            Data
                                                    1997
                                                                            China            rev
                                                                                            Q2007
                                                                            Surge
 Industry or Industry Group                                                 Qˆ rev
                                                                              2007
 Wood Furniture                                     .45          .44          .42             .57

 China Surge Industries (N=17)
     Mean                                           .78          .97          .97            1.08
     Median                                         .79          .87          .87            1.06

 Food/Beverage
 Comparison Group (N=35)
    Mean                                            .94          .91          .90             .90
    Median                                          .93          .89          .89             .90

Notes: The twenty largest economic areas by population are grouped into one aggregate big city
area. The statistics reported above are calculated for the big city area being treated as a single
location.
                                           Table 14
                  Actual and Fitted Values of Count Quotients, 1997 and 2007
           Fitted Values for BEJK Model and General Model with Specialty Segment
                         2007 Values Simulate China Surge using 1997

Panal A: Summary Statistics for Count Quotients of Primary Location of Industry
                                            Data            Pure BEJK          General Model
                                            Q count           Model             with Specialty
                                                               Q̂ count           Segment
                                                                                    Q̂ count
Industry of Industry Group               1997       2007      1997         2007     1997       2007
Wood Furniture in High Point (N=1)        4.2        2.3      17.7         22.0      4.0          3.0

China Surge Industries (N=17)
    Mean                                   5.8       3.9      24.5         28.6          6.8      5.5
    Median                                 4.2       2.9      17.0         17.5          4.8      3.5

Food/Beverage
Comparison Group (N=34)
   Mean                                   10.6      10.7      30.0         34.8      13.4       10.9
   Median                                  4.8       4.2      15.4         17.7       5.3        3.8

Panel B: Prediction Regression Results, Q count on Q̂ count for the two models
                                                              Mean Slope           Mean R2
         Industry of Industry Group                          (Mean std. err.)
         Wood Furniture (N = 1)
             Pure BEJK Model                                      −.27            .096
                                                                  (.06)
             General Model with Specialty Segment                  .93            .140
                                                                  (.17)
         China Surge Industries (N=17)
             Pure BEJK Model                                       -.06           .036
                                                                   (.18)
             General Model with Specialty Segment                   .89           .084
                                                                   (.32)
         Food/Beverage Comparison Group (N=35)
            Pure BEJK Model                                      .17       .043
                                                                (.15)
             General Model with Spec. Seg.                       .33       .046
                                                                (.32)
Note: Each regression used to construct in Panel B has 177 Economic Area observations.
Observations are weighted by 1997 population. The table reports means across the N industries
for each group of industries.
                                          Table 15
           Estimates of Standardized Segment and Specialized Segment Plant Counts
                           By Industry Grouping for 1997 and 2007

Panel A: Wood Household Furniture (1 Industry)

                              Plant Counts (Number)           Shares (Percent)
                             1997            2007         1997           2007
      Standardized                697             213           18.1             6.2
      Specialty                  3150            3215           81.9            93.8
      Total                      3847            3428          100.0           100.0

Panel B: All China Surge Industries (17 Industries)

                              Plant Counts (Number)           Shares (Percent)
                             1997            2007         1997           2007
      Standardized               3,783          1,371           29.1            15.7
      Specialty                  9,207          7,380           70.9            84.3
      Total                    12,990           8,751          100.0           100.0


Panel C: Food and Beverage Industries (35 Industries)

                              Plant Counts (Number)           Shares (Percent)
                             1997            2007         1997           2007
      Standardized               4,234          5,390           27.4            32.7
      Specialty                11,216          11,092           72.6            67.3
      Total                    15,450          16,482          100.0           100.0


Panel D: Remaining Diffuse Demand Industries (120 Industries)

                              Plant Counts (Number)           Shares (Percent)
                             1997            2007         1997           2007
      Standardized             31,969          26,568           26.1            23.5
      Specialty                90,388          86,432           73.9            76.5
      Total                   122,357         113,000          100.0           100.0
                                      Appendix Table A1
                          Mean Share of Shipments in Data and Model
                        Conditioned on Distance Shipped Over 100 Miles
              Averages Across Sample Industries and By Industry Distance Adjustment

                                                                     Distance Shipped
       Industry Grouping                Number of      100 to 500      500 to 1000 Over 1000
                                        Industries
       Data, All Sample Industries         172             0.43            0.30          0.26
       Model, All Sample Industries        172             0.38            0.33          0.30

       Data, a(100)<.5                         15          0.89            0.09          0.03
       Model, a(100)<.5                        15          0.77            0.17          0.06

       Data, .5 ≤ a(100) < .75                 31          0.57            0.27          0.16
       Model, .5 ≤ a(100) < .75                31          0.48            0.31          0.20

       Data, .75 ≤ a(100) < .9                 73          0.41            0.32          0.27
       Model, .75≤< a(100) < .9                73          0.35            0.34          0.31

       Data, .9 ≤ a(100)                       53          0.34            0.32          0.34
       Model, .9 < a(100)                      53          0.28            0.34          0.38

                                         Appendix Table A2
                            Unconditioned upon Shipments Above 100 Miles

                                                                  Distance Shipped
Industry Grouping                 Number of     Under 100     100 to 500    500 to 1000     Over 1000
                                  Industries
Data, All Sample Industries          172            0.27            0.32          0.22          0.19
Model, All Sample Industries         172            0.11            0.34          0.29          0.27

Data, a(100)<.5                       15            0.65            0.31          0.03          0.01
Model, a(100)<.5                      15            0.39            0.47          0.10          0.04

Data, .5 ≤ a(100) < .75               31            0.33            0.39          0.18          0.11
Model, .5 ≤ a(100) < .75              31            0.14            0.42          0.27          0.18

Data, .75 ≤ a(100) < .9               73            0.22            0.32          0.25          0.21
Model, .75≤< a(100) < .9              73            0.08            0.33          0.32          0.28

Data, .9 ≤ a(100)                     53            0.19            0.28          0.26          0.28
Model, .9 < a(100)                    53            0.05            0.26          0.33          0.36
                                    Appendix Table A3
                          Estimates of Ton-Mile Wholesale Share
           Averages Across Sample Industries and By Industry Distance Adjustment

                                        1997 NAICS                       1992 SIC
                                      Industry Sample                 Industry Sample
                                  Number of      Mean of      Number of Mean of Ton Mile
Industry Grouping                 Industries     Ton Mile     Industries     Wholesale Share
                                                Wholesale                     (Percent out of
                                                  Share                            100)
                                                 (Percent
                                                out of 100)
All Sample Industries                172             24.4       175            24.2
By value of a(100) for industry
    Below .50                         15            15.6         14            11.4
    From .50 to .75                   31            15.0         35            18.2
    From .75 to .90                   73            27.1         88            27.3
    Above .90                         53            28.7         38            27.3
