                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION,
                      PERFORMANCE AND EARNINGS


                           Andrew Weiss



                      Working Paper No. 1595




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RBSEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #1595
                                        April 198.5




                     High School Graduation,
                    Performance and Earnings



                               ABSTRACT




      Using data from the Panel Study of Income
                                                   Dynamics and a
 proprietary sample of semi-skilled production workers, this paper

 investigates the reasons for the discontinuous increase in wages

associated with graduation from high school.

     Associated with graduation from high school, we find a

discontinuous decrease in a worker's propensities to quit or be

absent. However, we do not find that high school graduates have

a comparative advantage on production jobs requiring more training,

nor, in the PSID sample, are high school graduates
                                                      assigned to jobs

requiring more training. Finally, we find that the wage premium

associated with graduation from high school vanishes during severe

slurips, periods in which employers are likely to be hoarding labor and

in which quits and absences are least important to fins.

     We conclude from this evidence that the sorting model of education

provides a better explanation for the higher wages of high school

graduates than does the human capital model.




                                      Andrew Weiss
                                      Department of Economics
                                      Columbia University
                                      New York, NY 10027
       HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION, PERFORMANCE AND EARNINGS*



                                               Andrew Weiss


                                           Columbia University

                                        New York, N.Y. 10027

                                                      and

                                   Be]! Communications Research




                                        Revised March 1, 1985




    Using data from the PSID and from a proprietary data set of newly hired

production workers, we investigate whether the discontinuous increase in earnings

associated with graduation from high school is due to unobserved attributes that

are correlated with both completion of high school and performance on jobs. This

correlation is a basic assumption of sorting models of education.

   We find that high school graduates have lower quit propensities and rates of

absenteeism than would be expected from their other demographic characteristics

   I am grateful to Roger K]cjn, Richard
                                         Spady, and participants at the seminars at the University of
   Chicago. SUNY Stoney Brook. the NBER, Stanford University, Cornell University and Columbia
   Universit. for valuable comments and suggestions. Gerald McTigue, Mi Mouzami and Andrea Shepard
  provided valuable assistance in processing the data and in computer programming. John Raisian
  reconstructed his blue collar-white collar classification scheme for my use
                                                 -2-

(including any continuous effects of education).' 2 On the other hand, they do not

have jobs requiring more training than would be expected from their demographic

characteristics, nor do they appear to have a comparative advantage on more
complex jobs.

     Thus it appears that the discontinuous increase in earnings associated with
graduation from high school is due to traits such as stick-to-itiveness or a low time

discount rate that were acquired prior to 12th grade and that increased the
likelihood of the individual completing high school. We found no evidence that the

higher earnings of high school graduates were due to their superior cognitive skills.



i.   p. H. Mirves and E. E. Lawler calcu]ated that the total cost of turnover of bank tellers was
     85 times as large as their daily earnings plus benefits. Hence, if graduation from
                                                                                        High School
     decreases a workers probability of quitting during their first year on the job by 10%, and
     assuming the average work year was 240 days, H.S. graduation would increase earnings of
    newly hired bank tellers by 3.5%.
2. Mirves and Lawler also estimated that the total cost of absenteeism for a sample of 160 bank
   tellers was more than twice the cost in salaries and benefits. Thus if, as we estimate, H.S.
   graduation results in a 14% decrease in the percentage of days absent, then we would expect the
   negative correlation between absenteeism and education to lead to a 2% higher wage for H.S.
   graduates working as bank tellers.
                                                                                       -
     Allen (1981) used the 1972-73 Quality of Employment Survey to calculate the effect of wages
     on absenteeism. He found that the elasticity of the absence rate with respect to marginal wage
     rate varies from -.35 to -.48. Since these elasticities stem from partial derivatives we can not
     directly impute the elasticity of wages with respect to absenteeism from the inverse of Allen's
     estimates. However his results suggest that if, as we estimate, high school graduates are absent
     14% less that would be expected from their other demographic characteristics, then these
     differences in absenteeism could explain the entire wage premium received by high school
     graduates. On the other hand, Allen's estimated coefficients are likely to be biased toward zero.
     leading to overestimates of the effect of absenteeism on wages.

     Allen also finds a negative, albeit minor, effect of high school graduation on absenteeism.
     However, since he includes wages as an independent variable in his absenteeism equation, the
     model being estimated is substantially different from ours-in which we are investigating the
     effect of education on wages. (If high school graduates are paid more because they are absent
     less, one might find that then including wages as an independent variable in the absence
     equation would obscure the relationship between high school graduation and wages).
                                           -3-

    Consequently, we conclude that some of the conventional estimates of rates of

return to secondary education (those that do not include dummy variables for high

school graduation) are capturing the effect of traits that were unlikely to have been

learned in secondary school.


1. THE DATA


    The data for this study comes from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID), with which the reader is presumably familiar, and from a proprietary data

set consisting of the personnel files of 2,920 newly hired semi-skilled production

workers employed by a high wage, unionized firm at three widely separated
geographic locations: labeled A, B and C.

   Each of these data sets have advantages and drawbacks. The PSID has two

disadvantages. First, it does not have a direct measure of output, or a good
measure of absenteeism. Second, since education typically affects job assignments

and promotional opportunities it would be difficult, it not impossible, using the

PSID to determine whether lower quit rates of high school graduates are due to

their job assignments or to unobserved attributes particular to the individual.

   The main drawback of the data derived from personnel files is that it is suspect

to serious sample selection biases. That issue shall be addressed on pages 10 and

11 of this section and at greater length in section 4. Let us first describe in detail

the proprietary data used in this study.

   Each of the workers in this sample was initially paid the same non-linear
                                                -4-

piece-rate. When a worker achieved 83% of' expected output for one month, the

worker was assigned to a pay group. All the members of a pay group received the

same pay. Pay was proportional to the output of the group — the average group
size is 126 members — and promotion opportunities were insignificant, so there was

little financial incentive for group members to achieve high levels of output.

Consequently, we only used the output of workers during their first month on the

job in this study. (Among experienced workers, the range in output from the
bottom to top deciles was less than 20% of the mean).

    Almost all workers were assigned to a pay group within their first three months

on the job, and the lower bound on earnings of newly hired workers was 65% of the

wage in a pay group, with earnings rising less than proportionately to output up to

a ceiling at 83% of the pay group wage. Therefore, expected lifetime earnings
differences among the newly hired workers at each location were trivial.3

    For each worker data were available on sex, age, marital status, education,

employment status when the worker applied for work, and an estimate of the time

required for an average employee to learn the worker's job as well as the worker's


3. Because in our sanip]e wages are independent of performance, we were able to avoid the sample
   selection biases present if a worke(s wage were included as an independent variable. If
   employers value a low propensity to be absent or to quit or a high level of productivity, then
   workers who have those qualities (or are perceived by employers as more likely to have those
   qualities) will receive higher wages and more training. Hence if the wage were an independent
   variable the error term in a quit, absenteeism, or productivity equation would be correlated with
   the wage variable and hence with all other independent variables that are correlated with wages.

   Although all the workers at each location in our sample received the same wage, they obviously
   did not have the same alternative opportunities: the effect of differences in alternative
   opportunities is discussed below.
                                                -5-


 output per hour (measured in physical units and normalized by the industrial

 engineering force to be equivalent across jobs), number of days absent, number of
 occasions absent,4 whether or not the worker quit and the date a quit occurred.

 The workers did not know that they were the subjects of an empirical study. All

the data were routinely collected either by the personnel office, industrial engineers,

or foremen at the three locations. Although the total sample contained 2,920
individuals, complete data were not available for all workers. In some cases
workers were assigned jobs for which there were no measures of job complexity, in

other cases the worker failed to answer all the questions on the application form.

Also at each location different information was available in the personnel records.

In location C, race data was not available and only the screws half of the Crawford

Physical Dexterity Test was administered; in the other two locations both the pins

and screws sections of the dexterity test were administered before a worker was

hired.5 The scores on this test were used by the firm in deciding whether to hire the

worker, but were not used in assigning workers to jobs. Job assignments were
random.

    An additional problem arose at location C: the plant was divided into two

halves, with significantly different promotional opportunities. Unfortunately the
data did not reveal to which half of the plant particular workers were assigned,

4. Consecutive days absent are recorded as a single occasion of absenteeism.
5. The Crawford Physical Dexterity Test is a two-part test. In the first part an individual uses a
    tweezers to place pins into sleeves in a pegboard. In the second part small screws are screwed
   into sleeves in the pegboard. Each part of the test takes three minutes and the number of
   operations performed in that time is tabulated.
                                        -6-

that initial assignment may not have been random. At that plant, workers assigned

to more complex jobs had better promotional opportunities. Because of these
unobserved differences in promotion opportunities, the relatively small sample size

at that location, and the missing data on race, prior experience, employment status

when they applied for this job, and scores on the pins section of the dexterity test,

we did not use data from that location in estimating the quit equations below.

   Table I presents some summary statistics which provide a context within which

to evaluate the data. NA denotes data that were not available.



                             Insert Table I about here


   Because this data set contains direct measures of three aspects of productivity:

output per hour. absenteeism (both percentage of days absent and occasions
absent), and quit propensity, it is possible to separately measure the effects of
education for each of those aspects of productivity. In addition, because the data

includes a measure of the complexity of the job to which the worker was assigned.

one can estimate whether better educated workers have a
                                               -7-


comparative advantage on more complex jobs.6



                                  Insert Figure 1 about here


    Before showing how the data provides information on the relative contributions

of the sorting and learning aspects of education to earnings, we first examine the

effect of education on earnings for some of the workers in our sample, and discuss

whether conclusions drawn from this subsample are applicable to a broader

population.

    At plant A job applicants were asked their wage at their most recent job and

whether or not they were currently employed at that job. Using that data, we
estimated the effect of an additional year of education on the previous pay of those

workers who were employed when they applied for their current job.7 8 Column                      3


6. In general, studies that rely on productivity measures of experienced workers within a given job
   classification are subject to important sample truncation biases. For example, suppose that
   education has a positive effect on performance within a given job, and that, as Medoff and
   Abraham find, education (and performance) have positive effects on a worker's probability of
   being promoted. Then among workers within a job classification, (i.e., workers who have not
   been promoted) education could be negatively correlated with performance even though
   education increases the performance of workers on the job. These effects can be seen in
   Figure 1. The downward sloping line is the criterion for promotion from job I to job 2. lIthe
   distribution of perceived productivities were the same at all education levels, and were a
   symmetric increasing hazard rate distribution, such as the normal or uniform, then on both jobs
   the better educated workers would be the less able. This problem does not arise for our data
   since none of the workers were promoted. (Note that this sample selection bias does not affect
   the substantive point made by Medoff and Abraham that within a sample of workers on the
   same job wages rise with experience despite productivities falling with experience. We are
   simply pointing out that in jobs in which there are significant promotional opportunities it is
   difficult to infer the direct effect of experience or education on productivity.)
7. We excluded unemployed workers from the sample since the wage on their previous job, one
   which they either couldn't keep or chose to leave, does not seem representative of their expected
   earnings. In each case wages at the previous job were used since wages for experienced workers
   on their current job are a function solely of seniority and the output of the relevant pay group.
8. Obviously this is a biased estimate of the effect of education on earnings for workers in the
   population — the workers in our sample chose to leave the jobs for which we have recorded their
                                                 -8-

of Table 2, contains estimates of the effect of various demographic variables on the

logarithm of the previous hourly wage of workers at that plant. Columns I and 2

reproduce the coefficients estimated by Wesley Mellow using the 1979 current

population survey.



                                    Insert Table 2 about here


   Table 2 can be used in various ways depending on how ambitious we wish to be.

First, the estimates of 6 In sage provide a measure of the effect of education on
                               8 educ

the earnings (in their previous job) for the subsample of workers for whom we have

earnings data. We used that estimate as a standard, and then calculated how
much of that effect can be explained by the partial correlation between education

and various aspects of performance for workers in that limited sample. This

approach does not make any assumptions about the sample being representative of

a larger population, but simply seeks to find those factors that contributed to
earnings differences on previous jobs for workers within this subsample. We
assume that performance on current jobs is correlated with wages on previous jobs.

We also assume that workers for whom usable pay data were available are
representative of workers in the sample, so that a year of education has
approximately a 4% effect on the hourly wage on other jobs for the workers in this


   earnings. In section 3, we analyze the effect of this bias.
                                                -9-


 sample.9 Including high school graduation as an independent variable we found
 that for the workers in our sample completion of high school had 2 to 3 times as

 great an effect on wages as did completion oil I th or 1 3th grade.

     A second use of the data in Table 2 is to provide a partial check of the

 importance of sample selection bias for our sample if one wishes to generalize our

results outside our sample. Since our major concern is in explaining the positive

correlation between education and earnings, it is useful to check to see if the return

of education in our sample is biased. This is a potentially serious problem because

one would expect that better educated individuals who apply for these jobs are less

representative of their schooling cohort than are less well educated workers.
However, the estimated value of the return on education for workers for whom we

had wage data is roughly the same as returns estimated using the C.P.S. sample.

Thus it does not seem that our sample differs from the C.P.S. sample in ways that

grossl' distort the effect of education on earnings, in addition, the sign of the
effect of race, sex, education, tenure, and experience on the logarithm of the wage

is the same for our sample as for the randomly selected C.P.S. sample.

    The personnel practices at these plants also provide grounds for believing that

our sample is representative. Only 22% of applicants whose applications were
reviewed were rejected. Of those. 859k were rejected because of a low score on the

Crawford Physical Dexterity Test. Our estimation procedures included the

9. We had usabte data on previous pay for 77% of the workers employed at the midwest location
   (those   workers comprised 43% of the entire sample).
                                                 10 -



worker's score on the dexterity lest as an independent variable, thus eliminating

that potential source of sample selection bias. In addition, the average pay increase

for workers for whom we had wage data was 103%, and workers waited more than

36 hours in freezing temperatures to receive job application forms. This evidence

indicates that the firm was paying above market wages, reducing the sample
selection problems derived from more "able" applicants not applying to the firm.

where ability refers to unobserved worker characteristics that are correlated both

with observed characteristics and with productivity.10 These high wages and the

concomitant excess supply of job applicants were routine features at the
manufacturing locations of this unionized firm. At another location of this firm

recall notices were recently mailed to former employees: 90% of those who had

found alternative work quit their jobs to return to work for the firm. Consequently

we have assumed that sample selection biases were small and have not corrected

for them) I




10. Of course some residual sample selection bias occurs if unobserved attributes that lead workers
   to wait on line longer, such as the ability to withstand the cold, are correlated with both
   performance measures and with observed attributes we are studying. At the location A we know
   the individual's place on line. It was uncorrelated with any of our measures of performance.
   Consequently, we have assumed that this source of bias is small and have disregarded it.
11. Alternatively we could have used the Bloom and Killingsworth (B-K) procedure to correct for
   sample selection bias. (Because the characteristics of excluded observations are unknown, the
   standard Heckit correction can't be used.) However, the B-K procedure is extremely sensiuve to
   assumptions about the distribution of the error term in the selection equation. Indeed, as they
   point out, the equation being estimated is only identified if the assumed distribution of the error
   term of the selection equation is nonlinear. See Olsen (1982) and Muthén and Jöreskog (1983)
   for discussions of this issue.
                                           -Il-

 2. MODELS


    Typically an individual's choice of a level of education is a function of both

observable and unobservable traits. The traits that are observable for our sample,
and that affect the schooling decision, include age, race, sex and manual dexterity.

We grouped together under the rubric "stick-to-itiveness" all the unobserved
attributes that affect an individual's choice of a level of schooling. Stick-to-
itiveness represents the combined effect on schooling level of characteristics such as

self-discipline, desire for variety, and susceptibility to illness or to the urge to '1take

a day off." Years of schooling, and high school graduation are used as proxies for
the traits referred to as stick-to-itiveness.

    In addition to representing these unobserved characteristics, education also

indicates a level of training. We would expect that one skill that is acquired in

school is the ability to learn complex tasks. Of course, that skill may have been

acquired prior to the years of schooling across which our sample differs (almost the

entire sample had at least nine years of education) and influenced the individual's

choice of a level of education. We assume that skills such as ability to learn
complex tasks that affect the productivity of workers and that may plausibly have

been learned in secondary school were learned there. That is, we intentionally

biased our analysis in favor of a learning explanation for the correlation between

education and earnings.

   The performance equations we estimate are: whether or not the worker quit

during his first six months on the job, absenteeism (both days absent and occasions
                                           - 12-



of absenteeism), and output per hour during the first month on the job as a
fraction of his expected output given the complexity of the job. (These
normalizations are routinely performed by the industrial engineering staff as part

of their efforts to compute the piece-rate for different jobs.) The critical
independent variables for our analysis are years of education, H.S. graduation, job

complexity, and a measure of the "match" between education level and job

complexity.

                 Match        [education - mean (education)] times
                              [job complexity - mean job complexity)].

Job complexity was defined as the logarithm of the number of weeks the plant's

industrial engineering staff estimates it should take a new employee to learn the job

(achieve the average productivity rating for the factory on that job). The main
component in the industrial engineers' calculation is the number of times per week

an experienced worker performs the task.

   In general we would expect stick-to-itiveness (those unobservable traits which

lead individuals to choose higher levels of schooling) to have its greatest effect on

quit propensity and to have a lesser effect on other aspects of behavior such as
absenteeism. On the other hand, one direct effect of education is to improve

alternative opportunities. increasing the probability of a quit.

2.1 Quits

   Let   S   denote   worker i's present value of his current job, J. denote i's present

value of his best opportunity elsewhere, and M. denote i's mobility costs (both real
                                                    - 13-



and psychic) of a job change (housework and leisure are counted as jobs). Assume

worker i is risk neutral and quits if and only if

(1)


      Denote the time discount rate of workers by r, worker i's age at the start of the

observation period by a1 and the value of an individuals alternative and present job

at time r by V1 (r) and S (r) respectively. Then, assuming male workers anticipate

working until they are 65 years old, and normalizing r           0 for the time when the
quit decision is made

                                       65—a, +50F
(2)                         P.   —S = 5 e' E(r) —S(i)]di.
where F is a dummy variable indicating whether a worker is a female, and             is an

estimated parameter of the problem. If females anticipate working fewer years.
   < 0. Next, let p1(i) represent the probability individual i changes jobs after the

observation period and before period r, and let the value of that new job be a
weighted average of the value of the previous job and some constant term B.

      Assume that the values of the alternative and the present job grow at an
exponential rate so that

(3a)        V1(r) = e"                     F(o) + p1(r)(y(0) + (l—)Bt(O)J

(3b)        S1(t) =        eU?   [1—p1n S(O) + p10)(y51(0) + (l—-r)B1(O)J

where 0 <     y   <   1.    Then, defining o = (r—u) and a1 =   I —
                                                                      (1—y)p1(r), worker i

quits if and only if
                                                   - 14 -



                            65—a. +30F
(4)                                      ct1et [J'(O)    —
                                                             S(O)]dt > M
                                0


      To obtain an estimable quit equation from (4), assume:

(5)                                          aV(O) X]31
(6)                                          aS (0) =

(7)                                               M=

               ( e6(65—a-fS0F)1
Denoting                            by g(a,ô,j30F), and substituting (5)-(7) into (4),


                               1 if g(a,&80F) [XIfiI — X2132]          —
                                                                           X3133   >0
(8)                       =
                               0 otherwise

Clearly, the net gain from changing jobs, the left hand side of (8), will be
measured with error. We assume this error term, denoted PQ. is distributed
normally with zero mean and is i.i.d. Therefore, the quit equation we estimate is

                              I if g(a,óJ30F)[X1,81 — X2i32] —X3fi3 >
(9)
                              0 otherwise

      The worker characteristics that we measured and that affect alternative

opportunities include education, race, sex, age, geographic location, dexterity, as

measured by scores on the physical dexterity test, and employment status when

hired (a worker who was on a temporary lay-off from a desirable previous job
might be likely to quit when recalled from the layoff).'2 The factors affecting

12, One mighi argue that employers should be concerned with the total effect of education on the probability
      of a worker quitfing taking into account the better alternative opportunities available to the better
      educated workers. Howevec. we are concerned with explaining wage differences in the market, not at the
      firm being studied, where there are no wage differences due to education differences. In the market
                                                       •15-


 alternative opportunities could also affect job satisfaction. For example, we would

 expect workers that were employed at the time of application to have a significantly

 higher level of job satisfaction (one reason they left the previous job was the

 anticipation of increased job satisfaction) and hence to be less likely to quit. There

 are also job related characteristics, such as job complexity, that affect job
 satisfaction but not alternative opportunities.

     Finally we would expect stick-to-itiveness (as measured by years of education

and high school graduation), and whether the worker is married to impose
additional mobility costs. Those variables are not multiplied by g(a,ô,fi0F). They

enter directly into the quit equation as elements of X3.13

    As can be seen in Table 3A our major hypothesis is confirmed. High school

graduation has a strong negative effect on the probability of a worker quitting.
This effect is independent of the direct effect of schooling. We can reject the
hypothesis that the reason better educated individuals have lower quit propensities

is that they learned not to quit in school.



                                      Insert Table 3A about here




   equilibrium better educated workers have higher wages as well as better alternative opportunities, It is
   differences in quit propensities, not of the eftect of alternative opportunities on quits, which contributes to
   differences in the equilibrium wage at different education levels.
13. See Mincer (]978) for an analysis of the effect of marital status on worker mobility.
                                          - 16-



     Equation (9) was estimated by the method of maximum likelihood, using a

pooled samp]e from plants A and B. Individuals were omitted if they were laid-off

before being with the firm for six months and selection bias was avoided by also

omitting workers who would have been laid-off before six months had passed had

they not already quit. (All layoffs were made strictly by seniority). Because the
likelihood function is almost flat with respect to changes in 5           offset by

compensating changes in the vector of variables multiplied by 5, the standard errors

of S and of the coefficients of variables multiplied by g(a,6,/30F)       are high.

Although statistically insignificant, they have values consistent with the model.

Individuals such as white males that have better alternative opportunities are more

likely to quit these jobs; workers who were employed when they applied for these

jobs are less likely to quit. Similar confirmation was provided by the negative
value of     Our estimates suggest that females in our sample anticipate spending

7 fewer years in the labor force than do males. This finding is consistent with

unpublished research b' Jacob Mincer, Using the P510 sample Mincer finds that

women spend roughly 25% less time in the labor force than do men. Finally the

similarity in the 'i'   statistics   obtained using the gradient, hessian and White
methods suggests that the model is not grossly misspecified.

     To obtain more precise estimates of the coefficients, and to make use of
Mincer's findings on the shorter work-life of women, we reformulated equation (9)

as
                                            17-



                            I   if h
(9a)
                            0 otherwise

                         mO5fl25F)(65—age)_
where   Ii   (a.&-F) =
                                  —.05


    That is, we impose the restrictions that r — i           .05   and that the effective
work-life of women is 25% shorter than that of men.

   Equation (9a) was estimated using a probit estimation procedure. The
estimated coefficients, and the effect of a change in each independent variable on

the probability of a worker quitting are presented in Table 3B.



                                Insert Table 3B about here



   Note that in Table 3B job complexity and match were not included as
independent variables. If job complexity and match are included as independent

variables when (9a) is estimated, the sample size falls to 1532 and the absolute
value of all the ' H statistics also falls. However, none of the results shown in
Table JB are significantly affected: high school graduation is estimated to
correspond to a reduction in the probability of the worker quitting of -.052 at a

10% quit probability and -.083 at a 20% quit probability. Similarly if quit
propensity is estimated separately for men and women in our sample, the
qualitative effects in Table 3B hold for each subsample.
                                       - 18-



   We checked the finding that high school graduation significantly affects quit

propensities using the 1968-1982 PSID sample. We estimate that each year of

post—primary education has neither a statistically nor economically significant

effect on a worker's quit rate, while completion of high school is associated with a

reduction in the individuals quit rate of roughly one-third.



                             Insert Table 4 about here


2.2 Absenteeism


   In Appendix A, we present a theoretical model that shows why differences in

expected absenteeism rates can significantly affect the wages of workers. In this

section. we estimate the discontinuities in expected absenteeism rates associated

with H.S. graduation for workers in our sample.

   In estimating the determinants of absenteeism we assume that a worker is more

likely to be absent the higher is his level of job dissatisfaction, and the lower his

persistence. As in the quit equation, job satisfaction is measured by the elements

of X2. We use education and high school graduation as proxies for persistence—an

individual who had insufficient persistence to complete high school is likely to have

poorer than expected attendance habits. We shall assume that absenteeism (both

days and occasions of absenteeism as a percentage of possible days worked) is a

linear function of A'-,, our proxies for diligence, and a normally distributed error

term.
                                                19-


    In the quit equation we were able to separate the effect of education on job

satisfaction from its effec on stick-to-itiveness by arguing that job satisfaction has

a greater effect on the quit rates of workers with longer expected future work lives.

The education x g(a,5j30F) term captured the effect of education on quits that

was caused by its effect on either alternative opportunities or job satisfaction. This

option is not available to us in the absenteeism equations: workers are trading off

one period gains and losses from absences. Consequently, the estimated coefficients

on education and high school graduation could be estimating the effect of lower (or

higher) levels of job satisfaction of better educated workers on their absence rates.

However, the results from the previously estimated quit equations suggest this is

not happening.

    As mentioned, two measures of absenteeism are used as dependent variables.

    Percentage of days absent is estimated using a Tobit procedure.14

    We calculated the percentage of days workers were absent during their first six

months on the job; however, because not all the workers in our sample completed

6 months of work those observations were weighted by the square root of the
number of days for which they were observed.




14. We are implicii]y assuming that discrete absenteeism data can be approximated by a continuous
   distribution, and that the error term in the estimation equation is normally distributed but
   truncated so that absenteeism rates that the model predicts would be negative are recorded as
   zeros.
                                              - 20 -




                                  Insert Table 5 about here


    We also used occasions of absent as a dependent variable. In those calculations

we restricted ourselves to individuals who worked for 6 months, and used the

negative binomial procedure described by Hausman, Griliches and Hall (HGH).'5



                                  Insert Table 6 about here


    Whether days or occasions are used as a measure of absenteeism we find that

high school graduation has a negative effect on absenteeism. This effect is
statistically significant regardless of the estimation procedure used. On the other

hand education has a positive, albeit statistically insignificant, effect on
absenteeism. Thus, it seems unlikely that high school graduates learned in
secondary school the traits that gave them low rates of absenteeism. Instead, the

same unobserved characteristics that lead to successful completion of high school

seem to lead to low rates of absenteeism.


15. The implicit assumptions made by using the negative binomial model are that incidents of
    absenteeism (several consecutive days absent are recorded as one incident) are generated from a
   binomial distribution which, because of the large number of observations for each individual, can
   be approximated by a Poisson arrival process; and that the X parameter which describes the
   Poisson process has a gamma distribution across the population. HGH describe a maximum
   likelihood procedure to compute the effect of various independent variables on A. (Because the
   probability of being absent is a function of whether the worker was absent on the previous day.
   the independence assumption required by the binomial distribution is inappropriate for modeling
   the percentage of days absent. It seems more reasonable to expect incidents of absenteeism to
   be independently distributed.)
                                          -2]-

 2.3 Output Per Hour

    The final indicator of performance explored was the logarithm of normalized

 output per hour during the worker's first month at the plant. As previously noted,

 newly hired workers are randomly assigned to jobs           and   paid piece-rate. We
 assume that output per hour is a linear function of observed characterisdcs.

including the match term described above.



                               Insert Table 7 about here


    From Table 7 we see that matching better educated people, or high schoor

graduates, to more complex jobs (the match term) has neither a statistically, nor

economically, significant effort on output. This finding suggests that the pecuniary

reward to education for the workers in the sample is not due to skills learned in
school that help those workers learn complex production tasks.

    The direct effect of education on output is marginally significant, but does not

seem large enough to explain the correlation between education and wages. In
Table 2 we computed the effect of education on the logarithm of their real wages

on their previous job for workers in Plant A. Our best estimate was that each year

of secondary education had a 4-5% effect on the pay of the workers in our sample.

On the other hand, restricting the sample to workers in that plant we find that each

year of education has only a I .3% effect on the output of workers in that plant.

This estimated effect is not statistically different from zero.
                                      - 22    -




   Figure   2 describes the distribution of jobs in our sample according to the
number of weeks required to learn each job.



                            Insert Figure 2 about here



3. EFFECTS ON WAGES


   A]though one shou]d be extremely cautious about generalizing the results in
Section 2 beyond our sample of semi-skil]ed production workers, the PSID data

provides, evidence of the impact of a low quit propensity on the wage premium

received by high school graduates.

   There is considerable evidence that during business slumps firms hoard workers:

pay wages above the value of the product of the workers. Implicit contract theory

maintains that these high levels of wages and employment are consequences of

optimal risk sharing between firms and workers. Consequently during business

slumps we would expect firms to benefit from (or be hurt less by) quits and unpaid

absences. Consequently, to obtain quantitative estimates of the effect of the low

quit propensity and low absenteeism of high school graduates on their wages, we

interacted county unemployment rates with high school graduation while estimiling

a wage equation for privately employed males in the PSID data set between 1968

and 1982. We included education, education squared, and education cubed as

independent variables to reduce the possible role of high school graduation in

approximating a precluded degree of curvature in the relationship between wages
                                               -23-


 and education.

     As a further check on possible non-linearities generating these results we

 replaced the dummy variable for high school graduation first with, a dummy

variable for completion of 11tl grade and then with a dummy variable for
completion of 33th grade.

    Neither of these dummy variables were statistically significant. Thus the
results do not seem due to the dummy variable for completion of high school

capturing some non-linearities in the relationship between calculation and wages.16



                                  Insert Table 8 about here


    As can be seen in Table 8, if the county unemployment rate is zero, graduation

from high school has roughly 4.4 times as great an effect on wages as does
completion of 11th grade. While, if the county unemployment rate is over 15%,

the wage premium received bv high school graduates disappears. At the mean

county unemployment rate, completion of i 2th grade has roughly four times the
effect on wages as does completion of I 1th grade.

   This pro-cyclical behavior of the wage premium for completion of high school is

especially surprising given the occupational distributions of high school dropouts


16. Nominal wages were used as a dependent variable with the natural logarithm of the C.P.I. as an
    independent variable to avoid restricting the coefficient of the in C.P.1. to I.
                                              -24-


and high school graduates. High school dropouts are over represented among blue

collar workers: 54% of the blue collar workers in the PSID sample were high school

dropouts, while only 10% of the white collar workers were high school dropouts.

Raisian finds that the wages of blue collar workers relative to those of white collar

workers are procyclical.17 Hence the different occupations chosen by high school

graduates and high school dropouts would lead the wage premium for high school

graduation to behave counter-cyclically.18

3.1 Corroborative Evidence


    If our analysis were wrong and the effect of high school graduation on earning
had nothing to do with the lower quite propensities of high school graduates. then

previous quits would have the same effect on the wages of high school graduates as

on the wages of high school dropouts. Previous quits have no discernable effect on

the wages of high school dropouts but a large negative effect on the wages of high

school graduates.



                                  Insert Table 9 about here



17. We used the same classification scheme as Raisian in determining which 2 digit occupations
    were blue collar and which were white collar.
18. Note that the formu]ation we have chosen has the form In H' — X,$ + ,,, where ,u,N(O,or).
    Coleman has argued against assuming that m is distributed i.i.d. if one wishes to study cyclical
   effects. He argues persuasively that a more reasonable model is In WXh fl+m, +11.
   Consequently, the i" statistics for our OLS estimates of the cyclical variables should be viewed
   with caution. (Most of the variance in county unemployment rates are due to cross sectional
   rather than cyclical effects).
                                        -25-


   The evidence in Table 9 suggests that high school graduation is used as a
screen for jobs in which a low quit propensity is highly valued. However.
graduation from high school may be only necessary, but not sufficient for obtaining

those jobs. In particular among experienced workers a low realized quit rate may
                                                                       -
also be required.

   The PSID also provides corroborative evidence that the discontinuous increase

in earnings associated with graduation from high school is not due to a
discontinuous increase in the cognitive skills of high school graduates.

   In 1976 and 1978 respondents to the PSID were asked the training required for

an average worker to learn their job. Better educated individuals reported having

jobs requiring more training. However, after correcting for the continuous effect of

education, we did not find that high school graduates were matched with jobs

requiring more training. Since we previously found a large effect of high school

graduation on quit propensities and quit rates, it would appear that the major
determinant of whether individuals take jobs requiring significant amounts of
training is how well they benefit from training, not their quit propensities (this

interpretation is consistent with training being largely the acquisition of general,
not firm specific, human capital).



                             Insert Table 10 about here


   Thus the discontinuous increase in earnings associated with high school
                                        - 26   -




graduation   does not seem to be due to the acquisition of skills that are
complementary with on-the-job training.

    On the other hand, the evidence presented in Table 10 suggests that the
earnings gains associated with education are due, in part, to better educated
individuals having attributes that enhance their benefit from training.

    Thus far we have not directly addressed the question of whether the evidence

we have presented supports a sorting rather than human capita] theoretic
explanation for the higher earnings of high school graduates. One of the reasons

that it is so difficult to distinguish between the two explanations is that both could

be based on unobserved (to the econometrician) attributes of individuals. In a pure

sorting model, although no ]earning occurs during the relevant course of schooling.

the same unobserved attributes that affect productivity also affect the private
return to schooling. In a human capital model, unobserved attributes could

indirectly affect productivity and affect the private return to schooling by affecting

the efficiency with which the individual learns. In that version of human capital

theory, some individuals go to school longer than others because they learn more in

school.

   A low rate of absenteeism and a low quit propensity could directly be affecting

productivity (as in a sorting model). Or they could be correlated with the
efficiency with which an individual learns (as in a human capital model).

   However, if high school graduates went to school longer than dropouts because

they learn more rapidly, and effectiveness of learning in school and learning on the
                                           - 27 -




 job are positively correlated, then we would expect the high school graduates to

 have a comparative advantage at jobs requiring more training: and, in the PSID. to

 have jobs requiring more training.

       As we've seen, high school graduates do not have a comparative advantage on

 production jobs and they do not report having jobs requiring more training. Thus,

 it seems unlikely that the discontinuity in earnings associated with graduation from

 high school is due to a discontinuous increase in the learning acquired by the high

school graduates, as would be implied by human capital theory.


4. SAMPLE SELECTION BIAS


    As we discussed above, we have strong reasons for believing that sample
selection bias is not a serious probJem for our analysis. However, to the extent

sample selection is a problem our results are stronger than would be indicated from

the estimated coefficients and "z" statistics.

    Since only a trivial number of applicants were rejected for reasons other than

low scores on the dexterity test, we shall restrict the discussion in this section to the

biases introduced from the application decision of workers.

   Consider an unobserved application equation. A worker applies for a job with
this firm if and only if

(iO)

where €1 includes unobserved characteristics of a worker. Having applied and been

aer-epted at this job, the worker subsequently quits if and only if
                                            - 28 -



(ii)                                    >      Ck'y   > 1)

and    is absent if and on]y if

(13)                               X,/3, > €3LK7 >

      Because   better educated workers had higher wages on their previous jobs, and

generally have higher reservation wages when unemployed, we would expect the

coefficients on education and high school graduation in (10) to be negative. Since

(10) is not estimated.            and education are negatively correlated.   It seems

reasonable to expect that, at least for employed applicants, e is positively
correlated with e7 and ei: A worker who was easily induced to leave his previous

job is likely to be easily induced to leave his current job, and a low level of
commitment to his job might also be expected to lead to a higher than expected

probability of being absent. Therefore, we expect c, and (3 to be negatively
correlated with education in equations (13) and (14). Hence, for our sample there

is an upward bias on the estimated coefficients on education and H.S. graduation in

the quit and absenteeism equations. resulting in an underestimate of the magnitude

of the negative correlation between H.S. graduation and the propensity to be
absent or to quit. (Because most firms pay higher wages to better educated
workers, they are not subject to this form of sample selection bias. In the market

equilibrium it is the unbiased correlation between education and performance that

determines the rate of return to education.)
                                         - 29   -




5. REVIEW OF RESULTS


    Recent large sample studies have shown returns to education in the region of
5%. We find a similar rate of return for the pay on their previous job for workers

in our two samples. A large component of this rate of return is the discontinuous
increase in wages associated with high schoo] graduation.

    Presumably the higher earnings of high school graduates are due to their higher

productivity relative to high school dropouts. We investigated four components of

productivity: output per hour, comparative advantage on more comp]ex task.
propensity to quit. and propensity to be absent.

    High school graduation appeared to be uncorrelated with output per hour, and

high school graduates did not appear to have a comparative advantage on more

complex jobs. On the other hand, high school graduates were significantly less

likely to quit or to be absent. The wage premium received by high school
graduates in the PSID sample is pro-cyclical. We estimated that when the county

unemployment rate reaches 15% this wage premium vanishes. Consequently, if a

low quit propensity and a low rate of absenteeism are more valuable during booms

than slumps, these data suggest that a considerable portion of the estimated return

to high school graduation is due to unobserved traits that are associated with that

credential.

   We also found that previous quits have a strong adverse effect on the earnings

of high school graduates, but not on the earnings of high school dropouts. This

difference in the impact of quits cii earnings is consistent with the high earnings of
                                        - 30   -




high school graduates being due to their lower quit propensities.

   Finally, we found that high school graduates were not assigned to jobs requiring

more training than would be expected from a continuous relationship between

education and required training. If the same skills that enable individuals to learn

effectively in school also improve their learning ability on the job (as is indicated

by better educated workers having jobs that do require more training), these data

suggest that graduation from high school is not associated with more efficient

acquisition of human capital.

   Consequently, the discontinuous increase in earnings associated with graduation

from high school seems due to unobserved attributes that are negatively correlated

with absenteeism and quit propensity, and are positively correlated with the
probability of the individual graduating high school.
                                REFERENCES


Allen, Steven. "An Empirical Model of Work Attendance.' Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 63, No. 1 (February 1981): 77-87.

Allen, Steven. "How Much Does Absenteeism Cost," Journal of Human
      Resources, 43 (Summer 1983): 379-393.

Bloom, David and Mark Killingsworth. "Correcting for Truncation Bias Caused by
      a Latent Truncation Variable, NBER Technical Working Paper No. 38,
      1984.

Coleman, Thomas. "Cyclical Variations in Individual Wages and Employment"
      unpublished mimeo, University of Chicago, 1984.

Fein, Mitchell. "Job Enrichment Does Not Work," Atlanta Economic Review, 55,
       (November-December 1975).

Hackman. Richard. "On the Coming Demise of Job Enrichment," Department of
      Administrative Sciences, Yale University, Technical Report, No. 9,
      December 1974.

Hausman, Jerry and Bronwyn Hal] and Zvi Griliches. "Econometrics Models for
     Count Data with an Application to the Patents - R&D Relationship,"
     Economerica, 52 (July 1984): 909-938.

Heckman, James. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error," Econometrica,
     47, (1979); 73-92.

Heckman, James. "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation.
      Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator
      for Such Models," Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 5, (1976);
      47 5-492.

Layard, R. and G. Psacharapoulos. "The Screening Hypothesis and Returns to
      Education," Journal of Political Economy, 82, (September/October 1954):
      985-998.

Liu, Pak-Wai and Yue-Chim Wong. "Educational Screening by Certificates: An
      Empirical Test," Economic inquiry, 20, (January 1982); 72-83.

Medoff, James and Katherine Abrahams. "Experience Performance and Earnings,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95, No. 4 (December 1980): 703-736.
Mincer. Jacob and Boyan Jovanovic. °Labor Mobility and Wages,' Studies in
     Labor Markets, Sherwin Rosen, editor, University of Chicago Press, 198],
      pp. 21-64.

Mincer, Jacob. "Family Migration Decisions," Journal of Political Economy, 86,
     No. 5, (October 1978): 749-774.

Mirves, P. H. and F. E. Lawler. "Measuring the Financial Impact of Employee
      Attitudes," Journal of Applied Psychology, 62, (1977): 1-8.

Muthén, B. and K. G. Jöreskog. "Selectivity Problems in Quasi-experimental
      Data," unpublished mimeo.

Nicholson, N. and C. A. Brown and J. K. Chadwick-Jones. "Absence from Work
      and Job Satisfaction." Journal of Applied Psychology, 61, (December 1976)
      pp. 728-737.

Olsen, Lawrence, Halbert White, and H. M. Shefrin. "Optima! Investment in
      Schooling When Incomes are Risky," Journal of Political Economy, 87,
      (June 1979): 522-539.

Psacharapoulos, George. "Returns to Education: An Updated international
      Comparison," Comparative Education, 17, 1981: 321-341.

Riley, John. "Testing the Educational Screening Hypothesis" Journal of Political
       Economy. 87, No 5. Part 2 (October 1979) 5227-5252.

Salop, Steven and Joanne Salop. "Self Selection and Turnover in the Labor
      Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, No. 4 (November 1976):
      629-49.

Taylor, Daniel. "Absence from Work Among Full-Time Employees," Monthlj
      Labor Review, 104, (March 1981): 68-70.

Viscusi, Kip. "Sex Differences in Workers Quitting," Review of Economics and
      Statistics, 62, No. 3 (August 1980) pp. 388-398.

White, Hal.     "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Misspecified Models,"
      Econometrica,   50,   1982: 1-25.

Wolpin. Kenneth. "Education and Screening "American Economic Review," 67,
       (December 1977); 949-58.
                            TABLE 1

              Mean Value of the Relevant Variable


                                  Plant A    Plant B      Plant C

9'c White                              .72       .76         NA

% Black                                .24       .20         NA

Age                                   24.6      25.3         26.7

Education                             12.1      12.2         11.9

9 Employed at time of
    application (1 if employed,
    0 otherwise)                       .64       .29          .38

% Male                                 .57       .19          .41

    Married                            .43       .48          .42

Previous work
   experience (in years)              3.54      NA           NA

Weeks to learn job                     7.5       5.1         11.7

Score on screws test                  22.6      21.3         24.0

Score on pins test                    22.4      23.5         NA

1st month output                       111          63        105

% days absent                         2.96       2.3          3.0

%   occasions absent                   1.2          1.1      1.12


Quit rate in first
    six months on job                 9.8%    18.2%        12.3%
                                                    TABLE 2
                                       LN HOURLY EARNINGS IN 1979
                            Current Population Survey Sample Versus Weiss Sample
                                          ('t statistics in parentheses)
                                                     cPS                cPS
                                                    With Size           With
                                                     of Firm'       Unionization"              Plant A
                   Non-White                             -.070                 -.073              -.027
                                                       (-7.14)               (-5.24)            (-1.52)
                   Female                                -.343                  •.262             -.239
                                                      (-57.44)              (-2] .86)          (-14.17)
                   Education                              .047                  .045               .185
                                                        (5.73)                (3.46)             (2.48)
                   (Education/I o,)2                      .084                     .035           -.570
                                                        (2.98)                    (.69)         (-2,03)
                   Tenure                                 .021                     .012            .027
                                                       00.60)                 (4.42)             (.707)
                   (Tenure/b)2                           -.043                 -.029              -.120
                                                      (-12.73)               (-6.26)            (-1.70)
                   Age-Educ.-6                            .022                     .014            .049
                                                       (11.96)                (4.88)             (4.03)
                   ((Age-Educ.-6)/ 0)2                   -.033                 -.042              -0.60
                                                      (-15.84)               (-6.73)            (-5.45)
                   Educ, Times Tenure                     .038                     .062          .0006
                                                        (2.98)                (5.25)              (.19)
                   Educ. Times (Age-Educ.-6)             -.069                    -.039           -.002
                                                       (-6.3)                (-389)              (2.30)
                   Married Dummy                           yes                         yes          yes

                   Number of Observations               18.55]               18,551               1,251
                                                          .436                    .324            1207



(The smaller R2 in column 3 compared with columns I and 2 is due, in part. to less variance in earnings
within the Weiss sample.)
Evaluating the effect ol additional year of education, tenure and experience at the mean values in each sample
for education, tenure and experience:

                              & In (wage)
                                                                 .064      .041         .044
                                ô ethic.
                              8 In (wage)
                                                                 .016      .012         .031
                                8 tenure                                           ,
                                   8 In (wage)
                                                                .0056   .0040           .061
                              & experience (proxy)

• CPS data also has dummy variables for SMSA, region, occupation, industry, and either firm size or union
  membership. whether or not the worker was employed pan-time, and unionization of industry.
  Weiss data is from the only plant in this study for which wage data on the previous job is available. The
  dependent variable is the logarithm of the wge their most recent job divi4ed by the mean wage in the
                                                   most recent previous pay
  economy at the time they held that job, or In average     .                    on their present job the lilt
                                                        pay in U.S. at that date
  time wages of all the workers of all the workers are approximately identical.
                                                 TABLE3A

    PROBABILITY OF QUITTING WITHIN FIRST SIX MONTHS ON THE JOB
          MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION PROCEDURE

                                          Estimated                      Standard Errors
                                         Coefficient                  ('C statistics below) *
                                             or                Gradient        Hessian       Whit&s
    Indenendent Varjable**                  Value              Method          Method        Method
6                                                    .26               2.04               .61              .28
                                                                     (-.13)            (-.42)           (-.91)
   (effect of being female                        -6.81                42.3              10.6             4.19
on anticipated work-life)                                            (-.16)            (-.63)          (-1.62)
H. S. Graduate                                    -.342               .140              .135              .136
                                                                   (-2.44)           (-2.54)           (-2.61)
College Graduate                                  -.242                .367             .397              .444
                                                                     (-.66)           (-.62)            (-.s9)
Education                                           -.07               .171             .057              .035
                                                                     (-.44)           (-.67)            (-.76)
g(a,c5,30F) x education                            .015                .143             .044              .029
                                                                      (.11)            (.34)             (.53)
Married                                           -.091               .078              .077              .077
                                                                   (—1.16)           (—1.18)           (—1.17)

g(a.&$0F) X employed                              -.098               .774              .231              .107
at application                                                      (-.13)            (-.43)            (-.92)
Number of observations                            2146
Log Likelihood                                 -741.99



Other independent variables included scores on each half of the dexterity test,
race-location interactions, location effects, age and an intercept term. We used
three different methods for calculating the standard errors because there is no
consensus as to which is the correct technique. If the model is correctly specified,
the three methods give the same asymptotic estimates. The estimates we obtain
are sufficiently similar to provide some confidence that the model is not grossly
misspecified. Computational costs precluded performirg the model specification
test suggested by White.



*    We are using the term t' statistic loosely, to refer to the estimated coefficient divided by the standard
     error.
                                            TABLE 3B
                                 PROBABILITY OF QUITTING
                                 WITHIN FIRST SEX MONTHS*

                                                                    Quit Probability
                                                                     from a I unit
                                                                     change in the
            Independent                                         Variable Evaluated at
                                      cQ.cmcisuL C.1ninic. _.w.LEr2babi1ity of
                                                                  10%           20%
Intercept                                     -.922    -1.54
H.S. Graduate                                 -.341    -2.54     -.059          -.096
College Graduate                              -.280     -.72     -.049          -.078
Education                                     -.]06    -1.32     -.019          -.030
Married                                       -.097    -1.26     -.017         -.027
h(a,ô,yF) x education                        .0055      1.45    .00097         .0015
h(a,6.-yF)x age                             -00029      -.32 -.000052       -.000083
h(a,&-yF)x male                              .0012       .16    .00022        .00034
h (a,ô,F) x white x south                     .068     4.58        .012         .019
h (a,ô,F) x south                            -.036     -2.34    -.0062        -.0099
h (a,ó,yE) x white x midwest                 .0061     1.00      .0011         .0017
h (a,o,*yF) x employed at                   -.0023     -4.95    -.0040        -.0064
 application
Ii (a.6,-1F) X pins section                 .00020      .34    .000035       .000056
of dexterity test
Ii (a,5,F) X screws section                 .00094     1.94     .00016        .00026
of dexterity test
Number of Observations                       2146
-y set equal to -.25, 5 set equal to .05.
.124 of observations had Q = 1; the mean of h (a,5,'-F) is 16.12




•   Estimated using Hessian method.
                                               TABLE 4

                QUITS PER YEAR FOR MALE PRIVATE SECTOR
                    EMPLOYEES IN PSID SAMPLE 1968.82*
                                   ("t" statistics in parentheses)

                         Independent
                          Varjable*                                          Coefficient

                H.S. graduate                                                      -.030
                                                                                 (-3.58)
                Education                                                          -.024
                                                                                 (-2.26)
                Education Squared                                                  .0030
                                                                                  (2.53)
                Education Cubed                                                 -.ooo I
                                                                                 (-2.76)
                Ln(Mean Experience                                                 -.025
                while in sample)                                                 (-3.67)
               New Entrant                                                          .014
                                                                                  (1.62)
               Non-white                                                           -.030
                                                                                 (-5.05)
               Age                                                                -.0023
                                                                                 (-5.30)
               Mean Cty Unemp. minus                                               -.003
               Mean Nat. Unemp                                                   (-1.79)
               Number of Observations                                              3781
                                                                                      .16
               Mean Quits per year                                                  .092




cia @bservitlon wis 1qhted by the squire root of the nslber of years the Individual was In the simple-
Other Independent variables were an Intercept term, end 8 locational dany variebles.
                                                    TABLE 5

                               DAYS ABSENT AS A PERCENTAGE
                                    OF DAYS WORKED *

                                     Tobit Estimation Procedures **
                                       (z statistics in parentheses)

                                  Independent Variable                   Coefficient

                                Intercept                                         7.38
                                                                                (2.54)
                                Male                                              .398
                                                                                (-.9 5)

                                Age                                              -.143
                                                                               (-5.89)
                                Education                                          .133
                                                                                  (.58)
                                H.S. Graduate                                    -2.35
                                                                               (-4.04)
                                College Graduate                                 -1.34
                                                                                (-.69)
                                Married                                          -.046
                                                                                 (.13)
                                Job Complexity                                    -.12
                                                                                (-.45)
                                Match                                              -.21
                                                                               (-i.io)
                                Employed at Application                          -1.23
                                                                               (-3.56)
                                Number of Observations                          1890
                                Log Likelihood                                -4781.2




•    The data for Tables 6 and 7 come from at] locations of the firm, rather than the two included in the quit
     equations.                        -



    Each observation was weighted by the square rt of the number of days worked. Dummy variables for the
    locations of the plants, the scores on the screws section of the dexterity test and race-location interactions at
    the two plants at which we had race data were also included as independent variable,
                                                   TABLE 6

                             OCCASIONS ABSENT DURING THE
                              FIRST SIX MONTH ON THE JOB

                                          Negative Binomial Model
                                     (z    statistics in parentheses) *

                               Independent Variable **                Coefficient

                              Intercept                                        2.70
                                                                             (5.68)
                              Ma]e                                              -.11
                                                                           (-2.10)
                              Age                                            -.036
                                                                           (-9.20)
                              Education                                       4,43
                                                                            (1.43)
                              H.S. Graduate                                  -.239
                                                                           (-2.59)
                              College Graduate                                -.028
                                                                             (-.11)
                              Married                                        .0085
                                                                              (.18)
                              Match                                            .011
                                                                              (.35)
                              Job Complexity                                -.0011
                                                                           (-.027)
                              Employed at Application                         -.14
                                                                           (-2.72)
                              Number of Observations                          1565
                              Log Likelihood                               1333.5




*
    Other independent variables were location, and score on the screws section of the dexterity test, and race-
    location interactions for the two plants at which race data was available.
    Standard errors were calculated using the Hessian method.
                                                   TABLE 7

                          NORMALIZED FIRST MONTH OUTPUT
                                Estimated by Ordinary Least Squares
                                    (ut" statistics in parentheses)

            Independent Variables*                 Coefficient         Coefficient         Coefficient

          Intercept                                        67.36              69.05                71.63
                                                          (5.80)              (6.24)              (7.14)
          Male                                                8.91              8.87                 8.87
                                                          (5.81)              (5.80)              (5.80)
          Age                                                 -.11               -.11                -.11
                                                         (—1.15)             (—1.16)             (-1.16)
          Education                                         1.36                 1.34               1.33
                                                          (1.63)              (1.61)              (1.59)
          H.S. Graduate                                     4.44                 2.54                -.21
                                                           (.64)               (.45)              (-.08)
          Match                                              .49                                     .03
                                                           (.48)                                   (.04)
          Job Complex x H.S. grad.                         -2.64               -1.55
                                                          (-.73)              (-.55)
          College Graduate                                -12.96              -13.12              -13.03
                                                         (-2.09)             (-2.11)             (-2.10)
          Married                                             4.01              4.02                4.01
                                                          (2.98)              (2.98)              (2.98)
          Score on                                           .22                 .22                     .21
          Dexterity Test                                  (1.52)              (1.53)              (i .53)
          Job Complexity**                                  7.82                6.98                5.63
                                                          (2.45)              (2.60)              (5.26)
          Employed at Application                             1.48               1.45                1.48
                                                          (1.08)              (1.06)              (1.08)
          Number of Observations                            1859                1859                1959

          Multiple R-Square                                   .382              .382                .382



•   Other independent variables were location dummies.
-. The statistically significant coefficients for job complexity suggest that the industrial engineers
    overestimate the difficulty of performing complex jobs.
                                        TABLE 8
               LN WAGES OF MALE PRIVATE SECTOR EMPLOYEES IN PSID
                                  SAMPLE 1968-82
                             (t" statistics in parenthesis)
        Indenendent Varjable                          Estimated Coefficient
        Education                                                       .087
                                                                       (3.98)
        Education squared                                              -.007
                                                                       (2.83)
        Education cubed                                                .00029
                                                                       (3.40)
        Reported Experience                                             .03
                                                                      (16.22)
        Reported Experience squared                                   -.00041
                                                                      (13.37)
       Age                                                            -.0054
                                                                      (-4.06)
       Disabled                                                        -.083
                                                                      (-6.62)
       Married                                                         .065
                                                                      (6.27)
       Time Trend                                                      .013
                                                                      (1.34)
       Race — White                                                    -.14
                                                                     (-17.76)
       Its. Graduate                                                   .125
                                                                      (6.34)
       H.S. Graduate times                                            -.0084
       county unemployment rate                                      (-3.86)
       College Graduate                                               .0082
                                                                      (.2 9)
       Ln of C.P.1.                                                    1.03
                                                                      (7.51)
       Mean Cty Unemp. minus                                          .0087
       Mean Nat. Unemp.                                               (2.92)
       Number of observations                                         9942




• Other independent variables were 8 location dummy variables and an intercept term.
  Note the estimated cocificient here is consistent with Robert Hall's observation that areas with high
  unemployment rates have higher than average wages.
                                                 TABLE 9

         LN WAGES OF MALE PRIVATE SECTOR EMPLOYEES IN PSID
                                            SAMPLE 1968-82
                                      ("C statistics in parenthesis)

                       Independent
                        Variables*                                       Coefficient

        Education                                                            .083
                                                                            (4.93)

        Education squared                                                  -.0070
                                                                           (-3.7 8)

        Education     cubed                                                .0003
                                                                           (5.16)
        H.S. graduation                                                     .119
                                                                           (6.04)
        H.S. x county unemployment rate                                    -.0088
                                                                           (-3.62)

        Quits per year observed                                             •.oi 3
                                                                           (-.49)
        H.S. graduate     times                                            -.080
        Number Quits per year in sample                                   (-2.60)

        Number of observations                                             13,604




*   Other independent variables included an intercept term , the county and national unemployment rates. In
    C.P.I., marital status, race, union membership, disabled, pan time, and a dummy variable for IsI year on
    the job.
                                              TABLE 10

          YEARS OF TRAINING REQUIRED FOR JOB IN 1976-1978
                          PSID SAMPLE,
                                  ("t" statistics in parentheses)

            Independent Variablet                               Coefficient

                    Intercept                                      -2.46
                                                                  (-5.36)
                   Education                                        .310
                                                                   (2.13)
                 (Education)2                                      -0.24
                                                                  (-1.46)
                 (Education)3                                     .00119
                                                                  (2.10)

              Work Experience                                      .oss
                                                                  (4.63)

            (Work     Experience)2                                -.ooio
                                                                  (-5.05)

                      Age                                          .033
                                                                  (3.80)
            Race       Non-white                                   -.87
                                                                 (-16.29)
          High School Graduate                                     -.02
                                                                  (-.23)
             College Graduate                                      -.37
                                                                 (-.197)
                   Married                                          .12
                                                                  (1.69)
                   Disabled                                       .012
                                                                  (.88)
                                                                  .1638

        Numbers of observations                                   9941




The other independent variables were 8 dummy variables for different areas of the country.
>-
I—
>
I-             J0B2
C-)

0
0
0
0
U                         PROMOTION
>                         STANDARD
U     JOBI
U)
C
0


             EXPERIENCE




             FIGURE 1
      25



      20

(I)
0
u-I5
0
LU
(9
C
I-                     23.2
2 l0
0
a:
U
3-


      5



      0
           1,2   3,4   5,6    7,8 9-10 11-12 13-14 15-16   17+

                  WEEKS REQUIRED TO LEARN THE JOB

                              FIGURE 2
                                         Appendix A


    In evaluating the cost of absenteeism to firms, the nature of the production

process is critical. Traditional economic analyses of absenteeism assume a worke(s

marginal product is equal to his wage and the cost of absenteeism is the wage of

the worker. In this section we consider the opposite polar case where the
production process requires k      workers   to operate. If more than k      workers   are

present, the extra workers are redundant, they do not increase output. If fewer
than Ic workers appear, output is zero. To simplify the notation, we assume output

is linear in the number of workers, and normalize the value of output to be equal to

k. The number of workers hired is denoted by n, the wage of each worker by w,

the probability that a worker appears for work by p. and the expected profit of a
firm employing n workers by ,r&1). We let P(S k)             denote   the probability that

at least k workers are present when n workers are hired. Finally, we assume that

workers are not paid if they are absent (this assumption is made so that we can

focus on the indirect costs of absenteeism, rather than the direct cost of paying for

an absent worker).

                           ir(n)     k   P(S k)        pw.             -

The expected marginal product of the n+1 worker is


                                           k) —P(S k)].

The net expected value of the marginal worker is
                                             A-2



   t(n+1) — 2r(n) — kP(s1 ) k) — (n+i)pw —                        s k) + npw,
                                           kP(S,
                    —
                        p/Zr (S,1 )k—i)+ (i—p)1ZP(S             k) —   kP(S ?k) —pw,
                                      k—i) —P(S k)] —pw,
 (Al)               —             —   k—I)   —
                        p[cP(S
 The expected value of the marginal worker is the probability that the worker is

decisive (enables the plant to operate) times the value of the production process,
minus that worker's expected cost to the firm.

    A firm increases the number of workers it employs so long as (Al) is positive; it

chooses the smallest n such that


(A2)          p/c
                    (j)j p(l—p)'" —pw C 0, wherej — k —1
    if we consider the case where workers are paid even if they are absent, the

usual policy in U.S. firms for routine levels of absenteeism, (Al) is rewritten as

                                pk   F(S   —   k — i)   —   w


   and (A2) as


                           -     n
                         pk .        .. p3(i—p) '—w<O
                               "n—I/i

   Below, we present an example showing the effect of changes in (I-p), the
probability of a worker being absent, on the profitability of the firm. As that
example illustrates, even if firms do not pay workers when they are absent, a given

change in the probability of a worker being present can have a more than
                                       A-3



proportional effect on the equilibrium wage of the worker. Consequently traits that

are correlated with low absenteeism rates may be significantly rewarded in the
labor market.

   To illustrate the effect of absenteeism on the equilibrium value of a worker to

the firm let us consider a production process which requires 20 workers to operate,

generates $10,000 of income per day if it operates, and has a fixed cost of $5,000

per day whether it operates or not. We shall assume workers are not paid if they

are absent. In equilibrium, if the probability of a worker being absent is known by

all employers, firms compete for workers so that wages are bid up to the level

where each production process earns zero profits, and all the workers at a given

plant have the same absenteeism rate, we find the following relationship between

absenteeism and wages:
                                         A -4




                                   Profit Maximizing
                  Probability of      Number of        Equilibrium
                  Being Absent        Employees        Daily Wage
                       .20                30           $ 197.66
                       .19                30              198.42
                       .18                29              199.51
                       .17                29              200.43
                       .16                28             201.46
                       .15                28             202.64
                       .14                27             203.47
                       .13                27             205.07
                       .12               27              205.56
                       .11               26              207.70
                       .10               26              208.60
                       .09               25              210.53
                       .08               25              212.05
                       .07               24              213.59
                       .06               24              216.02
                       .05               23              217,02
                       .04               23              220.87
                      .03                23              222.08
                      .02                22              227.61
                      .01                21              231.60
                      .00                20              250.00



Suggesting that even if employees are not paid when they are absent, in
competitive markets employers would pay higher wages to workers with lower
probabilities of being absent.
                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY




Bhattacharya, Sudipto, Nondissipative Signals and Dividend Policy, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 95, (August 1980): 1-24.


Dasgupta, Partha and Maskin, Eric, "The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontinuous
       Games, 1: Theory," March 1982, mimeo, a.


Dasgupta, Partha and Maskin. Eric, "The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontinuous
       Games. 2: Applications," June 1982, mimeo, b.


Fudenberg, Drew' and Tirole, Jean, "Sequential Bargaining with Incomplete Information,"
       Review of Economic Studies, 50, (April 1983): 221-248.


Guasch, J. Luis and Weiss, Andrew. "Wages as Sorting Mechanisms in Markets With
       Asymmetric Information," Review of Economic Studies, 47, (July 198W: 653-664.


______________ "An Equilibrium Analysis of Wage-Productivity Gaps," Review of
       Economic Studies, 49, (October 1982): 485-497.


Kreps, David; Milgrom. Paul; Roberts, John; and Wilson, Robert; "Rational Cooperation in
       the Finitely Repeated Prisoners Dilemma," Journal of Economic Theory, 27,
       (August 1982): 245-252.


Kreps, David and Wilson, Robert, "Reputation and Imperfect Information," Journal of
       Economic Theory, 27, (August 1982): 253-279(a).


                 "Sequential Equilibrium," Econometrica, 50, (July 1982): 863-894(b).


Milgrom, Paul and Roberts, John, "Limit Pricing and Entry Under Incomplete
       Information: An Economic Analysis," Econometrica, 50, (March 1982): 443-
       459(a).
                                             8-2




                  'Predation Reputation and Entry Deterrence,' Journal of Economic
         Theory, 27, (August 1982): 280-312(b).


 Myerson, Roger, 'Refinements on the Nash Equilibrium Concept,' international Journal of
       Game Theory, 7,, (1978): 73-80.


 Riley, John, 'Competitive Signaling,' Journal of Economic Theory, 10, (April 1975): 174-
        186.



                 'Informational Equilibria," Econometrica, 47, (March 1979): 33 1-360.


Rosenthal, Robert and Weiss, Andrew, 'Mixed Strategy Equilibrium in a Market with
        Asymmetric Information", Review of Economic Studies, 5, (April 1984): 333-342.


Rothschild, Michael and Stiglitz, Joseph E., 'Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
      Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Information,' Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 90. (November 1976): 225-243.


Rubinstein, Arid, 'Strong Perfect Equilibrium in Supergames,' international Journal of
       Game Theory,' 9, (1979): 1-12.


Selten, R., 'Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilibrium Points in Extensive
       Games,' International Journal of Game Theory, 4, (1975): 25-55.


Spence, A. Michael 'Job Market Signaling', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87, (August
       1973): 355-374.


Spence, A. Michael, 'Market Signaling: Information Transfer in Hiring and Related
       Processes,' Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass. 1974.
                                          B-3




Spence, A. Michael "Competition in Salaries and Prerequisites for Jobs" Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, 90, (February 1976): 51-74.


Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Theory of Screening, Education and Distribution of income," American
         Economic Review, 65, (June 1975): 283-300.


_______________ "Information   and Capital Markets', in Financial Economics, Essays in
       Honor of Paul Cootner, C. Cootner and W. Sharpe editors, Prentice Hall, 1982.


Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Weiss, Andrew, "Credit Rationing in Markets With Asymmetric
        Information." American Economic Review, 71, (June 1981): 393-410.


_______________ "Alternative    Approaches to Analyzing Markets with Asymmetric
       Information American Economic Review, March 1983, 73, 246-249.


Weiss, Andrew, "Education Test," Bell Laboratories Discussion Paper #101, 1977.


Weiss, Andrew, "A Sorting-ScumS-Learning Model of Education," Journal of Political
       Economy, 91, (June 1983): 420-442.


Wilson, Charles, "The Nature of Equilibrium in Markets With Adverse Selection" The Bell
       Journal of Economics, 11, Spring 1980, 108-130.


Wilson, Charles "A Model of insurance Markets with incomplete information," Journal of
        Economic Theory. 16, 167-207.


Yabushita, Shiro, "Theory of Screening and the Behavior of the Firm: A Comment,"
        American Economic Review, 73, (March 1983), 242-245.
