                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       BORROW CHEAP, BUY HIGH? THE DETERMINANTS OF LEVERAGE AND
                          PRICING IN BUYOUTS

                                            Ulf Axelson
                                           Tim Jenkinson
                                           Per Strömberg
                                         Michael S. Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 15952
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15952


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




Earlier versions of this paper were circulated under the title “Leverage and pricing in buyouts: An
empirical analysis.” We are very grateful to Steve Kaplan for sharing his data on 1980’s LBOs, and
to Joakim Bång, Ji-Woong Chung, and Reimo Juks for excellent research assistance. We would also
like to thank Viral Acharya, Malcolm Baker, Laura Bottazzi, Phil Canfield, Chris Collins, Marco DaRin,
Francois Derrien, Chris James, Steve Kaplan, Steven Ongena, Morten Sorensen, David Sraer, Ayako
Yasuda, as well as participants in numerous seminar presentations for valuable comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Ulf Axelson, Tim Jenkinson, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Borrow Cheap, Buy High? The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts
Ulf Axelson, Tim Jenkinson, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 15952
April 2010
JEL No. G32,G34

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper provides an empirical analysis of the financial structure of large buyouts. We collect detailed
information on the financing of 1157 worldwide private equity deals from 1980 to 2008. Buyout leverage
is cross-sectionally unrelated to the leverage of matched public firms, and is largely driven by factors
other than what explains leverage in public firms. In particular, the economy-wide cost of borrowing
is the main driver of both the quantity and the composition of debt in these buyouts. Credit conditions
also have a strong effect on prices paid in buyouts, even after controlling for prices of equivalent public
market companies. Finally, the use of high leverage in transactions negatively affects fund performance,
controlling for fund vintage and other relevant characteristics. The results are consistent with the view
that the availability of financing impacts booms and busts in the private equity market, and that agency
problems between private equity funds and their investors can affect buyout capital structures.


Ulf Axelson                                          Per Strömberg
London School of Economics                           Institute for Financial Research (SIFR)
Houghton Street                                      Drottninggatan 89
London WC2A 2AE                                      SE-113 60 Stockholm
u.axelson@lse.ac.uk                                  Sweden
                                                     and NBER
Tim Jenkinson                                        per.stromberg@sifr.org
University of Oxford
Said Business School                                 Michael S. Weisbach
Park End Street                                      Department of Finance
Oxford OX1 1HP                                       Fisher College of Business
UK                                                   Ohio State University
tim.jenkinson@sbs.ox.ac.uk                           2100 Neil Ave.
                                                     Columbus, OH 43210
                                                     and NBER
                                                     weisbach.2@osu.edu
                                                  I. Introduction


Understanding the financial structure of private equity firms is important not only in and of itself, but
also for understanding the role that capital structure plays for corporations in general. In 1989,
Michael Jensen famously predicted that the leveraged buyout would eclipse the public corporation and
become the dominant corporate form (see Jensen (1989)). His argument was based on the thesis that
the governance and financing of leveraged buyouts was superior in dealing with agency problems and
restructuring.      Together with active boards, high-powered management compensation, and
concentrated ownership, he considered leverage to be an essential part of this superior governance
model. Unlike public firms, Jensen argued, private equity funds optimized the capital structure in
companies they acquired, to take full advantage of the tax and incentive benefits of leverage (trading
these benefits off against the costs of financial distress).1
        As luck would have it, shortly after Michael Jensen’s prediction, buyouts virtually disappeared
in the wake of the collapse of the junk bond market in 1989. The dependence of buyout activity on
credit market conditions has been evident ever since. Although buyout activity was very low in the
early 1990’s, it recovered in the later part of the 1990’s and reached record volume during the credit
boom in 2006-2007, only to come to an abrupt end with the credit crisis in late 2007. This boom and
bust pattern underscores the importance of leverage to the private equity model. It is also consistent
with a somewhat different view of buyouts from Jensen’s: Instead of tailoring the capital structure
optimally to the needs of the company, LBOs could simply be relying on cheap debt to take levered
bets on firms. Indeed, critics of LBOs have argued that the high leverage used in buyouts could
jeopardize the health of otherwise sound firms.2
        In this paper, we empirically investigate the determinants of capital structure in LBOs,
highlighting the crucial importance of debt markets in providing capital for the financing of buyouts.
Our paper has two main goals: First, we want to understand how private equity funds determine the
capital structures in the leveraged buyout transactions they undertake. In particular, can buyout capital
structure be understood by the same models that explain capital structure of public corporations?




1
  This is the so-called “trade-off theory”. See Myers (2001).
2
  For example, Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, one of the proponents of the Alternative Investment Fund Manager Directive for the
regulation of hedge funds and private equity funds in the European Union, said that “in order to produce ever higher
returns, private equity firms have increased the risk of bankruptcy, which always generate public costs” (speech at the
Commision conference on hedge funds and private equity, Brussels February 26th 2009).

                                                          1
Second, what are the consequences of buyouts adopting alternative capital structures? Does the
financing of a buyout affect its pricing and eventual return?
        To study the factors affecting buyout capital structure, we construct a new dataset containing
detailed information about the financing of a large international sample of buyouts. This sample
contains 1157 buyouts, 694 of which were of North American firms and the remaining 463 of which
were of firms from 24 different countries outside North America, mainly in Western Europe. For each
buyout in our sample, we obtain detailed information about the financial structure of the transactions,
including details on the securities issued in various tranches of senior and subordinated debt, payback
schedules, and information on pricing. Unlike most previous work, our sample includes not only
buyouts of public companies, so called “public-to-private” transactions, but also the much more
frequently observed buyouts of private companies, such as family firms, corporate divisions, and
companies already owned by other private equity firms.3 Moreover, unlike most other studies, which
have focussed on the buyout wave in the 1980's, our sample considers international buyout transactions
from 1980 through 2008.4 This sample allows a much longer temporal analysis, including the
extraordinary credit market conditions prevailing in 2006/7. In terms of representativeness, our data
includes deals from a total of 176 distinct private equity sponsors and incorporates practically all the
major investors active in this market during our period of study. We do have a bias towards larger
buyouts because of our reliance on the syndicated loan market for capital structure information.
        We first provide a detailed description of the financial structure used in this sample of
leveraged buyouts. Not surprisingly, our sample firms were highly leveraged as a result of the buyout
transactions. Throughout most of the sample, the syndicated bank loan market provided the majority
of the debt to fund the transactions, and this debt is typically divided into a number of tranches. In
addition to the bank debt, there are often multiple layers of subordinated debt, in the form of
mezzanine debt, 2nd lien debt etc., as well as different classes of corporate bonds. The different
tranches and layers differ in seniority, maturity, repayment terms, and pricing. The level and the
structure of debt vary significantly over time. Leverage in the LBO deals is pro-cyclical, with high
leverage peaking in the late 1980’s, the late 1990’s, and 2006-2007, and dropping in the early 1990’s,
the early 2000’s and in 2008. Similar changes are found in the structure of the debt, with high leverage
periods being associated with longer repayment periods and a smaller Term Loan A tranche (the part

3
  An exception is Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990), who look at the operating performance of LBOs that subsequently
went public, including divisional buyouts as well as public-to-private transactions. Unlike their sample, we do not require
that our LBOs subsequently exited through a public offering.
4
  One exception is the contemporaneous study of Guo, Hotchkiss, and Song (forthcoming), which analyzes U.S. public-to-
private transactions from 1990 through 2006.

                                                            2
of the debt traditionally held by banks instead of other institutional investors). In contrast to the
procyclicality of buyout leverage, we find that a matched set of public firms if anything exhibits
countercyclical leverage.
        Theoretically, one approach to understanding buyout capital structures is to use the frameworks
that have been developed for public company capital structures. Since the decision-makers in a buyout
have much sharper incentives than managers of typical large publicly-traded firms, it is plausible that
capital structure theories that assume a value-maximizing principal, such as the trade-off theory,
should find more support if tested on a sample of buyouts than on public firms. Conversely, the strong
cyclicality of buyouts together with the organizational structure of private equity, suggest that buyout
financing could be driven by a different set of factors than those which affect capital structures of
public corporations. For example, it is plausible that private equity sponsors are uniquely positioned to
arbitrage debt markets versus equity markets due to superior access to debt financing, as suggested by
Ivashina and Kovner (2008) and Demiroglu and James (forthcoming). By borrowing cheap and
purchasing equity in firms, private equity sponsors can arbitrage the different conditions in the two
markets. Alternatively, private equity sponsors have agency problems of their own, which could
impact their choice of leverage in their portfolio companies. Axelson et al. (2009) present a model in
which because of the option-like structure of compensation given to private equity sponsors, they have
a tendency to overinvest, undertaking value-decreasing investments in addition to value-increasing
ones.   Making sponsors capital-constrained, so that they need to raise external debt in order to
complete deals, gives limited partners some protection against this tendency. However, when access to
debt is “easy”, private equity funds will nonetheless have an incentive to lever up as much as possible
and to overpay for deals. Consistent with this argument, Kaplan and Stein (1993) provide evidence
suggesting that the booming junk bond markets of the late 1980s led to an overheated private equity
market, with low private equity fund returns as a consequence.5
        To evaluate these potential explanations for leverage in buyout transactions, we examine the
determinants of cross-sectional variation in leverage across buyouts and the extent to which it is related
to cross-sectional patterns of public firms’ capital structures. We first test whether leverage in buyouts
is correlated with leverage in similar public firms. Very surprisingly (at least to us), there appears to be
absolutely no relation between leverage in buyout fims and leverage in comparable public firms,


5
  Ljungqvist, Richardson, and Wolfenzon (2007) find that buyout funds accelerate their investment flows when credit
market conditions loosen. They do not address how the leverage or pricing of individual deals vary with credit market
conditions, however. More recently, Gorbenko and Malenko (2009) present evidence that financial buyers bid more
aggressively in auctions for firms when credit conditions are stronger.

                                                         3
regardless of whether we measure leverage as the ratio of debt to enterprise value, debt as a multiple of
cash flow (as proxied by earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA)), or
interest coverage.
       There are two possible explanations for this lack of a relation. First, it could be that the choice
of leverage in buyouts is driven by completely different considerations than the choice of leverage in
similar public firms. Second, it is possible that our matching of buyouts to public firms is not accurate,
for example because buyouts tend to be targeted at firms within the industry that have very
unrepresentative characteristics. We perform a number of robustness checks to investigate the second
explanation, such as matching our LBO sample to subsamples of public firms that have adjusted their
leverage significantly over the last years, or are active debt issuers, but there nonetheless remains no
relation between the capital structures of buyouts and comparable public firms. In addition, we
consider the subsample of 142 public-to-private deals for which we have information about pre-LBO
financials. In this subsample, there is no relationship between buyout leverage and pre-LBO leverage.
However, there is a strong cross-sectional relation between pre-LBO leverage and that of public
matching firms, indicating that firms targeted by LBO sponsors do not differ systematically from
industry norms in their capital structure before the buyout. Finally, it could be that the LBO capital
structures are intended to be temporary and that private equity funds over time pay down debt to
approach a target capital structure that more closely resembles that of public firms. We address this
possibility by comparing public leverage to predicted LBO leverage in five years, using amortization
schedules, and still find no relationship. These findings suggest that selection bias or bad matching is
not the explanation for the lack of a relation between buyout capital structure and that of comparable
public firms.
       Given that the amount of leverage used by buyouts and matched public firms have little or no
relation, what does determine leverage in buyout firms? We first consider a number of factors known
to affect the cross-sectional pattern of leverage in public firms, such as profitability, cash flow
volatility, and growth opportunities. Similar to early studies, we find that for public firms, more
profitable firms have lower leverage, firms with more variable cash flows have lower leverage, and
firms with more growth opportunities have lower leverage. In contrast to the matched public firms,
none of these firm-specific characteristics are consistently related to LBO leverage levels. Instead, the
only robust predictor of LBO leverage we find is the prevailing condition of debt markets; the higher
the credit risk premium of leveraged loans, measured as the market leveraged loan spread over LIBOR,
the lower the leverage. One potential explanation for the strong relation between low spreads and high


                                                    4
leverage for LBOs is that when rates are lower, firms can pay interest on a higher principal with the
same cash flows. But this explanation would apply to public firms as well, and public firm leverage is
robustly positively related to the high-yield spread. It appears that, in contrast to public firms, the
primary determinant of buyout leverage is not firm-specific, but rather the market-wide condition of
the credit markets at the time of the buyout.
       General partners of private equity firms often state that the availability of leverage allows them
to pay higher purchase prices for the firms they acquire. We consider whether this prediction holds in
our sample. Because the deals in our sample are of dramatically different size, we use as our measure
of price the total enterprise value at the time of the deal as a multiple of EBITDA of the firm. Similar
to the leverage equations, we control econometrically for market conditions using the pricing of public
firms at the time of the buyout. Our results suggest that in contrast to the results for leverage, in which
there was no relation between public firm and buyout firm leverage, there is a statistically significant,
positive relationship between buyout pricing and the prices of comparable public firms. However,
buyout pricing is also strongly negatively related to current market interest rates on leveraged loans,
even after controlling for prices in public markets.
       The finding that both leverage and pricing in buyouts are strongly dependent on credit market
conditions could potentially be explained if variation in our high-yield spread variable simply picks up
variation in the economy-wide discount rate. When discount rates are low, real interest rates are low,
so for a given level of EBITDA firms should be able to take on more debt and still be able to meet
interest payments. Similarly, when discount rates are low, price multiples should be high. However,
the discount rate effect on price multiples should be similar for our matched public firms. Since the
high-yield spread is an equally strong predictor of LBO prices after controlling for public firm
multiples, we find a pure discount rate explanation implausible.          Instead, the results are more
consistent with stories in which the extra leverage that LBO funds take on when credit market
conditions are good makes them willing to pay higher prices, over and above prevailing prices in
public markets. As discussed above, this effect could either be due to private equity funds being
particularly proficient at arbitraging cheap debt against equity, or to agency problems between private
equity sponsors and their investors.
       To distinguish between these explanations, we estimate the impact of leverage on fund returns.
We first replicate the findings in Kaplan and Schoar (2005) on our sample of funds and find, similar to
Kaplan and Schoar, that the return of a particular fund (measured by IRR) is positively related to the
return of the previous fund by the same sponsor. We then show that the leverage of deals in a


                                                       5
particular fund is negatively related to the return of that fund, controlling for other relevant factors,
such as vintage year effects. The effect is nonlinear; for leverage levels below the median there is no
relation between leverage and fund returns, while the relation is robustly negative for above median
leverage levels. This finding is robust to controls including industry, region, and LBO type fixed
effects, sponsor fixed effects, and LBO year fixed effects, and provides support for an agency story in
which private equity funds overpay for deals when they can lever up a lot. To investigate whether
funds make money by timing debt markets, we split leverage into the component of leverage explained
by variation in debt markets and residual leverage. If funds were able to arbitrage debt markets against
equity markets when debt is “cheap”, we would expect the predicted component of leverage to have a
positive impact on fund returns. However, we instead find that both components of leverage have a
negative impact on returns, which is inconsistent with a market-timing story. Finally, also consistent
with an agency story in which sponsor over-investment and risk-shifting hurts investors, we find that
deals that are large relative to fund size predict negative fund returns.
       Our findings contribute to both the private equity literature and the capital structure literature.
First, our findings contribute to the literature on private equity fund returns, e.g. Kaplan and Schoar
(2005), and Gottschalg and Phalippou (2009). Our contribution here is to document how excess
leverage and deal size might have led to disappointing returns for many private equity funds.
       Our paper also relates to the literature on LBO financial distress. Our results support the
arguments of Kaplan and Stein (1993) that hot credit markets can lead to excess leverage, which can in
turn lead to high subsequent default rates. Whether this imposes a major cost on the economy is an
open question. Some evidence, e.g. Andrade and Kaplan (1998) and Bernstein et al. (2010), suggests
that these costs may not be particularly high, but more research is needed here.
       In terms of the broader capital structure literature, our paper is related to work by Berger et al.
(1997) and others who analyze how the corporate governance of firms affects their capital structures.
Our paper is also related to literature on market timing in capital structure (e.g. Baker and Wurgler
(2002), and Welch (2004)), and to the recent literature emphasizing the importance of supply-effects
for leverage (e.g. Leary (2009)). Our results suggest that taking advantage of market timing or excess
supply of funds can actually be value-decreasing for firms when owners have agency issues of their
own.
       The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section we describe how a
typical buyout is structured. Section III describes the theoretical frameworks we use for analyzing




                                                     6
capital structure. Section IV describes our sample and the multiple sources from which we derive our
data. Section V contains our empirical analysis, and Section VI concludes.


                           II. How are Private Equity Transactions Structured?


In a private equity transaction, the private equity firm forms a new company (“newco”) to bid for a
controlling stake in – and often majority ownership of – an existing company. The newco is
established specifically for the purposes of the transaction and is usually just a shell company with
nominal capital and temporary directors. The private equity sponsor lines up debt financing, which is
raised by newco conditional on the acquisition being consummated, and is backed by the target firm’s
assets. Together with equity that the private equity fund raises from its investors, the private equity
firm can purchase the target firm.6
        In principle, a private equity sponsor could finance a transaction entirely using the equity raised
from investors in its own fund(s), similarly to the way in which early-stage venture capital investments
are conducted. However, private equity buyouts are predominately financed with debt rather than
equity. This debt financing is typically provided through the syndicated loan market.7 Given that in a
private equity buyout, each bidder must have secured sufficient funds to complete the transaction
within a few days if they successfully negotiate a deal, bond financing, involving a prospectus and
various regulatory hurdles, usually takes too long to be a feasible as an initial source of capital.8
        The debt structure in buyouts has become fairly standardized, yet is far more complicated than
is typically described in academic discussions.9 In Table 1 we present an example of one of the private
equity transactions in our sample, the purchase of the U.K. tire and exhaust-fitting company Kwik-Fit
in 2005. This transaction used a capital structure that was typical for buyouts conducted at that time
and as such, we discuss this financial structure in some detail.
        Kwik-Fit was bought by private equity house PAI for an enterprise value of £773.5m. The
purchase was financed using £191m of equity (provided by funds advised by PAI) and £582.5m of
debt. The initial debt/equity ratio of the newco was therefore 75% debt and 25% equity, which is
typical for the buyouts in our sample. The debt was structured into senior and subordinated tranches.



6
  If the bid is unsuccessful, newco is disbanded and the debt is never issued.
7
   Reflecting a rather curious use of terminology, this market is increasingly known as the “leveraged loan” market.
8
  In some cases, however, syndicated loans are refinanced at a later stage using a public bond issue.
9
  A notable exception is Cotter and Peck (2001), who provide a detailed description of the debt structure of 64 U.S. public-
to-private buyout transactions completed from 1984 to 1989.

                                                             7
The senior debt was divided into three separate term loans of roughly equal sizes but with different
maturities, payment schedules and seniorities. One tranche, called Term Loan A, had a 7-year maturity
and was amortizing, while Term Loans B and C were not amortizing, with the principal being repaid in
a final “bullet” payment at the end of the term (or at redemption if earlier). In addition to the term
loans, the company obtained a revolving credit facility and a capex facility both of which, if drawn,
would rank as senior debt.
         In addition to the senior debt and facilities, newco was financed with two tranches of
subordinated debt: a 2nd lien tranche of £75m, which was senior to a mezzanine tranche of £97.5m. 2nd
lien tranches started to appear in buyouts during 2004, and are now a very common feature of buyouts’
capital structures. The interest payments on mezzanine debt include cash interest of 4.5%, together
with “pay-in-kind” interest of an additional 5%.10


     III. The Financial Structure and Pricing of LBOs and Public Firms: Theoretical Roadmap


In this section, we describe in more detail the theoretical frameworks that provide us with testable
implications about the factors affecting leverage and pricing in buyouts and public firms.

A. The Trade-off and Pecking Order Theories of Capital Structure

Perhaps the most commonly used explanation for leverage is the trade-off theory, in which capital
structure is chosen so that the tax and incentive advantages of debt exactly offset bankruptcy costs at
the margin (see Myers (2001)). The trade-off theory is often augmented with some version of the
pecking order theory of Myers and Majluf (1984), in which the issuance of securities is costly due to
information asymmetries, leading firms to stray from the optimal target leverage suggested by the pure
trade-off theory.
         Both the trade-off and the pecking order theories suggest that the capital structure of a firm
should be tailored to the characteristics of that firm’s assets. For example, profitable firms with stable
cashflows should have high leverage, since they are better at utilizing debt tax shields and have lower
probabilities of financial distress, and costs of financial distress are likely to be higher for firms with
more investment opportunities and more intangible assets.




10
  Pay-in-kind interest means that instead of cash, the holders of the mezzanine debt are issued additional notes equal to the
value of 5% of the outstanding principal each year.

                                                             8
        The pecking order theory predicts that firms that have historically been more profitable, so that
they have not needed to issue securities to finance investments, will end up with lower leverage, even
if the pure tradeoff theory would suggest that more profitable firms should take advantage of debt tax
shields and incentive benefits. The pecking order argument is less likely to explain leverage in
buyouts than in public firms since buyout leverage is calculated at the time of the transaction, so there
will have been no time for the firm to drift away from the target capital structure. Nonetheless, if both
LBO sponsors and managers of public firms act according to the trade-off theory, we would expect
that there should be a relation between LBO leverage and the leverage of public firms with similar
characteristics.    We test this idea below, and also relate LBO and public firm leverage to firm
characteristics, the idea being that according to the tradeoff theory, the same firm-level factors
determine leverage at the margin for both buyout and public firms, so changing one of these factors
should have the same effect for both types of firms.

B. Market Timing

Baker and Wurgler (2002), among others, suggest that managers attempt to take advantage of
mispricing in equity markets when issuing securities. Similarly, it is possible that debt markets
periodically become “overheated”, so that investors do not demand the full interest rate corresponding
to the fundamental underlying risk of a firm. Managers aware of this market imperfection should take
advantage of it, and issue more debt when the debt markets are overvalued.11 The market-timing
hypothesis is also consistent with the stated view of many private equity practitioners, who often argue
that one of the ways in which private equity funds make money is by increasing leverage of deals in
response to hot credit market conditions to arbitrage the conditions between debt and equity markets.12
If the market-timing story is true, buyout leverage should respond more to debt market conditions than
to the firm characteristics suggested by the trade-off theory, and they should also be willing to pay
higher prices when debt financing is “cheap”. This pattern would also hold for public firms, unless
private equity sponsors are better at timing debt markets than the managers of stand-alone firms.
Importantly, to the extent that the competition for deals between buyout funds is not strong enough to
pass on all the value increase from cheap debt to target shareholders, the market-timing hypothesis also




11
   Related to this argument, the results in Baker, Greenwood, and Wurgler (2003) suggest that public firms use debt market
conditions in an effort to determine the lowest-cost maturity at which to borrow.
12
   For example, Guy Hands, a partner at Terra Firma, stated: “We buy stuff with cheap debt and arbitrage on the difference
with equity markets”. Financial Times, November 15, 2007.

                                                            9
predicts that fund returns should be higher when the private equity sponsors are able to use higher
leverage to finance individual deals.



C. GP-LP Agency Conflicts

Just as there are agency problems between CEOs and owners that can explain leverage choices for
public firms, there are potential agency problems between the private equity fund managers (the
“GPs”) and the investors in the fund (the “LPs”) that could explain leverage choices in buyouts. In
particular, because of the limited liability of GPs and the option-like carry contract they hold on fund
returns, GPs may sometimes have an incentive to increase the riskiness of the fund by investing a large
fraction of fund money in one big deal.13 Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2009) provide a model
in which these overinvestment tendencies of GPs are mitigated by capital constraints, so that it is
optimal to require GPs to go to external capital markets and raise debt whenever they want to make an
investment. When liquidity in debt markets is high and/or interest rates are low, GPs can add more
leverage to their deals and invest more aggressively, increasing the value of their option and making
them willing to overpay for deals relative to fundamental value. Similar to the market-timing theory,
this agency story predicts that buyout leverage would be driven more by debt market conditions than
by the characteristics of the underlying portfolio firm. The agency story, in contrast to the market-
timing story, predicts that increased leverage can very well hurt investors in private equity funds, so
that higher leverage should lead to lower fund returns on average.
         Although Axelson et al. (2009) do not formally model GPs’ reputations, an extension of their
model would also imply that GPs with less reputational capital at stake should be more prone to
overinvestment.14 In the equations we estimate below, we therefore include proxies for GP reputation.




13
   The typical contract between GPs and LPs in a buyout fund is that GPs get a “carried interest” of 20% of all profits (after
fees borne by investors) provided the rate of return (as measured by IRR on invested capital) exceeds a stipulated hurdle
rate; but the GPs earn no carried interest if the fund does not exceed the hurdle rate.
14
   The model in Ljungqvist, Richardson, and Wolfenzon (2007) also has this prediction.

                                                             10
                                                  IV. Data Description


A. Data Sources and Sample Selection.

Our sample selection primarily relies on two commercial databases: Capital IQ and LPC/Dealscan. We
use the Capital IQ database to construct a base sample of private equity transactions. The base sample
contains all private placement and M&A transactions in Capital IQ where the list of acquirers includes
(at least) one investment firm that has a reported investment interest in one of the following stages:
Seed/startup, Early venture, Emerging growth, Growth capital, Bridge, Turnaround, Middle market,
Mature, Buyout, Mid-venture, Late venture, Industry consolidation, Mezzanine/subdebt, Incubation,
Recapitalization, or PIPES. From this sample, we select all M&A transactions classified as ‘leveraged
buyout,’ ‘management buyout,’ or ‘going private’ that were announced between January 1986 and July
2008. Capital IQ contains information on the details of the transaction, such as the buyers and sellers,
the target company identity, transaction size, and for a subset there is financial information such as
EBITDA (primarily for public-to-private transactions and LBOs involving public bond issues).15
           From the sample of Capital IQ buyouts we construct a list of all private equity firms that appear
as acquirers in at least five LBO transactions. For each of these private equity firms we extract
information from the LPC/Dealscan database on all syndicated loans for which one of these firms acts
as a sponsor, producing a total of 5678 loans. From this list we exclude loans that did not back the
original leveraged buyout transaction (i.e. refinancings and recapitalizations as well as loans financing
subsequent add-on acquisitions by the LBO target), ending up with 2467 LBO loans.
           Since Dealscan coverage improves substantially in the late 1990’s, we were able to match a
larger fraction of the recent deals of these funds. In addition, there is likely a bias in our sample
towards larger deals, which are more likely to use syndicated debt than are smaller deals. Dealscan
provides information primarily on the bank loan portion of the capital structure, but using the deal
descriptions provided by Dealscan and Capital IQ, we also find information on other types of debt such
as vendor financing, assumed debt, bonds, as well as equity used in the deal. We also use Capital IQ,
SDC, Mergent, and Edgar filings to track down additional public bond issues. In a handful of cases, we
infer information about additional subordinated debt from the difference between total debt and senior
debt ratios in Dealscan.




15
     See Stromberg (2008) and Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) for more detail and descriptive statistics on Capital IQ.

                                                              11
        To calculate our capital structure variables we also require information on the EBITDA of the
LBO target at the time of the buyout. For 649 observations this information is included in the
Dealscan data, either explicitly or implicitly in terms of a multiple of total debt, or senior debt, to
EBITDA. Using Capital IQ, Compustat, and Bureau Van Dyke’s Amadeus database, we are able to
find EBITDA information for another 425 observations.
        Finally, we supplement our sample with the Kaplan (1989a, b) sample of 83 buyouts from the
1980s. These buyouts predated the development of the syndicated loan market, so would clearly not
have entered our sample otherwise.16 After this process, we end up with a sample of 1157 buyout
observations between 1980 and 2008.
        An important part of our analysis is to match these private equity buyouts with comparable
publicly quoted companies. For public company financial information, we use the Compustat North
America and Compustat Global databases to calculate matched median financial characteristics for
public companies in the same year, region (North America, Western Europe, and Rest of World), and
industry as the corresponding buyout transaction.                 We rely on the Fama and French (1997)
classification of firms into 49 industries. We date the buyout by the closing date of the syndicated loan
package, as reported by Dealscan.
        Our analysis also requires information about debt market conditions and other macroeconomic
variables. Our debt market condition variables include the U.S. high-yield spread, defined as the U.S.
high-yield rate for the corresponding month according to the Merrill Lynch High-Yield index
(obtained through Datastream) minus U.S. LIBOR (obtained from the British Bankers’ Association);
the S&P Earnings/Price ratio (obtained from Compustat) minus the high-yield rate, and a credit
tightening measure, obtained from the Federal Reserve.17 We also obtain inflation and exchange rates
from the IMF.18
        Finally, we calculate various private equity sponsor characteristics, such as number of funds
raised, fund sizes, and fund returns (IRRs). Data on a fund’s inception date, size, and sequence
number relative to other funds raised by the same sponsor are constructed by combining observations
from Capital IQ and Preqin, both of which provide independently collected and somewhat non-



16
   We are very grateful to Steve Kaplan for providing us with this data.
17
   We use the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices survey, which is conducted quarterly by the
US Federal Reserve Board (source: http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SnloanSurvey/). We focus on the net
percentage of domestic loan officers at medium and large banks reporting a tightening of standards for loans.
18
   We have also used average spreads on leveraged loans for the U.S. and European markets over LIBOR, obtained from
Standard & Poor’s. We were only able to obtain these from 1997 and onwards, but for this period the results are virtually
identical to those using the spread variable based on the Merrill Lynch High-Yield Index.

                                                           12
overlapping data on these variables. Preqin has data on 9,523 buyout and venture funds as of June
2009, and is also our source for fund returns. Preqin claims to cover about 70% of all capital ever
raised in the private equity industry. Traditional sources of data on private equity returns rely on self-
reporting by GPs and/or LPs and are likely to suffer from sample selection biases. However, 85% of
the data gathered by Preqin is allegedly collected via Freedom of Information Act requests and should
not be subject to self-reporting biases.
           Direct information about which exact fund each deal belongs to is only available in about a
third of the cases (through Capital IQ). When this information is not available, we match a deal to the
sponsor fund that was actively investing in the time period and region of the deal. We match 1099 out
of our 1157 deals to a particular fund. The unmatched deals are done by sponsors who do not use a
fund structure for their investments.

B. Sample Characteristics and Representativeness

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics on our sample. Panel A indicates that the sample contains 1157
buyouts, of which 694 (60%) are of North American firms, 463 (39%) are of Western European firms,
and 10 (1%) are of firms located in the rest of the world. In contrast to previous papers that have
focused on U.S. deals, our sample is more representative of the universe of all buyouts. Still, our
sample overweights U.S. buyouts relative to the rest of the world, as in the universe of buyouts
reported in Capital IQ, 47% are from North America, 45% are from Western Europe, and 8% are from
the rest of the world.20 This bias is due to two reasons. First, our sample selection relies on Dealscan
for capital structure information, which mainly covers syndicated bank loans. Deals outside of U.S.
and Western Europe tend to be smaller and therefore rarely use syndicated loans. Second, our 1980s
deals are taken from Kaplan (1989 a,b), whose sample is restricted to U.S. buyouts.
            Unlike most previous research, our sample is not restricted to public-to-private deals. It does
contain 368 (32%) public-to-private buyouts, but also contains 167 (14%) buyouts of independent
companies, 320 (28%) divisional buyouts, and 293 (25%) buyouts of firms already owned by other
private equity firms, called secondary buyouts (see Table 2, Panel A).                        Because our sampling
procedure tends to overweight large deals relative to small ones, our sample is still somewhat biased
towards public-to-private deals compared to the underlying population of buyouts according to Capital
IQ, where public-to-private deals only account for 6.5% of transactions. Similarly, our procedure



20
     The statistics on the universe of deals on Capital IQ are taken from Strömberg (2008).

                                                               13
under-samples buyouts of (on average smaller) independent private companies, which make up just
14% of our sample compared to 46.8% of the deals on Capital IQ.
       Panel A of Table 2 also reveals that around 75% of our sample transactions occurred between
2001 and 2008, compared to 63% in the Capital IQ population. Again, this is probably indicative of
the syndicated bank loan market becoming significantly more active over the last decade.
       Panels A and B of Appendix Table 1 contain detailed breakdowns of the sample by country,
industry, and the identity of the sponsoring firm. In addition to the U.S., the U.K. and France are the
most common countries represented. The sample is widely distributed across industries, with no one
industry representing more than 10%. It is also widely distributed in terms of the sponsoring buyout
firm; Kohlberg, Kravis and Roberts is the most common sponsor, with 61 deals, but still only
represents 5.3% of the total sample.
       Panel B of Table 2 examines the deals’ size. As expected, our sample clearly contains very
large deals; the average (median) LBO enterprise value is just over $1.6 billion 2008 U.S. dollars
($683 million) compared to an average (median) of $330 million ($63 million) for the entire Capital IQ
sample. Public-to-private deals are the largest, averaging over $2.5 billion in enterprise value, and
include the sample’s largest deal, KKR’s buyout of RJR-Nabisco (enterprise value of $59.5 billion
when measured in 2008 dollars). In contrast, independent private deals are the smallest type of deal in
our sample, but still average over $600m in enterprise value.
       To summarize, although our sample is more representative of the buyout population than
samples used in other studies, it overweights large deals, public-to-private transactions, U.S.
transactions, and more recent buyouts, because of our reliance on the syndicated bank loan market for
capital structure information. In our tests, our main results are robust to controlling for region, buyout
type, and size, and we cluster our standard errors by deal year in our regressions. Nonetheless, the
extent to which our conclusions hold equally for smaller buyout transactions that do not rely on the
syndicated loan market for debt financing is an issue we leave for future research.


                                               V. Results

A. Leverage of buyout firms

Table 3 details the complicated debt structure found in our sample. Consistent with the Kwik-Fit deal
analysed earlier, bank debt is typically divided into amortizing Term Loan A, which is usually held by
the originating bank, and bullet payment Term Loans B, C etc. that are often securitized or sold to
institutional investors, such as hedge funds. In our sample, 62.2% of deals use amortizing debt (Term

                                                   14
Loan A), while 89.3% use bullet debt (Term Loan B). The use of amortizing debt declined noticeably
in the years leading up to the financial crisis as lenders were increasingly prepared to lend on a non-
amortizing basis. Table 3 also presents the fraction of debt financing accounted for by each type;
amortizing bank debt averages 23.4% of total debt while bullet debt comprises 46.2%.                 Other
important sources of debt are mezzanine (9.9%) and junior bonds (9.3%).
       In some transactions loans are provided by the private equity fund itself (“Sponsor loans”), or
by the seller in the buyout transaction (“Vendor loans”), and existing loans are sometimes retained
rather than refinanced (“Assumed debt”). As Table 3 shows, these loans are, on average, not very
significant, representing in total around 2.5% of total debt financing. We also observe preferred equity
in a few deals, which may have more or less debt-like features, but we do not include preferred equity
in our definition of debt.
       Throughout our analysis we distinguish between “regular” or non-contingent debt, and
contingent debt, such as revolving credit facilities, capital expenditure and acquisition lines of credit,
or stand-by letters of credit. Most of the contingent debt is not drawn at the time of the transaction, but
rather intended for future funding of working capital, add-on acquisitions or other types of investment.
We do not include contingent debt in our definition of total debt when calculating our leverage ratios
(debt to enterprise value, debt to EBITDA, and interest coverage), since the draw-down of contingent
debt would be concurrent with a subsequent investment in the firm, which in turn would involve a
change in enterprise value and EBITDA. As is indicated in Table 3, buyouts use substantial quantities
of contingent debt; these additional facilities amount to nearly 18% of the value of total (non-
contingent) debt.
       Table 3 also documents the spreads on the debt and the proportion of the debt that is due in less
than 5 years. Not surprisingly, the senior debt (the term loans and revolving credit facilities) has a
substantially smaller spread than the junior debt. Also, the effect of amortization is clear: the majority
of the Term Loan A and the bridge loans have to be paid off in less than 5 years but a very small
fraction of all the other types of debt are due that quickly. The maturity, and sometimes also the
spread, is often missing for vendor and sponsor loans in our sample. When we need these to calculate
leverage ratios we assume that (a) the interest rate on these loans equals the local LIBOR rate plus the
U.S. high-yield spread over U.S. LIBOR, and (b) that the debt is non-amortizing. Although these
assumptions are somewhat arbitrary, they have very little impact on our results given the small fraction
of total debt these loans represent.




                                                    15
        Table 4 documents the quantities of leverage used in the transactions as well as the pricing of
the buyout deals. We use three different measures of leverage: total debt divided by earnings before
interest and depreciation (“D/EBITDA”), total debt divided by enterprise value (“D/EV”) and interest
on debt divided by EBITDA (“I/EBITDA”).21,22 Our main measure of deal pricing is enterprise value
divided by EBITDA.23 As expected, LBOs are indeed highly leveraged. The average deal in the
sample raises 69% of its capital through debt of various forms and has ratios of debt to EBITDA and
interest to EBITDA of 5.6 and 0.5 respectively. The EV/EBITDA-multiple paid is 8.2 for the average
transaction. Public-to-private deals are the most highly levered, with 73% of capital raised through
debt and a D/EBITDA ratio of 6.5. They are also the highest priced transactions, with an average 8.8
EV/EBITDA multiple. Table 4 also shows significant univariate variation for leverage and pricing
across geographies and size groups, with U.S. deals and larger deals (measured by enterprise value in
2008 U.S. dollars) having higher leverage and pricing multiples.
        Table 4 also reveals significant changes in capital structure across time. These time trends are
illustrated graphically in Panel A of Figure 1. From the start of our sample in the early 1980’s, debt
and valuation levels peaked in the late 1980’s, decreased until the mid-1990’s, increased in the late
1990’s, fell in the early 2000’s, and increased again in the 2005-2007 period. Strikingly, leverage
(especially D/EBITDA) and pricing multiples track each other very closely, as is particularly clear
from the graph in Panel A of Figure 1. Also, the time periods when leverage and pricing drops most
significantly coincide with the fall of the junk-bond market in 1989-1990 and the internet crash in
2000-2001, while leverage peaks at the top of the business cycles in 1988, 1998, and 2007.24 This
suggests that macro-economic conditions affect both leverage and pricing of LBOs in a highly pro-
cyclical manner.
        It is worth noting, however, that there is a decreasing trend in debt to enterprise value over our
sample period, with an average D/EV of over 80% in each sub-period before 1994 and below 70%
following 1995. One partial explanation for this trend is that many of the 1980s deals involved selling



21
   As mentioned in Section IV, we obtain EBITDA either from Dealscan or from pre-LBO financial statements. One
concern is that the former EBITDA numbers could sometimes be pro-forma numbers or forward-looking projections. We
have re-run our analysis for the subsamples with different sources, and our results are qualitatively the same.
22
   The I/EBITDA measure is calculated using total interest expense, including non-cash Pay-In-Kind (PIK) interest. While
it may make sense to use a measure based on cash interest only, the information on the amount of PIK interest is missing
for a large fraction of our sample.
23
   We have also used enterprise value divided by sales as an alternative pricing measure, with similar results. Sales
numbers are missing for a large number of our observations, however.
24
    Note that we have very few observations, between 0 and 3 per year, for the 1990-1993 period. Hence, the large
movements in leverage and pricing over this period are not statistically reliable.

                                                          16
off parts of the acquired company, the proceeds of which could be used to repay some of the debt (see
Kaplan, 1989b).

B. Comparisons with Public Companies

As noted earlier, the literature has devoted considerable attention to financing choices, but almost
always in the context of publicly traded corporations. In Section III, we argued that factors that affect
capital structure in public companies could potentially apply to LBOs as well. In addition, other
theories such as the market timing or the GP-LP agency-based explanations described above suggest
that private equity firms could have different motivations for the choice of leverage in their portfolio
companies than do publicly-traded companies.25
         To evaluate the extent to which common theories explain leverage in public companies and
LBOs, we compare leverage choices in the buyouts in our sample with those in similar public
companies. If the same theories explain leverage in both types of organization, we should observe
common factors predicting leverage in both.
         To perform this comparison, we construct a sample of public companies that are as similar as
possible to the sample of LBOs. For each LBO, we take as a matching characteristic the median
industry value among the public companies in the Global Compustat database in the same year, same
region (North America, Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Asia, or Australia) and same Fama-French
industry (using their 49-industry classification) as the LBO.26
         For the public companies we calculate the corresponding measures of leverage and pricing as
we used for the buyouts, i.e. D/EV, D/EBITDA, I/EBITDA, and EV/EBITDA. For public company
debt (“D”) we use total long-term debt (including debt due within one year) minus cash and short-term
investments. For enterprise value (“EV”) we use market value of equity plus long-term debt minus
cash and short-term investment. For interest (“I”) we use interest expense minus interest income. We
calculate matched medians for D/EBITDA and I/EBITDA for all public companies in the same
industry and region using the fiscal year that precedes the closing date of the LBO syndicated loan.
When calculating matched EV/EBITDA and D/EV, we use the market value of equity for the public


25
   Indeed, if one asks practitioners how they make leverage choices, the typical answers will differ substantially. When
asked about capital structure policy, a typical CFO of a public company will usually discuss the importance of maintaining
financial flexibility and express concern over distress costs (see Graham and Harvey (2001)), while a partner of a buyout
firm will often say that they inject as much debt into their LBOs as possible to maximize the expected return on their equity
investment.
26
   The Fama-French industry classification was first introduced in Fama and French (1997) and has been updated in
subsequent work. We used the most recent industry classification as of January 2009 according to Kenneth French’s web
site at http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.

                                                            17
companies in the matched industry-region for the month preceding the closing of the buyout loan, and
use the blended averages of EBITDA, cash and long-term debt for the fiscal years preceding and
following the buyout loan closing date.27 We exclude public companies with negative EBITDA when
calculating the industry-region-date median values of D/EBITDA, EV/EBITDA and I/EBITDA.
        Panel B of Figure 1 illustrates graphically the evolution of leverage and pricing over our
sample period for the matched public company medians. The patterns for matched public companies
show very little resemblance to the patterns documented for the LBO sample in Panel A. First, not
surprisingly, public companies have significantly lower leverage, with a D/EV ranging between 30-
50% for most years, compared to 65-90% for the buyouts. Second, the time series variation is
strikingly different. The strong positive relation between D/EBITDA and EV/EBITDA that was seen
for the buyouts is not observed for public companies. Furthermore, in contrast to the pro-cyclical
pattern for buyouts, public company leverage appears counter-cyclical, peaking in the early 1990’s
recession and again after the internet crash in 2000-2001. The counter-cyclical leverage of public
companies is consistent with earlier research, such as Korajczyk and Levy (2003).
        Still, the lack of a relation in the time-series does not necessarily rule out a cross-sectional
relation between public and buyout leverage. Panel A of Table 5 performs the following experiment: it
sorts the matched public company median values into quartiles based on each of the three measures of
leverage. It then presents the medians of the leverage measures for the corresponding buyouts in each
of the public company quartiles. If the same factors determine leverage for both groups of companies,
then the pattern of leverage across quartiles should be similar. Note that this approach focuses on the
cross-sectional pattern of capital structures; even if the buyouts all have higher leverage, there should
still be a positive cross-sectional relation, if factors related to industry and location have any effect on
leverage choices.
        By construction, leverage of the public companies increases with the quartile’s rank. Public
company D/EV ranges from a median value of 0.19 in the lowest quartile to 0.54 in the highest
quartile. However, for the corresponding buyouts there is virtually no difference in leverage across the
public company quartiles, with a range of 0.69 to 0.71. The lack of relationship also applies using the
D/EBITDA measure of leverage. Whereas the public company medians increase across the quartiles


27
   For example, suppose a buyout closes in March 2000. For all publicly traded companies in the same industry and region,
we first calculate the market value of equity at the end of February 2000. For simplicity assume that these publicly traded
companies have fiscal years ending December 31. We then calculate blended values of long-term debt, cash, and EBITDA
using a weight of 3/12 for the preceding fiscal year-end of December 31, 1999, and 9/12 for the following fiscal year-end of
December 31, 2000. We then match the buyout with the median values of EV/EBITDA and D/EV across the publicly
traded firms in this group.

                                                            18
from 2.7 to 5.2, for the buyouts leverage actually decreases, from a median of 5.4 in quartile one to 4.8
in quartile four, with the difference across quartiles being statistically significant. Finally, using the
I/EBITDA measure, the first three quartiles of buyouts show little variation in terms of median
leverage; only the group of buyouts corresponding to the most levered public companies have higher
I/EBITDA.
        Figure 2 illustrates the (lack of a) relationship between LBO and public company leverage by
plotting LBO leverage for each transaction against the matched public company median leverage.
Again, for D/EV there is basically no relation (with an R-squared of 0.004), for D/EBITDA the
relationship is slightly negative (with an R-squared of 0.005), and only for I/EBITDA do we see a
slightly positive relationship (with a t-statistic of 1.78 and an R-squared of 0.021).
        These results suggest that there is virtually no relation between leverage in buyouts and in
matched public companies. However, it is possible that there is in fact such a relation in the data but
our matching process is so inaccurate that we fail to detect it. We explore a number of possible
hypotheses related to matching in Panels B through E in Table 5.
        First, the leverage at the time of the LBO transaction could be unrepresentative of the firm’s
target capital structure. In a typical LBO, the excess cash flow that the firm is generating is used to
pay down acquisition debt over time. Hence, it may be that private equity firms intend to reach the
LBO’s target at some point in the future, which implies that this future leverage is a better measure of
the firm’s optimal capital structure. To address this possibility, we estimate predicted debt and interest
expense five years after the LBO transaction using debt amortization schedules. We then calculate
D/EV, D/EBITDA, and I/EBITDA based on predicted D and I. Since we do not have predictions of
future EV and EBITDA, we normalize with EV and EBITDA at the time of the transaction. We then
compare these predicted leverage ratios to matched public company median leverage ratios. The
results, displayed in Panel B in Table 5, show that there is virtually no relation between predicted LBO
leverage and public leverage either and the results are very similar to those in panel A (although LBO
leverage ratios are approximately 20% lower on average).
        Second, it is possible that the median public companies are not at their optimal capital
structure. If firms incur transaction costs when adjusting capital structures, they would only do such
adjustments infrequently. Consequently, a randomly picked public company could have drifted away
from its optimal capital structure at the time when the sample was performed.28 To address this


28
  See e.g. Fisher et al (1989) and Strebulaev (2007) for theoretical models of costly adjustment, and Leary and Roberts
(2005) for supporting empirical evidence for U.S. public companies.

                                                          19
possibility, we consider an alternative set of matched firms, which are restricted to public companies
that have adjusted their capital structures in a given year with a change in debt to book assets of more
than ten percentage points in absolute value.              For this “adjuster” sample we calculate matched
industry-region-year median values of leverage as before. Panel C of Table 5 sorts buyouts using
leverage quartiles for the adjuster sample. The results are very similar to those obtained before; there
is no statistically significant relation between public company leverage and LBO leverage.
        Third, we compare our buyouts to a sub-sample of public companies that actually use leverage.
Starting with Jensen (1986), researchers have argued that managers are averse to debt and companies
with entrenched managers will therefore have lower leverage than what is optimal for shareholders.29
Also, even absent agency problems, some companies within the same industry could actually have
higher debt capacity (e.g. due to lower costs of financial distress) than others, and it may be that
buyouts are more similar to this group. To investigate this, we calculate industry-region-year median
leverage using the subset of public companies that have issued significant amounts of debt – the
“issuer” sample – which we define as companies whose ratio of long-term debt to book assets has
increased by more than ten percentage points in a given year.30 Panel D of Table 5 sorts buyouts using
leverage quartiles for the issuer sample. For D/EV and D/EBITDA there is again no relation between
buyout leverage and public company leverage, although there is a significant positive relation for
I/EBITDA. Overall, the relation between buyout and debt-issuing public company leverage is weak.
        Finally, and related to the previous point, there may be significant heterogeneity in the debt
capacity of companies even within an industry-region-year match. Given that LBO transactions rely
on the ability of the company to take on debt, it is possible (or even likely) that private equity sponsors
select targets within an industry and region that have particularly high debt capacity.31 Unfortunately,
we do not observe pre-LBO characteristics for the majority of firms in our sample since they were
private at the time of the LBO. Of the firms that were publicly traded before the buyout, we were able
to find pre-LBO financial information for a subsample of 166 firms that were purchased in public-to-
private transactions. For this subsample, we calculate leverage ratios using the last financial statement
available in Global Compustat before the LBO transaction date. The upper half of Panel E of Table 5



29
   See Berger, Ofek and Yermack (1997) for evidence that firms with entrenched managers use less leverage.
30
   We have also used a match based on the 75% leverage percentile of matched public firms in the same industry-region-
year with similar results.
31
   For a sample of U.S. 1980’s public-to-private transactions Opler and Titman (1993) argue that LBO targets have worse
investment opportunities and lower financial distress costs than other public firms. Stuart and Kim (forthcoming) confirm
these findings using a more recent sample, and find in addition that companies that have directors with prior LBO
experience are more likely to undergo an LBO transaction.

                                                           20
sorts buyouts according to quartiles of pre-LBO leverage. For D/EBITDA there is again no relation
between pre-LBO and LBO leverage, and for I/EBITDA the result is very weak (and completely
driven by the upper quartile of pre-LBO companies). There is, however, a positive (and statistically
significant at the 5 percent level) relation for D/EV, although the LBO leverage distribution is much
narrower (ranging from 0.63 to 0.77 across pre-LBO quartiles) than the pre-LBO leverage distribution
(ranging from 0.11 to 0.97).
           In contrast to the view that LBO targets are selected because of their debt capacity, pre-LBO
companies have rather similar leverage to their public peers, indicating that selection issues may be
minor. This comparison is presented in the lower half of Panel E, where pre-LBO leverage is sorted
across matched public company industry-country-date median leverage quartiles.            For all three
leverage measures, there is a significant positive relation between pre-LBO and median industry
leverage, and the inter-quartile ranges are of roughly similar magnitudes. Interestingly, LBO targets
do not appear significantly more levered pre-LBO compared to their public peers (median D/EV is
somewhat higher, while median D/EBITDA is somewhat lower and median I/EBITDA is identical).
Although we cannot completely rule out selection based on unobserved factors, our results suggest that
the failure to find a relation between LBO and public company leverage is not primarily due to private
equity firms selecting targets with particularly high debt capacity.

C. LBO leverage and company characteristics.

The results so far suggest that there is no correlation between the leverage used in buyouts and that in
comparable public companies. We now take the comparison to a more detailed level by investigating
the extent to which firm-level characteristics are related to leverage in the two sets of firms. We focus
on characteristics that are plausible proxies for factors suggested by the trade-off or pecking order
theories, and that have been found in previous research to be associated with the cross-sectional
variation in capital structure for public companies.32 To proxy for investment opportunities, we use
market-to-book ratios, R&D-to-sales ratios, and sales growth, all of which should be negatively related
to leverage according to the trade-off theory. To proxy for profitability, we use return on invested
capital (ROIC), which should be positively related to debt tax shields and incentive benefits of debt
according to the trade-off theory, but negatively related to leverage according to the pecking order
theory. To proxy for risk, we use volatility in ROIC, which should be negatively related to leverage
since it decreases debt tax shields and increases costs of financial distress. To proxy for intangibility

32
     See e.g. Titman and Wessels (1988) and Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999),


                                                          21
of assets, which should increase costs of financial distress, we use sales to property, plant and
equipment (PPE) ratios. Finally, we relate leverage to statutory corporate tax rates, which should be
positively related to the benefits of utilizing a debt tax shields.
        Continuing the approach adopted in Table 5, in each case we sort the matched public company
industry-region-date medians by the variable in question, then present median leverage by quartile for
the public companies and their buyout matches. The results are presented in Table 6 and suggest, in
general, that, consistent with previous research, these factors tend to be related to capital structure for
public companies. For example, market-to-book and R&D-to-sales ratios are negatively related to
leverage ratios, as most studies have found. Yet, for the corresponding buyouts, there is no such
relation between leverage and the ranking of the public comparables for either of these ratios. If
anything, if there is any relation between firm characteristics and LBO leverage, it tends to go in the
opposite direction of public firms. This pattern holds for market-to-book ratios and for sales growth,
both of which are positively correlated with LBO Debt/EBITDA and Interest/EBITDA ratios and
negatively correlated with public firm leverage. The one variable for which buyouts and public
companies’ capital structures have a similar pattern is the corporate tax rate, which is weakly
correlated with leverage.
        None of these variables except sales growth remain robustly significant for explaining LBO
leverage when we use them as controls in the regressions described in Subsection E below. LBO
Debt/EBITDA does seem to go up with sales growth, which is not what the trade-off theory would
predict if sales growth proxies for growth opportunities that can be lost in financial distress. We think
it more likely that this relation occurs because sales growth is related to expected future growth in
EBITDA, which can explain why the private equity sponsor is willing to take on relatively high debt
levels compared to today’s EBITDA.

D. LBO leverage and debt market conditions.

The variables used in Table 6 have been used in previous research to explain capital structure in public
companies. Yet, they do not appear to explain capital structure in buyouts, at least not in the way a
trade-off or pecking order theory would predict. We now go on to examine whether debt market
conditions help explain leverage in buyouts better, as suggested by either the market timing or the GP-
LP agency stories outlined in Section III.
        The patterns previously shown in Figure 1 seem broadly consistent with debt market conditions
playing a different role for LBOs and public companies. In particular, LBO leverage appears to be



                                                      22
pro-cyclical, while public company peer leverage is not. To examine this pattern in more detail, we
continue our univariate approach of sorting the public companies on various measures – in this case on
debt market conditions – and then considering leverage of both the buyouts and the matched public
company industry-region-date medians.
         The results are presented in Table 7. Using the high-yield spread as a measure of market
conditions for lower-quality loans of the sort used in buyouts, all three measures of leverage decrease
for buyouts as the spread increases. A lower spread is typically thought to be suggestive of better
financial conditions and a hotter market for high-yield debt, so it is not surprising that buyout firms use
more debt when this spread is lower. Yet, the relation goes the opposite way for the public companies,
for which each measure of leverage is increasing with the high-yield spread. In other words, leverage
in public companies increases, if anything, when debt market conditions worsen.
         We confirm these patterns using two alternative measures of debt market conditions. First, we
calculate the difference between the earnings yield in the S&P 500 index and the high-yield rate at the
time of the buyout, which Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) document to be positively related to private
equity fundraising. Arguably, this measure captures the difference in relative pricing across public
equity and debt markets, and a larger value of this variable indicates that equity is relatively “cheap”
compared to high-yield bonds. Second, we use a measure of “credit tightening” according to a
quarterly survey undertaken by the U.S. Federal Reserve. In particular, we use the net percentage of
loan officers in medium and large U.S. banks reporting tightening standards for loans.33 This measure
captures non-price aspects of credit market conditions, such as debt covenants and quantity constraints.
When we sort the LBO transactions across quartiles using these two debt market condition measures,
we find a significantly positive relationship between leverage and the ease of debt market conditions
for the LBOs, whereas the pattern for the public comparators usually goes in the opposite direction.
Again, these patterns are strongly suggestive that the drivers of capital structures are different for
LBOs and public companies.
         In addition to the quantity of debt, we also examine the composition of debt as a function of
debt market conditions. Table 8 considers the way in which the types of debt used in the sample of
buyouts varies intertemporally and in relation to our measures of debt market conditions. It is evident
that the proportion of amortizing Term Loan A debt, which is the tranche of the loan that is provided
by banks as opposed to other financial institutions, has both declined over time and is countercyclical,


33
   See Lown, Morgan, and Rohatgi (2000) for more information about the survey. These authors document that the
survey results are strongly related to loan growth, with tightening standards being associated with slower loan growth.

                                                             23
with the fraction increasing after the internet bust of 2000-2001 and decreasing during the “credit
bubble” in 2005-2007. This pattern is clear and statistically significant when sorting on debt market
conditions. During very liquid credit markets, when buyout leverage is generally higher, banks hold a
lower fraction of the buyout debt as opposed to hedge funds, collateralised loan obligations (CLOs)
and other non-bank financial institutions. Table 8 also shows a similar pattern for the maturity of debt,
measured as the proportion of total debt maturing in five years. Using high-yield spreads as a measure
of credit conditions, the maturity increases from 9% of debt being due in five years for the median
buyout in the lowest spread quartile, to 29% in the highest spread quartile. These finding are consistent
with the observations of Kaplan and Stein (1993) about the late-1980’s LBO boom.34 In addition,
during hot credit market conditions, contingent debt commitments increase, while the fraction of
“alternative debt” (defined as vendor, sponsor, and off-balance-sheet financing) decreases. It appears
that when markets are hot, lenders are more willing to provide extra sources of finance such as lines of
credit for capital expansion, while when times are tougher, buyout firms have to go to alternative
sources such as vendor or self-provided debt for financing.
        To summarize, these various univariate analyses suggest that debt market conditions, as
opposed to firm-specific debt capacity, are the main determinants of buyout leverage. In the next
section we investigate these relations in a multivariate regression framework.

E. Multivariate analysis of buyout capital structures

The sorts reported in Tables 5-8 are suggestive that capital structures in LBOs are determined by debt
market conditions rather than the theories of capital structure that have been developed and applied to
publicly traded firms. To explore this issue more rigorously we present multivariate regressions
modelling capital structure choices for both LBOs and public companies. Descriptive statistics for the
regression variables are provided in Table 9.
        Table 10 considers the impact of debt market conditions on leverage. The first six columns
present regressions predicting the leverage for our sample of matched public companies, and for the
subset that adjusted their capital structure. These first equations rely on a fairly parsimonious
specification, including only the high-yield spread, plus regional dummies and industry fixed effects.
We confirm the positive relationship found earlier between the credit spread and leverage for public
companies; the results are particularly significant when leverage is measure by debt to enterprise value.


34
  In recent work, Shivdasani and Wang (2009) find that during hot credit conditions, CDOs provide a higher fraction of
LBO credit, suggesting that the supply of non-bank debt fuel LBO activity.

                                                         24
Similar (unreported) results are obtained when we use our subsample of debt-issuing public
companies.
       In Columns 7-12, we predict comparable leverage levels for our sample of buyouts.                 In
Columns 7-9 we first try to explain each measure of leverage using the median leverage for the
matched public companies. If the same explanations for leverage hold for both sets of companies, we
would expect positive and statistically significant coefficients on the public industry leverage
variables. However, the only statistically significant coefficient is actually negative, while the other
two coefficients are positive, small and not statistically significant.
       However, in Columns 10-12, when we add the credit spread to the equation, it is negative and
highly statistically significant in each specification. Columns 13-18 replicate Columns 7-12, except
that they add controls for deal location, deal type and deal size. The results in these columns are similar
to those in Columns 7-12: leverage of public comparables does not explain buyout leverage but buyout
leverage is strongly related to debt market conditions as measured by the yield spread. Deal size,
however, is indeed another important determinant of LBO leverage. Larger deals (measured by
enterprise value quartiles) are significantly more highly levered than smaller deals for all our three
leverage measures, and public-to-private deals seem more highly levered than other LBO types.
       Table 11 presents leverage regressions controlling for company characteristics. For public
companies (Columns 1-3), more profitable industries (as measured by return on invested capital,
ROIC) have lower leverage, industries with more variable cash flows (as measured by the standard
deviation of ROIC) have lower leverage, and industries with more growth opportunities (proxied by
R&D-to-sales and market-to-book ratios) have lower leverage. These results are broadly consistent
with the earlier capital structure literature for public companies. In contrast, the regressions reported in
columns 4-6 show that almost none of these company characteristics have any significant relationship
with buyout leverage. The only exception is that when we measure leverage as Debt/EBITDA, LBOs
matched to industries with high sales growth and low corporate tax rate tend to have higher leverage,
although the economic significance is small. Note that this result is the opposite of what the trade-off
theory would predict. In contrast to industry characteristics, the high-yield spread variable is still a
strong determinant of buyout capital structure. It appears that the pattern is robust: public leverage is
related to the factors from the trade-off and pecking order theories discussed in other work, while
buyout leverage appears to be primarily a function of market conditions.




                                                     25
F. Pricing of Deals

To this point we have focused on the way in which capital structure differs between buyouts and public
companies, and whether the determinants of leverage are similar in each group of companies. We now
turn to the issue of the factors that affect buyout pricing. Our measure of price is enterprise value
divided by EBITDA, which we refer to as the “EV multiple”, which is the most commonly-used metric
for price in the private equity sector.35 Of particular interest, returning to the questions raised in the
introduction, the evidence in Figure 1, and indeed the title of the paper, is whether conditions in the
debt market not only affect capital structure but also the valuation of companies.
         Table 12 examines the relation between pricing in buyouts and in public companies. It presents
estimates of equations predicting EV multiples as a function of company and market characteristics.
The first two columns consider the extent to which pricing in buyouts and in public firms are related to
the high-yield spread. The spread has a negative and statistically significant impact on prices both of
buyouts and public firms.              Comparing the coefficients, however, the negative magnitude is
significantly larger for the LBO multiple than the public company multiple, indicating that LBO
pricing is more sensitive to debt market conditions.
         The fact that public company valuations are related to the credit spread suggests that the spread
not only proxies for debt market conditions, but also picks up changes in the economy-wide discount
rate or risk premium. Hence, before we can conclude that debt market conditions drive LBO pricing,
we need to control for changes in discount rates. In the third column we do so by controlling for the
matched public company EV multiple in the equation predicting pricing in buyouts. Changes in the
discount rate should be reflected in public company valuations. As expected (and in contrast to the
leverage regressions) the coefficient on the median public company multiple is positive and
statistically significant. Nonetheless, the credit-spread variable is negative and statistically significant
as before, and the magnitude of the coefficient is the same as in the previous columns. The effect of
credit market conditions on LBO pricing appears to be fairly orthogonal to general changes in
economy-wide discount rates. The fourth column adds a number of deal-level controls and finds a
similar effect; credit market conditions have a strong relation with buyout pricing. Buyout pricing and
buyout leverage both appear to be determined in large part by debt market conditions; the results are



35
  Clearly, many other possible metrics exist. In the private equity sector, enterprise value is often expressed as a multiple of
EBITDA minus “normalised” capex (in an attempt to proxy free cash flow). In the public equity arena, share price to
earnings (P/E) ratios are most typically employed. However, P/E ratios only measure equity valuation, and so are not
suitable for comparing buyouts where debt forms a large, and variable, portion of the capital structure.

                                                              26
consistent with easier availability of leverage driving up LBO transaction prices, as is commonly
suggested by practitioners and by the financial press.
       The final two columns try to get at this issue more directly by considering the relation directly
between LBO EV multiples and LBO leverage. The evidence from Figure 1 suggests that, at least in a
time-series aggregate, leverage and pricing in buyouts are highly correlated. This correlation does not
necessarily imply that leverage has a causal impact on pricing, since both are likely to be functions of
common, unobserved factors. In addition there are likely to be measurement error issues when our
proxies for pricing (enterprise value) and leverage (total debt) are both normalised by EBITDA.
       Still, we present some suggestive evidence on the relation between leverage and pricing by
regressing price multiples on leverage, using high-yield spreads as an instrument for leverage in the
first stage in the fifth column. Although this approach addresses the measurement problem in
EBITDA, one can question whether it controls adequately for endogeneity, since, as previously argued,
spreads may be related to the cost of capital (although we control for public market pricing in the
regression). As an alternative, we estimate this equation in the sixth column using the fraction of debt
that is Term Loan A as an instrument for leverage, since this fraction is likely to be related to the
amount of leverage available but not to the pricing of the deal (except through the leverage channel).
Using either instrument, our estimates indicate that there is a statistically significant relationship
between instrumented leverage and pricing in buyouts. This relation remains after controlling for
pricing multiples prevailing in public markets.
       We believe that our results on LBO leverage and pricing are unlikely to be driven by matching
or measurement error. Apart from the robustness results discussed previously, we reestimate the
regression analysis of leverage and pricing in Table A2 of the appendix for the subsample of public-to-
private transactions, where we are able to control for pre-LBO firm characteristics rather than industry-
region-level proxies. In these equations, we again find similar results to those in Table 12, with
leverage strongly predicting the pricing of deals.
       To summarize the results so far, our results suggest that (a) debt market conditions, rather than
firm-specific factors, are the primary driver of leverage in buyouts, and (b) debt market conditions also
drive the prices paid in these transactions, presumably through the leverage channel.

G. LBO transactions and Private Equity sponsor characteristics

Our results suggest that both buyout leverage and pricing are strongly related to debt market
conditions. One possible explanation, along the lines of Jensen (1989), is that private equity funds



                                                     27
choose leverage optimally to maximize the value of the LBO target firm, and the optimal leverage ratio
is higher during hot credit market conditions. This explanation appears to be unlikely given our
empirical results for several reasons: First, leverage in buyouts is essentially unrelated to comparable
public company leverage and characteristics in the cross-section, even for subsamples of public firms
that are more likely to adjust or increase leverage. Second, public firms across all subsamples decrease
rather than increase their leverage in response to improving debt market conditions. In an optimal
leverage story, we would expect that (a) at least some proxies for benefits and costs of leverage should
have the same cross-sectional relation for public companies and buyouts, and (b) that at least some
public companies (such as the ones that actively manage their capital structures) should increase their
leverage as well in response to improving debt market conditions.
        Consequently, it appears that the data are more consistent with the market timing or the GP-LP
agency explanations discussed in Section III than with one based on portfolio company characteristics.
        To distinguish between the market timing and the agency stories, we first consider the manner
in which LBO leverage and pricing are related to private equity fund characteristics. If buyout
leverage is principally used to arbitrage debt and equity markets, then the more reputable firms, who
have better access to debt markets, should be able to take advantage of these opportunities to a greater
extent than less reputable firms. Other research, such as Demiroglu and James (forthcoming) and
Ivashina and Kovner (2008) present evidence suggesting that more reputable private equity funds have
easier and cheaper access to debt.
        We evaluate this argument using three different measures of private equity fund reputation: the
amount of capital raised by the sponsor, the number of past private equity funds raised by the sponsor,
and the number of private equity transactions undertaken during the last three years. For every buyout
deal, we calculate the relative ranking of the sponsor according to these three measures at the time of
the deal, normalized between zero and one, in order to get a time-invariant measure (since LBO
volume has increased over time).36 Since the relation between these rankings and our dependent
variables is unlikely to be linear, we use dummy variables for whether the sponsor was relatively
highly ranked according to these measures.37 We are able to find this information about the private
equity firms, and their different funds, for about three-quarters of our overall sample of transactions.
We also include controls for the deal size relative to the overall fund size, and whether the private



36
  The exact construction of these variables is explained in Appendix B.
37
  When we use the rankings themselves rather than the dummy variables, or the raw numbers for fundraising, number of
funds, and number of transactions undertaken, the results are generally insignificant.

                                                        28
equity firm is affiliated to a commercial or investment bank (which arguably could increase access to
leverage).
        Table 13 presents regressions of our various leverage measures for each LBO transaction on
private equity firm- and fund-level characteristics, in addition to the debt market and public
comparator variables discussed previously. Overall, the statistical significance of the reputation
variables is weak and fairly inconsistent. While the number of past funds raised seems positively
related to D/EBITDA and EV/EBITDA, other reputation variables are statistically insignificant and
often enter with a negative sign. In addition, economic significance of these reputation variables is
quite low (especially compared to the high-yield spread).38 There is some weak evidence that deals that
are large relative to the size of the fund (measured by EV/fund size) use more debt. Although there
could be several explanations for this finding, it is broadly consistent with the agency story of Axelson
et al. (2009), in which leverage can lead to overinvestment.39 Also, it is worth noting that the
coefficient on our measure of debt market conditions, the high-yield spread, is consistently negative
and statistically significant in all leverage and pricing regressions.
        The ultimate test of whether the willingness of private equity firms to take on leverage is good
or bad for investors, however, is the question of whether deal leverage affects fund returns. Return
data (measured as fund-level IRR) is available from Preqin for 185 private equity funds in our sample,
which invested in 595 of our LBO deals. This means that we are able to match about one-half of our
total sample of transactions to funds where we can observe their returns. Of course, our transactions
are a relatively small subset of the total number of buyouts conducted by these funds, but for the
remaining buyouts data was not available. Nonetheless, we have a reasonably large sample of fund
returns, and, on average, detailed information on around three buyouts per fund.
        Table 14 presents regressions of private equity fund-level IRRs on LBO deal-level leverage and
a number of variables designed to control for other factors affecting returns, such as market
fluctuations and risk factors. In our regressions we control for fund vintage year (i.e., the year the fund
was raised), region and industry fixed effects, LBO type dummies, fund benchmark returns, and, in
some specifications, LBO year. Taken together, these controls should absorb a major part of the effect
of market return fluctuations and differences in risk premia across deals. Since we have several
observations for any given fund, we cluster our standard errors both at the fund and vintage year levels.

38
   One concern is that these reputation variables are correlated with each other, introducing multicollinearity problems in
the regressions. In unreported regressions we enter the fund characteristics one at a time with very similar results.
39
   Consistent with PE firms having overinvestment incentives, Lopez-de-Silanes et al (2009) find that deals undertaken by
funds with a large amount of fund capital or portfolio companies per investment professional produce lower IRRs at the
deal level.

                                                           29
Finally, since previous research (notably Kaplan and Schoar (2005)) has found significant persistence
in the performance across funds for a given private equity sponsor, we also control for the
partnership’s previous fund’s IRR, as well as a dummy variable indicating whether this is a sponsor’s
first fund.
        The first column estimates how a fund’s IRR relates to private equity firm and fund
characteristics. Kaplan and Schoar’s (2005) persistence result holds for our sample as well, and this
finding is robust to all alternative specifications that we have estimated. None of the other private
equity firm/fund characteristics are statistically significant. In the remaining columns we introduce
deal-level leverage and deal size variables. Overall, the results provide strong support for the agency
story as opposed to the arbitrage story for leverage. In particular, deal-level leverage is always
negatively related to fund returns, and statistically significantly so for our log D/EBITDA and
I/EBITDA measures (see Columns 2-4). Hence, funds doing transactions with more leverage tend to
underperform other funds, controlling for other factors affecting returns.
        Of course the Modigliani-Miller theorem predicts that leverage should have a strong effect on
returns. This effect, however, works in the opposite direction of what we find in the data. Modigliani-
Miller logic implies that leverage should increase average (expected) equity returns, while the results
presented in Table 14 suggest that the opposite is true in our sample and that funds with more levered
deals have lower returns.
        In Column 5 of Table 14 we consider whether there is any evidence that funds make money by
timing debt markets, by splitting leverage into the component explained by variation in debt markets
and residual leverage. We do this by first estimating a regression of log D/EBITDA on high-yield
spreads and using the fitted values from this regression to calculate predicted leverage. We then
calculate “residual” leverage as the difference between actual and predicted log D/EBITDA. If funds
arbitrage debt markets against equity markets when debt is “cheap”, we would expect the predicted
component of leverage to have a positive impact on fund returns. However, we find that both
components of leverage have a negative impact on returns, which is inconsistent with a market-timing
story. In Column 6 we investigate whether the negative effect of leverage is driven by the relatively
more levered deals by separating log D/EBITDA depending on whether this variable is below or above
the sample median. As the table shows, the negative effect is driven by the deals with a D/EBITDA
above the sample median, while the coefficient is smaller and insignificant when D/EBITDA is below
the sample median. This suggests that low to moderate leverage levels do not significantly hurt
returns, but high leverage levels do.      Also consistent with an agency story in which sponsor


                                                   30
overinvestment / risk shifting hurts investors, the results in Column 7 show that deals that are large
relative to fund size are associated with negative fund returns. Finally, these results are not driven by
the timing of transactions, even though (as Figure 1 shows) valuation multiples vary considerably over
time. When, in column 7, transaction year fixed effects are included, the results are unaffected.
       To summarize these results, the evidence that fund-level returns tend to be negatively related to
the transaction-level leverage suggests that private equity sponsors may be acting more in their own
(carried!) interest than their investors’ when they impose highly leveraged capital structures on their
portfolio companies. Note that this does not necessarily imply that a highly levered capital structure
imposes extra costs on the portfolio firm itself, as some critics of LBOs have argued. Instead, our data
indicates that the prices private equity funds seem to be willing to pay for highly levered deals are not
only high, but excessive.

                                           VI. Conclusions


Private equity firms have become increasingly important as a source of capital and governance for
companies. The majority of capital raised by private equity funds is used for leveraged buyouts, in
which equity from limited partners is supplemented with additional deal-level debt financing. Each of
these buyouts thus represents a capital structure decision; the total capital involved in these is
enormous. Buyout financing represents an important yet largely unexplored issue, for which there are
implications both for the study of private equity, and also for corporate finance more broadly. Are the
theories that have been developed to explain capital structures of public firms applicable to buyout
firms, or do completely different factors explain buyout capital structures than explain capital structure
in public firms? What is the role of debt market conditions and do they explain the extreme cyclicality
of the buyout industry? How does the availability and pricing of debt contribute to the quantity pricing
and returns of buyouts observed in the economy?
       To address these and related questions, this paper constructs a large, detailed, and
geographically diverse sample of buyouts - to our knowledge the most complete such database yet
assembled. Previous analyses have tended to focus on U.S. public-to-private transactions, which are a
small subset of all private equity deals. Our sample of 1157 transactions includes the often-studied
public-to-private deals, but the vast majority of the transactions are the more common deals involving
the purchase of private companies, and divisions of public companies. Our sample also differs from
most in that it includes a substantial number of non-U.S. deals. We combine detailed information on
capital structure from the syndicated loan market, valuation metrics from accounting data, and detailed


                                                   31
information on private equity firm and fund characteristics to produce the first comprehensive analysis
of the capital structure of buyouts.
       We first characterize how buyouts are financed, and find that, to a first order, buyout capital
structures appear to be “inverted” relative to comparable public companies. On average, debt
comprises around 70 percent of enterprise value in buyouts, which is about the proportion of equity in
public companies. This debt comes in many different forms; we document the use of each type and the
extent to which this use varies over differing market conditions. Much of the debt employed in buyouts
is non-amortizing, and it is common that for some tranches even interest payments are optional.
Contingent credit facilities are widely used and provide additional financial flexibility that is critical
for firms operating with such high leverage.
       We next compare the capital structure of buyouts with a matched sample of public companies.
Not surprisingly, leveraged buyouts employ more debt than do public companies, although the size of
the difference is striking, and is strongly cyclical. More surprising is our finding that there is no cross-
sectional relation whatsoever between the financial structure of buyouts and matched public firms.
This finding is robust to a large number of alternative measures of leverage and control samples.
       The lack of a relation between buyout financial structures and public company financial
structures suggests that different factors determine capital structure decisions of public companies and
private equity firms. We econometrically investigate the extent to which various possible factors affect
capital structures of buyout and public companies. Variables suggested by previous research work
well, and in accordance with theory, for the public companies. However, the factors that predict capital
structure in public companies have no explanatory power for buyouts. Instead, the main factors that do
affect the capital structure of buyouts are the price and availability of debt; when credit is abundant and
cheap, buyouts become more leveraged. In contrast, no such effect is observed in the matched public
companies. Our sample is particularly useful in this respect, since we include transactions from the
1980s through to the recent credit bubble, and even some transactions completed after the ensuing
financial crisis. As a consequence we observe considerable time-series variation in debt market
conditions.
       Our results suggest that capital structure in buyouts requires a different explanation than in
public firms. Private equity practitioners often state that they use as much leverage as they can to
maximize the expected returns on each deal. The main constraint they face, of course, is the capital
market, which limits at any particular time how much private equity sponsors can borrow for any
particular deal. Axelson et al. (2009) formalize these ideas in their model, which suggests that the


                                                    32
higher leverage chosen by private equity funds during hot markets could plausibly not be in the
interests of their investors.
        An important issue is whether company valuations are related to leverage, since if private
equity funds pay more for portfolio companies when higher leverage is available, then the higher
leverage could drive pricing beyond what is in the interests of investors. We document a significant
relation between leverage and valuation, which is consistent with the view that the prices that private
equity funds are willing to pay increases with the leverage they employ. However, there are a number
of alternative explanations for this finding. In particular, when credit conditions are favorable and
interest rates and the cost of capital are low, and valuations and leverage could be high for simple
discounting reasons. Distinguishing between these effects is difficult without a large panel of deal-
level outcomes.
        In the absence of these data, we perform two sets of tests. We first try to isolate the impact of
leverage on pricing by controlling for general movements in valuation multiples in public companies,
which will also be affected by economy-wide movements in interest rates. Even controlling for such
movements, as well as a number of fund-level characteristics that potentially influence the bidding
behavior of private equity firms, credit conditions appear to impact LBO pricing positively. The
second set of tests utilizes fund-level returns data, to which we can match a significant subset of our
buyouts. Although this data is one step removed from the deal level returns that we would ideally
prefer, provided our sample of deals is representative of those undertaken by each fund, it nonetheless
allows us to analyze whether highly leveraged deals are associated with higher or lower returns for
investors. The regressions suggest that there are consistently negative relations between fund returns
and our various leverage measures. We also confirm previous findings regarding the persistence of
performance by private equity firms across successive funds.
        Capital structures in public companies and private equity portfolio firms appear to be driven by
different factors. Costs from the incentive contracts that are ubiquitous in private equity are important
determinants of LBO capital structures. Given the increasing role of private equity in the economy and
the importance of financial markets in these deals, understanding the mechanism through which
financial conditions affect private equity transactions more completely seems like an increasingly
important area of research.




                                                   33
                                               References

Andrade, Gregor and Steven N. Kaplan (1998), How Costly is Financial (not Economic) Distress?
Evidence from Highly Leveraged Transactions that Become Distressed, Journal of Finance
53, 1443-1493.

Axelson, U., Strömberg, P., and M. Weisbach (2009), “Why are buyouts levered? The financial
structure of private equity firms,” Journal of Finance, 64, 1549-1582.

Baker, M, and J. Wurgler (2002), “Market timing and capital structure,” Journal of Finance 57, 1-32.

Baker, M, R. Greenwood, and J. Wurgler (2003), “The maturity of debt issues and predictable
variation in bond returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 70, 261-291.

Berger, P., E. Ofek, and D. Yermack (1997), “Managerial entrenchment and capital structure
decisions,” Journal of Finance 52(4), 1411-1438.

Bernstein, Shai, Josh Lerner, Morten Sørensen, and Per Strömberg (2010), “Private Equity, Industry
Performance and Cyclicality” Working Paper, SIFR.

Cotter, J. F., and S. W. Peck (2001), “The structure of debt and active equity investors: the case of the
buyout specialist,” Journal of Financial Economics 59, 101-147.

Demiroglu, C. and C. James (forthcoming), “The role of private equity group reputation in LBO
financing,” Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).

Fama, E.F., and K.R. French (1997), “Industry costs of equity,” Journal of Financial Economics 43,
153-193.

Fischer, Edwin O., Robert Heinkel, and Josef Zechner (1989), “Dynamic capital structure choice:
Theory and tests,” Journal of Finance 44, 19–40.

Gorbenko, A., and A. Malenko (2009), “Strategic and financial bidders in takeover auctions,” working
paper, Stanford University.

Gottschalg, O., and L. Phalippou (2009), “The performance of private equity funds,” Review of
Financial Studies 22(4): 1747-1776

Graham, J.R., and C.R. Harvey (2001), “The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from
the field,” Journal of Financial Economics 61, 187-243

Guo, S., E. Hotchkiss, and W. Song (2010), “Do Buyouts (Still) Create Value?” forthcoming, Journal
of Finance.

Ivashina, V., and A. Kovner (2008), “The private equity advantage: Leveraged buyout firms and
relationship banking,” working paper, Harvard Business School.



                                                    34
Jensen, M. (1986), “Agency costs of free cash flows, corporate finance and takeovers,” American
Economic Review 76, 323-339

Jensen, M. (1989), “Eclipse of the Public Corporation,” Harvard Business Review.

Kaplan, S.N. (1989a), “Management buyouts: evidence of taxes as a source of value,” Journal of
Finance 44, 611-632.

Kaplan, S.N. (1989b), “The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value,”
Journal of Financial Economics 24, 217-254.

Kaplan, S.N., and A. Schoar (2005), “Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and capital
flows,” Journal of Finance 60(4), 1791-1823 .

Kaplan, S. N., and J. Stein (1993), ”The evolution of buyout pricing and financial structure in the
1980s,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 313-357.

Kaplan, S.N., and P. Strömberg (2009) “Leveraged buyouts and private equity”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23, 121-146.

Korajczyk, R. and A. Levy (2003), “Capital structure choice: Macroeconomic conditions and financial
constraints,” Journal of Financial Economics 68, 75-109.

Leary, M. (2009), “Bank Loan Supply, Lender Choice, and Corporate Capital Structure,” Journal of
Finance 64(3), 1143-1185.

Leary, M. and M. Roberts (2005), “Do firms rebalance their capital structures?” Journal of Finance
60(6), 2575-2619.

Ljungqvist, A., M. Richardson, and D. Wolfenzon (2007), “The investment behavior of buyout funds:
theory and evidence,” ECGI working paper 174/2007.

Lopez-de-Silanes, F., L. Phalippou, and O. Gottschalg (2009), “Giants at the gate: Diseconomies of
scale in private equity,” working paper, University of Amsterdam.

Lown, Cara S., Donald P. Morgan, and Sonali Rohatgi, 2000. Listening to loan officers: the impact of
commercial credit standards on lending and output, Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Jul, 1-16.

Muscarella, C. J., and M. R. Vetsuypens (1990), “Efficiency and organizational structure: A study of
reverse LBOs,” Journal of Financial Economics 45, 1389-1413.

Myers, S. (1984) “The Capital structure puzzle,” Journal of Finance.

Myers, S., and N. Majluf (1984), “Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
Information that investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221




                                                   35
Opler, T., and S. Titman (1993), “The determinants of leveraged buyout activity: Free cash flow vs.
financial distress costs,” Journal of Finance 48(5), 1985-1999.

Ross, S., Westerfield, R., and J. Jaffe (2008), Corporate Finance, 8th ed., McGraw-Hill.

Shivdasani, A., and Y. Wang (2009), “Did structured credit fuel the LBO boom?,“ Working paper,
University of North Carolina.

Shyam-Sunder, L., and S. Myers (1999), “Testing static tradeoff against pecking order models of
capital structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 51, 219-244.

Strebulaev, I. (2007), “Do tests of capital structure theory mean what they say?” Journal of Finance
62, 1747-1787.

Strömberg, P. (2008) “The new demography of private equity.” In The Global Economic Impact of
Private Equity Report 2008, World Economic Forum, January 2008.

Stuart, T., and S. Kim, forthcoming, “Board interlocks and the propensity to be targeted in private
equity transactions." Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).

Titman, S., and R. Wessels (1988), “The determinants of capital structure choice,” Journal of Finance
43(1), 1-19.

Welch, I. (2004), “Capital structure and stock returns,” Journal of Political Economy 112(1), 106-130.




                                                   36
                           Figure 1: Market trends in leverage and pricing

The figu re sh ows median v alues of Net Deb t to En terprise Valu e ti mes 10, Net Deb t to EBITDA, and En terprise
Value to EBITDA for a sample of 1157 leverage buyout transactions (Panel A) and the corresponding median values
for matched public companies. Each leveraged buyout is m atched to the m edian value for public firms in the same
Fama-French 49 industry, month, and region (U.S., Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Asia, or Australia). See Table 5
for definitions of all variables. There are no buyouts in the year 1991.

                                         Panel A: Leveraged buyouts




                                    Panel B: Matched Public Companies




                                                        37
                              Figure 2: LBO Versus Public Market Leverage

This figu re sho ws LB O lev erage fo r th e sam ple p lotted ag ainst th e m edian p ublic com pany lev erage in th e sa me
Fama-French 49 industry, year and month, and region (U.S., Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Asia, or Australia) as
the LBO. The sample excludes LBOs in the banking and insurance industries (Fama-French industries 45 and 46). In
addition, panels B and C exclu de two LBOs with n egative EBITDA at t he time of the transaction and the industry
median cal culation e xcludes fi rms wi th ne gative EB ITDA. Leverage i s m easured as net debt t o e nterprise value
(market value of equity plus debt minus cash and short-term investments) in Panel A; net debt (i.e. debt minus cash
and short-term investments) to EB ITDA value in Panel B, and net interest expense over EBITDA in panel C, and
excludes outliers where LBO I/EBITDA>8. Panel C excludes interest payments on vendor and sponsor loans. For the
public companies, the net debt to EV is calculated using equity market value in the m onth preceding the date of the
closing of the syndicated loan for the corresponding LBO. F or the LBOs, the net debt does not include contingent
debt such as lines of credit. For the t-statistics, standard errors are clustered by year.

                                         Panel A: Debt / Enterprise Value
                         1
                         .8
                         .6
                         .4
                         .2
                         0




                                  0               .2                 .4              .6                   .8
                                                       Industry median net debt / EV

                                        Net non-contingent debt / EV                Fitted values


                          D/EV: Slope = 0.056, T-statistic = 1.71, R-squared=0.004, N=971

                                               Panel B: Debt / EBITDA
                         30
                         20
                         10
                         0




                              0               2                   4                 6                          8
                                                  Industry median net debt / EBITDA

                                      Net non-contingent debt / EBITDA                    Fitted values


                     D/EBITDA: Slope = -0.148, T-statistic = -2.28, R-squared=0.005, N=1117.


                                                                 38
                Panel C: Net Interest / EBITDA




I / EBITDA: Slope = 0.607, T-statistic = 1.78, R-squared=0.021, N=854




                                 39
      Table 1: A Typical Private Equity Buyout: the August 2005 Purchase of Kwik-Fit
Kwik-Fit is a leading tyre and exhaust fitting company, operating in the UK, Netherlands, France and Germany.
Private equity funds were both the buyer and the seller: PAI bought KwiK-Fit from CVC. In private equity
transactions the purchase price and level of debt are typically expressed in terms of multiples of earnings before
interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), as shown in the last column. In this example, the estimated
EBITDA for 2005 of £95.9m is the reference point. Pricing of the debt is expressed relative to the London Inter-bank
Offered Rate (LIBOR). For the mezzanine debt, the return is split between cash interest payments and “payments in
kind” (PIK).

                                  Amount                       Terms                  Pricing        Multiple of
                                    (£m)                                         (spread over         EBITDA
                                                                                     LIBOR)
Enterprise Value                773.5                                                                        8.1 x

                                   191.0
          Equity                                                                                        2.0 x
                                  (25%)

Debt
 Term Loan A                           140         7 year amortizing                     2.25%
 Term Loan B                           135              8 year bullet                    2.50%
 Term Loan C                           135              9 year bullet                    3.00%
 Total Senior Debt                   410.0                                                                    4.3 x
 2nd Lien                                75                   9.5 year                5.00%
 Mezzanine                            97.5                     10 year        4.5% + 5% PIK
                                   582.5
        Total Debt                                                                                      6.1 x
                                  (75%)

Revolving credit facility                 40                    7 year                   2.25%
Capex facility                            50                    7 year                   2.25%




                                                        40
                                                               Table 2: Sample Characteristics

This table shows the distribution of our sample companies according to various characteristics. In Panel A, LBOs are classified according to whether the transaction
involved the buyout of a division of a larger company, whether the target was an independent private firm or was quoted on a stock exchange (public-to-private),
whether it was a secondary transaction where the vendor was a private equity sponsor, or whether the acquisition was connected to a privatization or bankruptcy.
Additional information on the distribution of our sample by country, industry and private equity sponsor is provided in the Appendix. In terms of geography, the
companies are classified according to whether their head office is located in the US, Europe or Rest of the World. Panel B provides descriptive statistics on the size of
the LBOs in our sample, according to enterprise value (EV), and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA). The numbers of observations
differ since data is not available for all measures for all companies. All values are in constant 2008 USD. Probability-values for rejecting the equality among groups
using a Kruskal-Wallis test are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.

                                        Panel A: Distribution of the sample by status prior to the LBO and region

                                     Private       Privatization/      Public-to-                          North       Western      Rest of     Total by    Year as %
LBO year            Divisional                                                           Secondary
                                    company         Bankruptcy          private                           America      Europe       World        year        of total
1980                    0               0                0                 1                0                1            0            0           1          0.1%
1981                    0               0                0                 3                0                3            0            0           3          0.3%
1982                    0               0                0                 5                0                5            0            0           5          0.4%
1983                    0               0                0                 6                0                6            0            0           6          0.5%
1984                    0               0                0                 14               0                14           0            0           14         1.2%
1985                    0               0                0                 10               0                10           0            0           10         0.9%
1986                    1               0                0                 9                0                10           0            0           10         0.9%
1987                    1               0                0                 13               0                14           0            0           14         1.2%
1988                    1               1                0                 23               0                25           0            0           25         2.2%
1989                    0               1                0                 9                0                10           0            0           10         0.9%
1990                    0               0                0                 1                0                1            0            0           1          0.1%
1991                    0               0                0                 0                0                0            0            0           0          0.0%
1992                    1               0                0                 2                0                3            0            0           3          0.3%
1993                    1               0                0                 2                0                3            0            0           3          0.3%
1994                    4               6                0                 1                0                11           0            0           11         1.0%
1995                    6               4                0                 2                0                12           0            0           12         1.0%
1996                    7               2                0                 3                3                15           0            0           15         1.3%
1997                    4               12               0                 16               4                32           4            0           36         3.1%
1998                    6               8                0                 18               4                32           4            0           36         3.1%
1999                    17              8                0                 32               9                49           17           0           66         5.7%
2000                    26              12               0                 21               8                41           25           1           67         5.8%
2001                    25              5                1                 16               3                25           25           0           50         4.3%
2002                    42              11               0                 10               10               28           45           0           73         6.3%
2003                    38              14               3                 18               27               49           50           1          100         8.6%
2004                    42              22               1                 17               55               73           64           0          137         11.8%
2005                    38              23               0                 25               62               69           79           0          148         12.8%
2006                    31              20               1                 38               50               70           68           2          140         12.1%
2007                    27              15               3                 42               54               73           64           4          141         12.2%
2008                    2               3                0                 11               4                10           8            2           20         1.7%
Total                  320             167               9                368              293              694          453          10         1,157
as % of total         27.7%           14.4%            0.8%              31.8%            25.3%            60.0%        39.2%        0.9%       100.0%

                                                                                    41
                                                     Panel B: Size of the LBOs in the sample

                                                   Enterprise Value, million USD                        EBITDA, million USD
                                           N         Mean      Median    Min         Max        N      Mean      Median    Min     Max
Total sample                              1033      1,602.8    683.2     18.9      59,509.5    1157    174.9      81.9    -16.2   6391.3

By type of LBO:
Divisional                                295       1,289.9    701.8    18.9       16,844.2    316     169.1     98.2     -16.2   2864.9
Private company                           117        602.8     432.1    56.1       2,769.8     164     70.1      52.1       1.6   380.2
Privatization/Bankruptcy                   6        1,383.4    1802.3   174.6      2,182.5      9      149.7     162.6     17.1   343.8
Public-to-private                         375       2,566.9    848.2    43.5       59,509.5    378     275.9     104.4     -0.1   6391.3
Secondary                                 240        974.2     599.0    57.2       17,835.0    290     109.6     67.7       4.1   1598.1

KW test for difference between types     p-value    0.000***                                          0.000***

By time period:
1980-84                                   29         922.2     803.8    173.0      3,658.3     29      124.7     113.0     27.0   311.1
1985-89                                   78        3,895.9    935.6    43.5       59,509.5    79      442.4     101.8     -0.1   6391.3
1990-94                                   17         646.4     467.0    88.5       2,948.4     18      101.8     52.4       8.9   730.4
1995-99                                   158        774.5     589.0    72.0       3,745.9     163     91.9      69.9     -16.2   390.2
2000-04                                   387        886.7     519.1    18.9       8,533.9     422     123.1     72.4       4.5   1259.4
2005-08                                   364       2,331.3    922.9    56.1       50,037.7    446     213.1     89.1       1.6   5205.7

KW test for difference between periods   p-value    0.000***                                          0.000***

By Region:
North America                             640       1,796.2    652.5     40.7      59,509.5    703     189.1     74.4     -16.2   6391.3
Western Europe                            387       1,282.2    720.7     57.2      25,154.1    444     153.5     90.9      10.3   2160.7
Rest of World                              6        1,659.5    1876.7    18.9      2,625.3     10      127.6     118.6     5.6    293.3

KW test for difference between regions   p-value     0.284                                            0.035**




                                                                        42
                                        Table 3: The structure of LBO Debt

This table shows the structure of debt employed in LBOs. The reported figures, with the exception of the first column,
represent mean values across our sample of buyouts. The main categorization is between senior secured bank debt, and
subordinated debt. Senior debt is often split into separate tranches, with differing seniority, amortization, and interest rates
(and sometimes currencies). Term Loan A is amortizing debt, while Term loans B, C, and higher (Term loan B,C,…) are
typically non-amortizing. Subordinated debt can take a variety of forms including mezzanine and 2nd lien debt. Similarly,
bonds can either be senior or high-yield junior bonds, which are more common given the highly leveraged structure of most
LBOs. A variety of other debt is observed in our sample. Vendor loans refer to transactions where the vendor is prepared to
accept some part of the total price as a loan note secured on the target company. In most LBOs the existing debt is paid off
as part of the transactions, but in a minority of cases the new owners take on some of the existing debt. We refer to this as
assumed debt. In a few cases we also observe loans from the private equity sponsor (Sponsor loans), and some explicit off-
balance sheet financing; we categorize all these separately. Contingent debt refers to facilities that are put in place at the
time of the LBO to fund working capital, capex, acquisitions etc., but are not drawn down at the time of the transaction.
Some transactions involve preferred equity, which can be similar to low-seniority debt, although we neither include
preferred equity nor contingent debt in our calculations of leverage in subsequent tables.

                               Exists            % of total debt                 Basis           Paydown within 5 years
                            (% of LBOs)            (excluding                 points over
                                                contingent debt)               LIBOR

 Senior bank debt
 Term loan A                     62.2%                23.4%                        276                     68.0%
 Term loan B,C, …                89.3%                46.2%                        306                     5.5%
 Bridge loans                    9.4%                 2.9%                         271                     71.1%
 Subordinated debt
 2nd lien                        10.6%                 2.5%                        543                      5.3%
 Mezzanine                       41.0%                 9.9%                        519                      1.3%

 Bonds
 Senior                          7.1%                  2.3%                        485                      4.7%
 Junior                          21.9%                 9.3%                        561                      0.5%

 Other debt
 Vendor loans                    2.9%                  0.5%                        648                        -
 Assumed debt                    2.6%                  1.0%                         -                         -
 Sponsor loans                   1.0%                  0.3%                        761                        -
 Off balance sheet               1.8%                  0.6%                         -                         -
 Total debt                                           100%                         490                     22.8%

 Contingent debt
 Revolver                        92.1%                14.2%
 Other facilities                25.2%                3.7%

  Preferred equity               2.6%                  0.5%                        627                        -




                                                              43
                                                             Table 4: Leverage and deal pricing

This table shows the amount of debt used and the transaction valuation paid in the acquisition in the sample of LBOs. Debt includes senior secured bank debt and all
forms of subordinated debt (see Table 3 for details). Interest includes all the projected interest payments in the first year after the transaction. Measures are (1) debt
divided by earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (D/EBITDA), (2) debt divided by enterprise value (D/EV), (3) total interest divided by
EBITDA (I/EBITDA), and (4) enterprise value divided by EBITDA (EV/EBITDA). Probability-values for rejecting equality among groups using a Kruskal-Wallis test
are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.


                                             D / EBITDA                           D / EV                          I / EBITDA                       EV / EBITDA
                                       N         Mean      Median        N         Mean       Median        N        Mean       Median       N        Mean       Median
All LBO transactions                  1142        5.6       5.2         1002       0.69        0.70        873       0.50        0.45       1009       8.2        7.6

Divisional                             315        5.0         4.7       289         0.69        0.70       238        0.43        0.39      290         7.4        6.8
Private company                        163        4.9         4.7       115         0.64        0.65       139        0.44        0.42      114         7.8        7.4
Public-to-private                      366        6.5         5.8       354         0.73        0.73       253        0.62        0.57      362         8.8        8.0
Secondary                              289        5.6         5.3       238         0.66        0.68       237        0.50        0.43      237         8.5        7.9
Privatization/Bankruptcy                9         4.0         3.7        6          0.51        0.60        6         0.43        0.42       6          8.8        8.6
Kruskal-Wallis p-value                         0.000***                          0.000***                          0.000***                         0.000***
1980-84                                29         6.3         5.5       29          0.84        0.87        0                               29         7.15        6.33
1985-89                                68         8.0         7.8       64          0.89        0.91       41         0.98        0.93      67         8.55        8.24
1990-94                                18         6.5         6.1       17          0.80        0.81       16         0.62        0.59      17         7.67        7.68
1995-99                                161        5.5         5.1       158         0.68        0.69       148        0.64        0.55      154        8.44        7.53
2000-04                                421        4.4         4.3       379         0.65        0.67       325        0.35        0.33      382        6.91        6.63
2005-08                                445        6.3         5.8       355         0.68        0.69       343        0.53        0.5       360        9.54        8.81
Kruskal-Wallis p-value                         0.000***                          0.000***                          0.000***                         0.000***
North America                          689        5.8         5.3       619         0.70        0.70       587        0.55        0.49      625        8.46        7.68
Western Europe                         443        5.3         4.9       377         0.68        0.68       283        0.42        0.38      378        7.79        7.38
Rest of World                          10         5.7         5.5        6          0.70        0.68        3         0.53        0.59       6         8.48        8.9
Kruskal-Wallis p-value                         0.000***                          0.056*                            0.000***                         0.002***
EV quartile 1 (smallest)               250        4.6         4.3       246         0.66        0.66       185        0.45        0.37      249        6.92        6.62
EV quartile 2                          252        5.2         5.0       251         0.68        0.69       200        0.47        0.43      252        7.68        7.29
EV quartile 3                          253        6.1         5.5       252         0.70        0.70       195        0.54        0.47      254        8.7         7.72
EV quartile 4 (largest)                255        6.9         6.4       253         0.72        0.72       195        0.6         0.55      254        9.51        9.06
Kruskal-Wallis p-value                         0.000***                          0.000***                          0.000***                         0.000***




                                                                                   44
                                                 Table 5: Leverage of LBOs versus Public Companies

This table shows the median values of Net Debt (i.e. debt net of cash) to Enterprise Value (D/EV), Net Debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization (D/EBITDA), and Net interest expense to EBITDA (I/EBITDA) for the sample of 1157 LBO transactions and matched public companies split into
subgroups according to the quartiles of the corresponding debt measure for matched publicly traded companies. In Panel A, each LBO is matched to the public
companies in the same Fama-French 49 industry, year and month, and region (U.S., Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Asia, or Australia). In Panel B, the predicted
leverage of the LBO 5 years after the transaction, based on amortization schedules, is matched to the public companies in the same Fama-French 49 industry, year and
month, and region. In Panel C, each LBO is matched to the public companies in the same industry, date, and region whose long-term debt to capital ratio (debt divided
by debt plus book equity) changed by more than 10 percentage points in absolute value in the year of the LBO (“capital structure adjusters”). In Panel D, each LBO is
matched to the public companies in the same industry, date, and region whose long-term debt increased by more than 10 percentage points of this year’s total book
assets in the year of the LBO (“debt issuers”). Panel E focuses on a subsample of public-to-private LBOs where leverage can be observed prior to the buyout.
Probability-values for rejecting the equality among groups using a Kruskal-Wallis test are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.

                                                   Panel A: LBO versus public company median leverage

                                                  D/EV                                       D/EBITDA                                   I/EBITDA
                                        LBO            Matched public                 LBO          Matched public               LBO             Matched public
 Whole sample                           0.70               0.35                        5.1              3.8                     0.45                0.12
 Leverage
 Public quartile 1 (lowest)              0.69                 0.19                    5.4                 2.7                   0.43                  0.07
 Public quartile 2                       0.69                 0.31                    5.3                 3.5                   0.42                  0.10
 Public quartile 3                       0.71                 0.40                    5.2                 4.2                   0.42                  0.13
 Public quartile 4 (highest)             0.70                 0.54                    4.8                 5.2                   0.53                  0.20
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                 0.08*                  -                   0.00***                 -                  0.00***                   -


                                      Panel B: Predicted LBO leverage in 5 years versus public company median leverage

                                                  D/EV                                       D/EBITDA                                   I/EBITDA
                                      Pred. LBO                                  Pred. LBO                                  Pred. LBO
                                   leverage in 5 yrs    Matched public        leverage in 5 yrs    Matched public        leverage in 5 yrs      Matched public
 Whole sample                            0.55               0.35                     4.2                3.8                    0.35                 0.12
 Leverage
 Public quartile 1 (lowest)               0.58                0.19                    4.4                 2.7                   0.33                  0.07
 Public quartile 2                        0.54                0.31                    4.4                 3.5                   0.34                  0.10
 Public quartile 3                        0.55                0.40                    4.3                 4.2                   0.32                  0.13
 Public quartile 4 (highest)              0.53                0.54                    3.7                 5.2                   0.41                  0.20
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                   0.18                     -              0.00***                  -                  0.02**                    -



                                                                                 45
                                   Panel C: LBO versus public company capital structure adjusters’ median leverage

                                                 D/EV                                  D/EBITDA                          I/EBITDA
                                       LBO          Matched public            LBO          Matched public       LBO          Matched public
Whole sample                           0.70             0.33                   5.1              4.2             0.45             0.15
Leverage
Adjuster quartile 1 (lowest)            0.69             0.16                  5.3                2.6            0.44               0.09
Adjuster quartile 2                     0.70             0.28                  5.3                3.7            0.45               0.13
Adjuster quartile 3                     0.70             0.39                  5.4                4.6            0.44               0.18
Adjuster quartile 4 (highest)           0.70             0.55                  4.7                6.2            0.46               0.29
Kruskal-Wallis p-value                  0.71               -                  0.02**               -             0.77                -


                                          Panel D: LBO versus public company debt issuers’ median leverage

                                                  D/EV                                 D/EBITDA                          I/EBITDA
                                          LBO        Matched public           LBO          Matched public       LBO          Matched public
Whole sample                              0.70           0.33                  5.1              4.7             0.45             0.13
Leverage
Debt issuer quartile 1 (lowest)           0.68            0.17                 5.3                3.4            0.38               0.08
Debt issuer quartile 2                    0.70            0.29                 5.1                4.4            0.43               0.11
Debt issuer quartile 3                    0.70            0.37                 5.2                5.2            0.45               0.16
Debt issuer quartile 4 (highest)          0.71            0.51                 5.0                6.5            0.55               0.24
Kruskal-Wallis p-value                    0.13                 -               0.59                -           0.00***               -




                                                                         46
                                                       Panel E: Pre-LBO leverage

                                         D/EV                                 D/EBITDA                        I/EBITDA
                                LBO             Pre-LBO                LBO           Pre-LBO         LBO             Pre-LBO
Whole sample                    0.70              0.38                  5.6             3.2          0.54              0.11
Leverage
Pre-LBO quartile 1 (lowest)     0.63             0.11                  6.1               0.4         0.48                0.01
Pre-LBO quartile 2              0.69             0.28                  5.4               2.6         0.53                0.07
Pre-LBO quartile 3              0.77             0.52                  5.4               3.8         0.51                0.18
Pre-LBO quartile 4 (highest)    0.75             0.97                  6.0               5.9         0.61                0.33
Kruskal-Wallis p-value         0.02***             -                   0.18               -          0.08*                -
Observations                     115                                   160                            159

                               Pre-LBO     Matched public          Pre-LBO         Matched Public   Pre-LBO       Matched Public
Whole sample                     0.38          0.29                   3.2               3.5           0.11            0.11
Leverage
Public quartile 1 (lowest)      0.28             0.11                  2.1               2.3         0.06                0.06
Public quartile 2               0.39             0.27                  3.0               3.1         0.08                0.09
Public quartile 3               0.46             0.37                  3.4               3.8         0.10                0.13
Public quartile 4 (highest)     0.45             0.49                  3.8               4.9         0.19                0.21
Kruskal-Wallis p-value         0.03**              -               0.003***               -         0.00***               -
Observations                     113                                   166                            166




                                                                  47
                                                   Table 6: Leverage of LBOs versus Public Companies

This table shows the median values of Net Debt (i.e. net of cash) to Enterprise Value (D/EV), Net Debt to EBITDA (D / EBITDA), and Net interest expense to
EBITDA for a sample of 1157 LBO transactions and matched public companies split into subgroups according to quartiles of the corresponding financial characteristic
for matched public companies. Each LBO is matched to the public companies in the same Fama-French 49 industry, year and month, and region (U.S., Western
Europe, Eastern Europe, Asia, or Australia). The definitions of the public company characteristics are: Market-to-book = [market value of equity + book value of long-
term debt] / [book value of equiy + book value of long-term debt]; Return on Invested Capital = EBITDA / [book value of equity + book value of long-term debt];
Volatility in ROIC = the standard deviation of return on invested capital over the last five years; Sales-to-PPE = Sales / Property, plant and equipment; tax rate is the
statutory corporate tax rate for the corresponding country and year. Probability-values for rejecting the equality among groups using a Kruskal-Wallis test are
statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.

                                                     D/EV                                      D/EBITDA                                     I/EBITDA
                                            LBO           Matched public                LBO          Matched public                LBO             Matched public
 Market-to-book
 Public quartile 1 (lowest)                 0.69                0.52                    4.5                 4.4                     0.36                 0.13
 Public quartile 2                          0.71                0.41                    5.2                 4.2                     0.46                 0.14
 Public quartile 3                          0.70                0.31                    5.4                 3.5                     0.46                 0.11
 Public quartile 4 (highest)                0.69                0.21                    5.6                 3.1                     0.52                 0.09
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                     0.39              0.00***                0.00***              0.00***                0.00***               0.00***

 R&D-to-sales
 Zero                                       0.69                0.37                    5.1                 4.0                     0.44                 0.12
 Positive                                   0.71                0.28                    5.1                 3.2                     0.49                 0.10
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                     0.31              0.00***                   0.59              0.00***                  0.06*               0.00***
 Sales growth
 Public quartile 1 (lowest)                 0.69                0.41                    4.7                 4.0                     0.37                 0.12
 Public quartile 2                          0.70                0.36                    5.2                 3.8                     0.46                 0.12
 Public quartile 3                          0.69                0.32                    5.3                 3.7                     0.46                 0.11
 Public quartile 4 (highest)                0.70                0.33                    5.5                 3.6                     0.49                 0.11
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                     0.19              0.00***                0.00***              0.00***                0.00***                 0.21




                                                                                   48
                              Table 6: Leverage of LBOs versus Public Companies (continued)

                                        D/EV                             D/EBITDA                       I/EBITDA
                               LBO        Matched public        LBO          Matched public    LBO          Matched public
ROIC
Public quartile 1 (lowest)     0.68             0.34             5.0                3.7        0.44                0.10
Public quartile 2              0.69             0.33             5.3                4.3        0.44                0.12
Public quartile 3              0.72             0.39             5.1                4.0        0.44                0.13
Public quartile 4 (highest)    0.70             0.34             5.4                3.4        0.47                0.12
Kruskal-Wallis p-value        0.00***          0.00***          0.10*           0.00***        0.66            0.00***

Volatility in ROIC
Public quartile 1 (lowest)     0.70             0.46             5.0                4.5        0.39                0.13
Public quartile 2              0.70             0.39             5.0                4.1        0.45                0.14
Public quartile 3              0.72             0.34             5.3                3.6        0.48                0.12
Public quartile 4 (highest)    0.68             0.21             5.4                3.0        0.46                0.08
Kruskal-Wallis p-value         0.04*           0.00***          0.05*           0.00***       0.01**           0.00***
Sales-to-PPE
Public quartile 1 (lowest)     0.71             0.38             4.8                4.2        0.42                0.16
Public quartile 2              0.69             0.39             5.0                3.8        0.44                0.12
Public quartile 3              0.70             0.29             5.4                3.6        0.51                0.10
Public quartile 4 (highest)    0.68             0.35             5.3                3.7        0.45                0.09
Kruskal-Wallis p-value         0.12            0.00***          0.02**          0.00***       0.01***          0.00***
Tax rate
Low                            0.70             0.39             5.3                4.2        0.43                0.11
Medium                         0.68             0.32             5.0                3.5        0.47                0.12
High                           0.83             0.44             5.4                3.4        0.36                0.16
Kruskal-Wallis p-value        0.00***          0.00***           0.22           0.00***       0.02**           0.00***




                                                           49
                                                Table 7: Leverage of LBOs and debt market conditions
This table shows median values of Net Debt (i.e. net of cash) to Enterprise Value (D/EV), Net Debt to EBITDA (D / EBITDA), and Net interest expense to EBITDA
(I/EBITDA) for a sample of 1157 LBO transactions and matched public companies. Each LBO is matched to the public companies in the same Fama-French 49
industry, year and month, and region (U.S., Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Asia, or Australia), and values for “matched public” is the median value among the
public companies in this industry-year-region group. “U.S. high-yield spread” is the U.S high-yield rate minus U.S. Libor. “S&P E/P minus High-Yield-rate” is the
S&P earnings divided by price minus the U.S high-yield rate. “Credit Tightening” is the net percentage of loan officers in medium and large banks reporting tightening
standards for loans. All variables are measured at the end of the month of the LBO, except for credit tightening which is measured for the quarter of the buyout.
Probability-values for rejecting the equality among groups using a Kruskal-Wallis test are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.


                                                    D/EV                                    D/EBITDA                                     I/EBITDA
                                           LBO           Matched public               LBO           Matched public               LBO             Matched public
 US high-yield spread
 Public quartile 1 (lowest)                 0.70               0.29                   6.1                 3.7                    0.56                  0.11
 Public quartile 2                          0.70               0.33                   5.6                 3.8                    0.49                  0.11
 Public quartile 3                          0.70               0.37                   4.8                 3.8                    0.39                  0.12
 Public quartile 4 (highest)                0.66               0.44                   4.2                 4.2                    0.31                  0.13
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                   0.00***            0.00***                0.00***             0.00***                0.00***               0.00***
 S&P E/P minus High-Yield-rate
 Public quartile 1 (lowest)                 0.66               0.45                   4.3                 4.2                    0.40                  0.15
 Public quartile 2                          0.73               0.36                   5.6                 3.6                    0.56                  0.13
 Public quartile 3                          0.69               0.32                   5.0                 3.8                    0.38                  0.10
 Public quartile 4 (highest)                0.70               0.30                   5.9                 3.8                    0.50                  0.10
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                   0.00***            0.00***                0.00***             0.00***                0.00***               0.00***
 Credit Tightening
 Quartile 1 (easy)                          0.70               0.33                   5.0                 3.8                    0.36                  0.10
 Quartile 2                                 0.70               0.30                   5.4                 3.6                    0.47                  0.10
 Quartile 3                                 0.69               0.33                   5.4                 3.8                    0.53                  0.11
 Quartile 4 (tight)                         0.65               0.42                   4.4                 4.2                    0.37                  0.13
 Kruskal-Wallis p-value                   0.00***            0.00***                0.00***             0.00***                0.00***               0.00***




                                                                                 50
                                                    Table 8: Debt structure and debt market conditions

This table shows the mean and median values of various debt structure characteristics for a sample of 1157 LBO transactions. See Tables 3 and 4 for debt structure and
leverage definitions and Table 7 for definitions of the credit conditions variables. “Contingent debt except revolver” refers to facilities that are put in place at the time
of the LBO to fund capex, acquisitions, etc. which are not drawn down at the time of the transaction, excluding regular lines of credit. “Alternative funding” includes
vendor loans, loans by the LBO sponsor, and off-balance-sheet financing. Probability-values for rejecting the equality among groups using a Kruskal-Wallis test are
statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.

                     % of debt maturing              % Term Loan A /              % Term Loan A /             % Contingent debt exc.             % Alternative funding
                       within 5 years                  Total Debt                 Total Bank Debt              revolver / Total Debt                 / Total Debt
                       Mean        Median             Mean       Median            Mean        Median             Mean          Median              Mean         Median
Whole sample           0.22         0.18              0.26        0.24             0.37         0.36              0.03            0                 0.03           0
Time periods
1980-84                 0.07         0.05             0.69         0.73             0.93         1.00                                               0.11           0.08
1985-89                 0.18         0.08             0.42         0.44             0.88         1.00                                               0.13           0.06
1990-94                 0.28         0.25             0.17         0.21             0.64         0.69               0               0               0.03             0
1995-99                 0.24         0.19             0.27         0.23             0.45         0.44             0.03              0               0.03             0
2000-04                 0.29         0.27             0.31         0.31             0.40         0.46             0.03              0               0.03             0
2005-08                 0.17         0.13             0.16         0.04             0.20         0.12             0.05              0               0.02             0
KW p-value           0.00***                       0.00***                        0.00***                     0.00***                            0.00***
US High-Yield Spread
Quartile 1        0.14               0.09             0.13           0              0.18           0              0.05              0               0.01             0
Quartile 2        0.23               0.18             0.26         0.25             0.39         0.38             0.04              0               0.03             0
Quartile 3        0.24               0.22             0.29         0.27             0.44         0.46             0.02              0               0.03             0
Quartile 4        0.31               0.29              0.3         0.3              0.41         0.47             0.03              0               0.04             0
KW p-value     0.00***                              0.00***                       0.00***                     0.00***                            0.01***
S&P E/P minus High-Yield-rate
Quartile 1           0.31     0.29                    0.34         0.32             0.47         0.49             0.02              0               0.04             0
Quartile 2           0.23     0.19                    0.29         0.27             0.52         0.5              0.03              0               0.05             0
Quartile 3           0.21     0.19                    0.21         0.19             0.27         0.27             0.04              0               0.02             0
Quartile 4           0.16     0.14                    0.15         0.05             0.19         0.12             0.04              0               0.02             0
KW p-value        0.00***                          0.00***                        0.00***                     0.00***                            0.01***
Credit Tightening
Quartile 1 (easy) 0.23        0.21                    0.22         0.24             0.3          0.33             0.03              0               0.01             0
Quartile 2           0.23     0.19                    0.23         0.22             0.34         0.35             0.03              0               0.03             0
Quartile 3           0.19     0.13                    0.19         0.14             0.27         0.22             0.05              0               0.02             0
Quartile 4 (tight) 0.29       0.26                    0.31         0.29             0.42         0.43             0.03              0               0.04             0
KW p-value        0.00***                          0.00***                       0.00***                      0.06*                              0.01**



                                                                                    51
                       Table 9: Descriptive statistics for regression variables

This table shows descriptive statistics for the variables used in the regression analyses in Tables 10-14. “Public”
variables are median values for all public companies in COMPUSTAT and Global COMPUSTAT in the same
region, Fama-French 49 industry, and month as the corresponding LBO transaction. “Adjuster” variables are median
values for public companies whose debt to book capital changed by more than 10 percentage points in absolute value
in the year of the LBO. “Issuer” variables are median values for public companies whose long-term debt increased
by more than 10 percentage points of this year’s total book assets in the year of the LBO. Fund characteristics are
calculated using data from Capital IQ and Preqin. “EV / fund size” is the enterprise value of the LBO transaction
divided by the fund size of the acquiring PE fund. Sponsor rankings are explained in Appendix B. “Bank affiliated”
means that the PE sponsor was a subsidiary of a commercial bank, investment bank, or insurance company. Fund
return data is from Preqin by June 2009. “Preqin fund benchmark IRR” are average fund returns for funds of the
same vintage, region, and market segment.

                                              N      Mean         Min     25th      Median       75th       Max
                                                                          %tile                  %tile
LBO characteristics
LBO D/EV                                    1002      0.69         0.00    0.61       0.70        0.78      0.99
LBO log D/EBITDA                            1143      1.66         0.18    1.44       1.65        1.86      3.82
LBO I/EBITDA                                873       0.50         0.00    0.32       0.45        0.61      8.06
LBO log EV/EBITDA                           1009      2.04        -0.01    1.81       2.02        2.25      3.63
Macro variables
Corp. tax rate in country and year          1153      37.2        10.0     34.5       39.3        39.3     56.8
US high-yield spread                        1118      5.53        2.23     3.46       5.01        6.74     12.31
Public …
 D/EV                                       1131      0.36        -0.11    0.26       0.35        0.47     0.85
 log D/EBITDA                               1149      1.28        -1.67    1.14       1.34        1.52     3.64
 I/EBITDA                                   1149      0.13        -2.65    0.09       0.12        0.16     0.45
 log EV/EBITDA                              1130      2.48         1.65    2.29       2.45        2.62     3.90
 M/B ratio                                  1131      1.57         0.62    1.18       1.44        1.74     6.14
 sales growth                               1147      1.33         0.17    0.95       1.08        1.17     95.82
 ROIC                                       1149      0.10        -0.25    0.09       0.11        0.12     0.24
 Volatility in ROIC                         1149      0.05         0.00    0.04       0.05        0.06     0.24
Public adjuster …
 D/EV                                       1033      0.35        -0.09    0.23       0.33        0.46      1.09
 log D/EBITDA                               1125      1.40        -0.95    1.17       1.43        1.67      4.71
 I/EBITDA                                   1127      0.18         0.00    0.10       0.15        0.22      4.06
Public debt issuer …
 D/EV                                       1041      0.34        -0.09    0.24       0.33        0.44      0.98
 log D/EBITDA                               1130      1.57        -0.04    1.38       1.55        1.74      3.67
 I/EBITDA                                   1130      0.15        -2.68    0.10       0.13        0.18      0.56
Private equity sponsor/fund
 Sponsor top decile in fundraising          1049      0.32          0        0          0          1         1
 Sponsor top decile in no. of funds         1157      0.30          0        0          0          1         1
 Sponsor top 2% in deals last 3 yrs.        1126      0.74          0        0          1          1         1
 Fund size, 2008 USD millions               1059      3773         17      1092       2395       4861      23047
 Log Fund size                              1059      7.71        2.83     6.99       7.78       8.49      10.05
 EV / fund size                             930       0.72        0.01     0.16       0.28       0.60      32.84
 Bank affiliated sponsor (dummy)            1157      0.15
 Fund IRR (%)                               610       21.4        -17.1    11.2       19.6        28.9     109.9
 First-time fund (dummy)                    1079      0.09
 IRR in previous fund (%)                   620       22.6        -18.3    11.5       22.1        28.9     109.9
 Preqin fund benchmark IRR (%)              643       20.0         3.0     10.2       16.5        30.7     38.9



                                                             52
     Table 10: LBO vs. Public Company Median Leverage and Debt Market Conditions

This table shows the results from OLS regressions of LBO and matched public company median leverage on the
U.S. high-yield bond spread over LIBOR (“High-yield spread”) and various other controls. “Public” variables are
median values for all public companies in COMPUSTAT (or Global COMPUSTAT for non-U.S. deals) in the same
region, Fama-French 49 industry, and month as the corresponding LBO transaction. “Adjuster” variables are median
values for public companies whose debt-to-book capital ratio changed by more than 10 percentage points in absolute
value in the year of the LBO. OLS regression coefficients and t-statistics using standard errors clustered at the LBO
deal-year level are displayed in the table. Coefficients are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1%
(***) levels.

                                       (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)
                                      Public       Public          Public     Adjuster    Adjuster        Adjuster
VARIABLES                                           log                                     log
                                      D/EV       D/EBITDA      I/EBITDA        D/EV      D/EBITDA        I/EBITDA

High-yield spread                    0.017***       0.005         0.003*      0.022***    0.023***         0.010***
                                       11.261       1.667          1.992        9.865       6.549            3.981
Western Europe                       0.035***     0.121***      -0.030***      0.033*       0.007         -0.067***
                                        3.159       4.521         -4.346        1.798       0.177           -5.659
Rest of World                         -0.055*     -0.346**      -0.058***       0.036     -0.784***       -0.095***
                                       -2.009       -2.42          -4.25        0.595       -4.302          -4.965

Industry Fixed Effects                 Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes

Constant                             0.187***     1.088***      0.130***      0.203***     1.406***        0.227**
                                        4.4         7.776         9.497         3.084        7.485          2.241

Observations                           1092         1110           1110         995          1087           1089
R-squared                               0.7         0.759          0.897       0.419         0.458          0.295

                                        (7)          (8)            (9)         (10)        (11)            (12)
                                       LBO          LBO            LBO          LBO         LBO             LBO
VARIABLES                                            log                                     log
                                      D / EV     D/EBITDA      I/EBITDA        D / EV    D/EBITDA        I/EBITDA

Public D/EV                           0.040                                    0.072*
                                      1.306                                     1.971
Public log D/EBITDA                               -0.081***                                 -0.044
                                                    -3.077                                  -1.591
Public I/EBITDA                                                    0.208                                    0.302
                                                                   1.233                                    1.622
High-yield spread                                                            -0.010***    -0.059***       -0.043***
                                                                               -3.409       -7.938          -6.209

Constant                             0.676***     1.760***      0.478***      0.716***     2.034***       0.698***
                                      72.136       33.019         9.531        55.234       44.037         15.564

Observations                           983          1136            871         944          1097            871
R-squared                             0.002         0.010          0.004       0.033         0.161          0.081




                                                              53
     Table 10: LBO vs. Public Company Median Leverage and Debt Market Conditions
                                     (continued)


                                (13)         (14)          (15)      (16)         (17)       (18)
                                LBO          LBO           LBO       LBO          LBO        LBO
VARIABLES                                     log                                  log
                               D/EV       D/EBITDA     I/EBITDA     D/EV       D/EBITDA    I/EBITDA

Public D/EV                     0.040                               0.070*
                                1.251                                2.040
Public log D/EBITDA                        -0.048**                             -0.022
                                            -2.315                              -1.283
Public I/EBITDA                                            0.121                              0.202*
                                                           1.202                               1.824
High-yield spread                                                  -0.009***   -0.050***   -0.038***
                                                                     -3.845      -7.705       -5.000
Private company                -0.038**      0.045        0.031     -0.042**      0.007       -0.000
                                -2.444       1.321        0.986      -2.717       0.217       -0.010
Privatization/Bankruptcy      -0.178***   -0.308***       0.018    -0.179***   -0.303***       0.008
                                -3.767      -3.326        0.220      -3.807      -4.779        0.112
Public-to-private               0.037*     0.197***    0.166***       0.012    0.138***     0.119***
                                 1.769       5.416        4.159       0.626       3.680        3.146
Secondary                      -0.022**    0.143***      0.102**   -0.032***   0.081***        0.060
                                -2.741       4.049        2.112      -5.103       3.061        1.287
Western Europe                  -0.009     -0.076**    -0.119***     -0.003     -0.060**   -0.119***
                                -0.580      -2.501        -3.102     -0.167      -2.160       -3.096
Rest of World                    0.012      -0.074      -0.106**      0.012      -0.100    -0.183***
                                 0.255      -0.543        -2.232      0.258      -0.758       -4.478
Enterprise value quartile 2     0.023*     0.110***       0.022      0.019*     0.092**       -0.008
                                 2.026       2.852        0.453       1.819       2.484       -0.176
Enterprise value quartile 3   0.041***     0.251***      0.105**    0.039***   0.234***        0.070
                                 4.118       9.394        2.131       3.882      10.229        1.442
Enterprise value quartile 4   0.047***     0.368***    0.131***     0.044***   0.323***      0.084**
                                 4.273       8.652        2.929       4.718      11.008        2.150
Constant                      0.649***     1.468***    0.390***     0.697***   1.766***     0.648***
                                44.446      48.558        6.301      41.787      35.888        8.910

Observations                     983        1005            773       944         966         773
R-squared                       0.081       0.223          0.084     0.089       0.319       0.137




                                                      54
                           Table 11: Leverage and company characteristics

This table shows the results from OLS regressions of LBO and matched public company median leverage on the
U.S. high-yield bond spread over LIBOR (“High-yield spread”) and various other controls. “Public” variables are
median values for all public companies in COMPUSTAT (or Global COMPUSTAT for non-U.S. deals) in the same
region, Fama-French 49 industry, and month as the corresponding LBO transaction. OLS regression coefficients and
T -statistics using standard errors clustered at the LBO deal-year level are displayed in the table. Coefficients are
statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.

                                        (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
                                       Public       Public          Public       LBO          LBO           LBO
VARIABLES                                            log                                       log
                                      D / EV      D/EBITDA         I/EBITDA     D/EV       D/EBITDA      I/EBITDA

High-yield spread                    0.012***        -0.006           0.005    -0.009***   -0.049***      -0.038***
                                       5.878         -1.458           1.286      -4.344      -7.274          -4.796
Public Market / Book                 -0.099***     -0.154***         -0.012     -0.021**      0.010          -0.004
                                       -5.542        -4.898          -1.163      -2.488       0.493          -0.205
Public sales growth                  -0.001***       0.001          -0.001**     -0.000    0.003***          -0.000
                                       -5.319        1.327           -2.476      -0.727       4.540          -0.185
Public ROIC                          -0.290***     -2.676***          0.456       0.151      -0.024           0.002
                                       -5.245        -6.661           0.833       1.224      -0.079           0.006
Public ROIC volatility               -2.931***    -14.155***          0.104       0.092       0.629          -0.043
                                      -13.045       -15.566           0.123       0.406       1.415          -0.179
Corporate tax rate                     -0.001        -0.004          -0.000       0.002     -0.006*        -0.005**
                                       -0.632        -1.668          -0.854       0.693      -2.060          -2.132
Western Europe                         -0.022        0.013         -0.037***     -0.009      -0.109       -0.306***
                                       -0.806        0.144           -3.403      -0.163      -0.666          -3.453
Rest of World                          0.022         0.068           -0.020       0.013    -0.098***      -0.151***
                                       1.621         1.527           -1.343       0.552      -3.388          -3.886
Private company                                                                 -0.043**     -0.001          -0.004
                                                                                 -2.654      -0.024          -0.135
Privatization/Bankruptcy                                                       -0.177***   -0.323***          0.000
                                                                                 -3.718      -5.332           0.002
Public-to-private                                                                 0.015    0.125***       0.122***
                                                                                  0.751       3.389           3.117
Secondary                                                                      -0.032***    0.071**           0.058
                                                                                 -5.449       2.788           1.186
EV quartile 2                                                                    0.020*     0.084**          -0.005
                                                                                  1.964       2.242          -0.103
EV quartile 3                                                                   0.040***   0.227***           0.074
                                                                                  4.237      10.183           1.445
EV quartile 4                                                                   0.045***   0.313***         0.087**
                                                                                  4.851      11.107           2.190

Constant                             0.650***      2.702***          0.092     0.660***     1.922***      0.867***
                                       8.929        22.156           0.643       6.417       14.788         7.961

Observations                           1087          1087            1087         939          948           761
R-squared                              0.584         0.582           0.045       0.099        0.322         0.133




                                                              55
                                Table 12: Determinants of LBO Pricing

This table shows the results from OLS regressions of LBO and matched public company valuations, as measured by
the logarithm of Enterprise Value divided by EBITDA (“EV multiple”), on the U.S. high-yield bond spread over
LIBOR (“High-yield spread”) and various other controls. “Public” variables are median values for all public
companies in COMPUSTAT (or Global COMPUSTAT for non-U.S. deals) in the same region, Fama-French 49
industry, and month as the corresponding LBO transaction. Specifications (5) and (6) are 2SLS regressions where
LBO leverage is instrumented with the U.S. High-yield spread and the fraction of Term Loan A to total debt,
respectively. Regression coefficients and t-statistics using standard errors clustered at the LBO deal-year level are
displayed in the table. Coefficients are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.


                                      (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                     LBO        Public       LBO         LBO         LBO         LBO
                                      log        log          log         log         log         log
VARIABLES
                                  EV multiple EV multiple EV multiple EV multiple EV multiple EV multiple
                                                                                   IV HiYld    IV TermA

High-yield spread                  -0.048***     -0.026***     -0.045***     -0.034***
                                     -6.863        -6.070        -6.063        -5.972
Log LBO D/EBITDA                                                                            0.656***        0.808*
                                                                                               8.676         1.926
Public EV multiple                                                0.106**      0.104**      0.126***      0.130***
                                                                   2.234         2.468         6.183         3.063
Western Europe                                                               -0.074***        -0.034        -0.015
                                                                                -2.900        -1.486        -0.341
Rest of World                                                                   -0.097        -0.039        -0.023
                                                                                -0.798        -0.562        -0.291
Private company                                                                0.075**       0.071**       0.070**
                                                                                 2.238         2.656         2.317
Privatization/Bankruptcy                                                         0.158      0.354***       0.397**
                                                                                 1.233         2.854         2.264
Public-to-private                                                             0.107***         0.025        -0.020
                                                                                 3.964         0.971        -0.214
Secondary                                                                     0.116***      0.071***         0.052
                                                                                 6.046         6.688         1.067
EV quartile 2                                                                  0.092**         0.022         0.002
                                                                                 2.328         1.182         0.036
EV quartile 3                                                                 0.200***        0.041*         0.000
                                                                                 7.845         2.057         0.001
EV quartile 4                                                                 0.276***       0.063**         0.012
                                                                                10.412         2.345         0.080
Constant                           2.433***      2.728***      2.028***       1.789***      0.589***         0.363
                                    27.587        22.561        19.495          18.092         4.907         0.715
Industry and country
fixed effects                         Yes           Yes             No           No            No            No

Observations                          970          1091             951         951           949            985
R-squared                            0.233         0.612           0.123       0.235         0.631          0.631




                                                             56
                                                  Table 13: Leverage, pricing and fund characteristics

This table shows the results from OLS regressions of leverage and valuation for a sub-sample of LBO transactions for which we can obtain details about the private
equity sponsor and the fund used for the transaction. See previous tables of definitions of the leverage, valuation, and debt market variables. The size of the
transaction relative to the fund is measured by the LBO enterprise value over the fund size. Measures of reputation of the PE sponsor include whether the fund
sponsor was in the top 10% based on amount of funds raised at the time of the deal (among the sponsors in our sample), whether the fund sponsor was in the top
10% based on amount of number of funds raised at the time of the deal (among the sponsors in our sample), and whether the fund sponsor was among the 2% most
active at the time of the deal based on number of transactions undertaken during the previous 3 years (using all PE transactions in Capital IQ). We also control for
whether the fund is affiliated to a bank. Regression coefficients and T -statistics using standard errors clustered at the LBO deal-year level are displayed in the table.
Coefficients are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.

                                                (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)                (5)           (6)               (7)           (8)
                                                              log                            log                              log                             log
VARIABLES
                                              D/EV         D/EBITDA        I/EBITDA       EV multiple         D/EV         D/EBITDA        I/EBITDA        EV multiple

High-yield bond spread over LIBOR           -0.010***       -0.050***       -0.040***        -0.033***      -0.010***       -0.050***       -0.040***       -0.033***
                                              -4.224          -6.809          -4.752           -5.001         -4.071          -6.930          -4.766          -4.958
Industry median net debt / EV                 0.060*                                                          0.060*
                                               1.829                                                           1.874
Industry median log net debt /                                -0.027                                                          -0.026
EBITDA
                                                              -1.526                                                          -1.458
Industry median net interest /                                                0.167*                                                          0.159*
EBITDA
                                                                              1.864                                                           1.950
Log industry median EV/EBITDA                                                                0.098**                                                         0.094**
                                                                                              2.378                                                           2.298
EV / Fund Size                                                                                              0.010***          0.008           0.010*          -0.007
                                                                                                              2.871           1.416            1.913          -1.659
Sponsor in top decile in fundraising          -0.008         -0.008           0.028           -0.003         -0.005          -0.011            0.026          -0.010
                                              -0.798         -0.173           0.868           -0.067         -0.561          -0.235            0.815          -0.259
Sponsor in top decile in number of            0.009         0.062***          0.013          0.054**          0.010         0.066***           0.015         0.059**
funds raised
                                              0.849           2.897            0.508           2.214          0.915           3.168            0.596          2.427
Sponsor 3 year-deal activity in top 2%        -0.021          0.005           -0.055          0.035*          -0.015          0.016           -0.041          0.034
                                              -1.601          0.164           -1.133           1.857          -1.140          0.468           -0.815          1.645
Bank affiliated                               0.012           0.048            0.007          -0.002          0.004           0.031           -0.021          -0.005
                                              0.786           0.876            0.172          -0.043          0.223           0.578           -0.518          -0.139

LBO type and region fixed effects              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
EV quartile dummies                            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                   857             879             706              864            846             866             696             851
R-squared                                     0.093           0.327           0.127            0.251          0.102           0.325           0.125           0.244


                                                                                        57
                                                           Table 14: Leverage and fund returns

This table shows the results from OLS regressions of the acquiring private equity fund’s IRR (according to Preqin) on LBO deal leverage and various deal and fund
characteristics. Regression coefficients and T -statistics displayed in the table. Vintage year refers to the year when the acquiring private equity fund was raised. T-
statistics are clustered both at the vintage year as well as fund level using the method of Thompson (2006) and Petersen (2009) (using Mitchell Petersen’s
“cluster2”-command in STATA). Coefficients are statistically significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.
                                                            (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                                             Dependent variable: fund level IRR
Deal Log D / EBITDA                                                      -6.596**                                                                             -6.213**
                                                                          -2.042                                                                               -2.360
Deal D / EV                                                                                 -2.232
                                                                                            -0.472
Deal Interest / EBITDA                                                                                     -4.116**
                                                                                                            -2.285
Deal Log D/EBITDA, predicted                                                                                                -9.656**
                                                                                                                              -2.029
Deal Log D/EBITDA, residual                                                                                                  -6.279*
                                                                                                                              -1.946
Dummy for D/EBITDA below sample median                                                                                                        -7.174
                                                                                                                                              -0.999
Log D / EBITDA * (D/EBITDA below median)                                                                                                      -3.088
                                                                                                                                              -1.237
Log D / EBITDA * (D/EBITDA above median)                                                                                                    -8.013***
                                                                                                                                              -2.751
Deal EV / Fund Size                                                                                                                                           -3.148**
                                                                                                                                                               -2.036
Log Fund Size, 2008 USD                                  2.219            2.635*              2.328          2.157           2.649*           2.734*           1.690*
                                                         1.401             1.713              1.527          1.299            1.922            1.852            1.695
Log fund sequence number                                 -0.273            0.261             -0.737          2.002
                                                         -0.130            0.123             -0.347          0.657
First-time fund                                          5.234             5.661              2.771          6.570           5.312            5.524             1.352
                                                         0.986             1.026              0.517          0.836           1.180            1.210             0.345
IRR in previous fund                                    0.363**          0.366**            0.347**         0.367*          0.359**          0.364**           0.259*
                                                         2.099             2.149              2.136          1.937           2.133            2.232             1.781
Fund benchmark IRR                                                                                                                                              0.139
                                                                                                                                                                1.464
Vintage year fixed effects                                Yes              Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
Industry, region, LBO type and year fixed effects         No               No                 No             No                No               No               Yes
Number of LBO deals                                       515              513                458            407               505              513              450
Number of funds                                           154              154                142            144               152              154              139
Number of vintage years                                    19               19                 19             19                19               19               16
R-squared                                                0.390            0.408              0.428          0.380             0.397            0.409            0.600

                                                                                       58
                                 Appendix A: Additional tables



                         Table A1: Additional Sample Characteristics

              Panel A: LBO Targets by Country and Primary Fama-French Industry
                Number of      % of      Industry         Number of     Industry    Number of
               transactions    total                     transactions              transactions

USA               683         59.0%      Rtail               102        Insur          16
UK                138         11.9%      BusSv               91         Txtls          16
France            101          8.7%      Whlsl               72         ElcEq          14
Germany            69          6.0%      Telcm               60         LabEq          14
Netherlands        39          3.4%      Hlth                48         Util           14
Italy              22          1.9%      BldMt               46         Oil            13
Sweden             19          1.6%      Mach                46         Boxes          12
Spain              14          1.2%      Fun                 42         Clths          11
Canada             11          1.0%      Books               40         Steel          11
Belgium            8           0.7%      Hshld               39         Toys           10
Denmark            8           0.7%      Chems               37         Agric          9
Switzerland        8           0.7%      Food                36         Soda           8
Finland            6           0.5%      Autos               34         Fin            7
Ireland            6           0.5%      Trans               32         Other          7
Norway             5           0.4%      Cnstr               31         Banks          4
Australia          4           0.3%      PerSv               31         Beer           4
Luxembourg         4           0.3%      Meals               30         Guns           3
Austria            2           0.2%      Chips               27         Hardw          3
Bermuda            2           0.2%      MedEq               23         Mines          3
Czech              2           0.2%      Paper               19         RlEst          3
Greece             2           0.2%      Rubbr               19         Ships          3
Hungary            1           0.1%      Softw               18         Coal           0
Philippines        1           0.1%      Drugs               17         Gold           0
Poland             1           0.1%      Aero                16         Smoke          0
Turkey             1           0.1%      FabPr               16
Total             1157        100.0%




                                                    59
                                       Panel B: Transactions by Main LBO Sponsor

Private Equity firm                    Deals   Private Equity Firm                      Deals   Private Equity Firm                Deals
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co             61    Odyssey Investment Partners LLC            7     Heartland Industrial Partners        2
Bain Capital                             43    PPM Capital Ltd                            7     KRG Capital Partners LLC             2
Carlyle Group                            40    Behrman Capital                            6     LGV Capital Limited                  2
Blackstone Group                         38    DB Capital Partners                        6     Lehman Brothers Merchant Banking     2
Apax Partners                            35    HgCapital                                  6     Littlejohn                           2
CVC Capital Partners                     26    Metalmark Capital LLC                      6     Monitor Clipper Partners             2
Candover Partners Ltd                    21    MidOcean Partners LLP                      6     Nautic Partners                      2
Cinven                                   20    Sterling Group                             6     Parthenon Capital Inc                2
Permira Advisers Ltd                     20    Willis Stein & Partners                    6     Quad C                               2
BC Partners Inc                          19    AXA Private Equity SA                      5     Questor Partners Fund LP             2
3i Group Plc                             18    Bear Stearns Merchant Banking Partners     5     Saratoga Partners                    2
Bridgepoint Capital Ltd                  18    Bruckmann Rosser & Sherrell                5     Silver Lake Partners LP              2
Madison Dearborn Partners                18    Calera Capital                             5     Stonington Partners                  2
GTCR Golder Rauner LLC                   17    Cerberus Partners                          5     Summit Partners LP                   2
INVESTCORP                               17    Fenway Partners                            5     Thoma Cressey Equity Partners        2
Kelso & Co                               17    Oaktree Capital Management                 5     Weiss Peck & Greer Investments       2
Texas Pacific Group Inc                  16    Providence Equity Partners                 5     Yucaipa Cos                          2
Warburg Pincus & Co                      16    Royal Bank Private Equity                  5     Lazard Asset Management LLC          2
Court Square Capital Partners            15    Wellspring Capital Management              5     Allied Capital Corp                  1
DLJ Merchant Banking                     15    Wind Point Partners                        5     Audax Group LP                       1
EQT Scandinavia BV                       15    ABRY Capital Partners                      4     Bessemer Capital Partners            1
Goldman Sachs Capital Partners           15    Allianz Capital Partners                   4     Brockway Moran & Partners Inc        1
Thomas H Lee Partners                    15    Francisco Partners                         4     CDC Entreprises                      1
Vestar Capital Partners                  15    Harvest Partners                           4     Close Brothers Private Equity        1
ABN AMRO                                 14    Kohlberg & Co                              4     Colony Capital LLC                   1
PAI [Paribas Affaires Industrielles]     14    Onex Corp                                  4     Cornerstone Equity Investors         1
Clayton Dubilier & Rice Inc              13    Ripplewood Holdings LLC                    4     Deutsche Beteiligungs AG             1
HM Capital Partners LLC                  13    Trivest Partners                           4     Drexel Burnham Lambert               1
JW Childs Associates                     13    21 Centrale Partners                       3     E.F. Hutton LBO Inc.                 1
Advent International Corp                12    Alpinvest Partners                         3     Equita Management GmbH               1
Leonard Green & Partners                 12    American Capital Strategies Ltd            3     First Atlantic Capital Corp          1
Welsh Carson Anderson & Stowe            12    Arcapita Inc                               3     General Atlantic LLC                 1
Doughty Hanson & Co                      11    Astorg Partners                            3     Great Hill Partners                  1
IK Investment Partners                   11    Brentwood Associates                       3     Gresham Partners                     1
AEA Investors Inc                        10    Butler Capital                             3     Gresham Private Equity               1
Berkshire Partners                       10    Centre Partners                            3     Henderson Private Equity             1
Boston Ventures Management               10    Genstar Capital Corp                       3     Kirtland Capital Partners II LP      1
Castle Harlan                            10    Golden Gate Capital Inc                    3     Liberty Partners                     1
Cypress Group LLC                        10    JLL Partners                               3     Morgan Lewis Githens & Ahn           1
Hellman & Friedman LLC                   10    Lindsay Goldberg & Bessemer                3     Nordic Capital                       1
Merrill Lynch Capital Partners           10    McCown De Leeuw & Co                       3     North Castle Partners                1
Cognetas/Electra Partners Europe         9     Oak Hill Capital Partners                  3     Olympus Partners                     1
First Reserve Corp                       9     TA Associates Inc                          3     Palamon Capital Partners             1
Gilde Investments                        9     Terra Firma Capital Partners Ltd           3     Phildrew Ventures                    1
LBO France                               9     UBS Capital                                3     Phoenix Equity Partners              1
Montagu / HSBC Private Equity            9     Veritas Capital                            3     Platinum Equity LLC                  1
Charterhouse Development Capital         8     Veronis Suhler Stevenson                   3     Saunders Karp & Megrue               1
Forstmann Little & Co                    8     Gibbons Goodwin & Van Amerongen            3     Sentinel Capital Partners            1
Freeman Spogli                           8     American Securities Capital Partners       2     Stonebridge Partners                 1
One Equity Partners LLC                  8     AtriA Capital Partenaires                  2     Sun Capital Partners Inc             1
Alchemy Partners                         7     Bridgepoint Capital Ltd [ex-Natwest]       2     TDR Capital LLP                      1
Barclays Private Equity                  7     Chequers Capital                           2     Thayer Capital Partners              1
Code Hennessy & Simmons                  7     Cravey Green & Wahlen                      2     Waterland Private Equity             1
Duke Street Capital                      7     Eurazeo SA                                 2     Watermill Ventures Ltd               1
JP Morgan Partners                       7     Fox Paine Capital LLC                      2     Weston Presidio Capital              1
Jordan Co                                7     HIG Capital                                2     Windward Capital                     1




                                                                        60
       Table A2: Leverage and pricing determinants in the public-to-private subsample

This table shows the results from OLS regressions of LBO and pre-LBO leverage and valuations on the U.S. high-
yield bond spread over LIBOR (“High-yield spread”), pre-LBO characteristics, and other controls for the subsample
where pre-LBO financial information was available. “Public” variables are median values for all publicly traded
firms in COMPUSTAT (or Global COMPUSTAT for non-U.S. deals) in the same region, Fama-French 49 industry,
and month as the corresponding LBO. Pre-LBO characteristics are taken from the closest financial statement before
the LBO closing date. Pre-LBO market values are calculated using stock prices 12 months before the LBO closing
date. In the regressions where pre-LBO leverage is the dependent variable, all independent pre-LBO characteristics
are lagged one year. t-statistics use standard errors clustered at the LBO deal-year level. Coefficients are statistically
significant at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.

                                     (1)            (2)               (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                           LBO            LBO               LBO          LBO           LBO            LBO
                                     log            log
                                 D/EBITDA       D/EBITDA          D/EV           D/EV        I/ EBITDA      I/EBITDA

Pre-LBO log D/EBITDA                0.015           0.024
                                    0.324           0.745
Pre-LBO Net debt / EV                                             0.081          0.089*
                                                                  1.583           1.886
Pre-LBO I/EBITDA                                                                                0.136          0.166
                                                                                                0.936          1.568
High-yield spread                                -0.086***                       -0.007                     -0.047***
                                                   -5.608                        -1.025                       -8.001

Observations                         142             134            97             91             99             99
R-squared                           0.002           0.267         0.027          0.028          0.011          0.297

                                     (7)            (8)             (9)           (10)          (11)           (12)
VARIABLES                         Pre-LBO          LBO           Pre-LBO          LBO         Pre-LBO          LBO
                                     log            log
                                 D/EBITDA       D/EBITDA          D/EV           D/EV        I/EBITDA      I/ EBITDA

Pre-LBO M/B                         0.167          0.088**      -0.139***        -0.002          0.015          0.038
                                    0.867            2.396         -5.512        -0.151          0.734          1.217
Pre-LBO sales growth                0.387           -0.101          0.027       -0.218*          0.026          0.099
                                    0.903           -0.535          0.449        -1.986          0.292          1.058
Pre-LBO ROIC                      -4.124**         -0.974*         -0.038        -0.012        -0.758*         -0.070
                                   -2.447           -2.102         -0.099        -0.066         -1.994         -0.463
Public ROIC volatility            -7.447**          1.366*      -2.290***        -0.680        -0.678*         -0.342
                                   -2.928            1.760         -3.516        -1.567         -1.831         -0.569
Pre-LBO ln(sales)                  0.102*            0.033          0.010        0.006          -0.009         -0.007
                                    2.118            1.616          0.940        0.773          -1.084         -0.609
High-yield spread                   0.040        -0.066***       0.043***        -0.001        0.014**      -0.039***
                                    0.765           -4.542          3.292        -0.154          2.276         -5.079
North America                       0.043            0.191         -0.051        0.005           0.053        0.089**
                                    0.159            1.733         -0.815        0.159           1.667          2.270
Constant                            0.773         1.643***        0.529**      0.741***         0.218*       0.675***
                                    1.138            5.751          2.760        8.348           2.051          4.344

Observations                          89             100            86             99             96             75
R-squared                           0.135           0.305         0.476          0.156          0.215          0.310




                                                                61
      Table A2: Leverage and pricing determinants in the public-to-private subsample
                                       (continued)


                          (13)      (14)     (15)     (16)      (17)      (18)
                        Pre-LBO   Pre-LBO  Pre-LBO    LBO     Pre-LBO     LBO
VARIABLES                           Log                log       log       log
                        Log D/EV D/EBITDA I/EBITDA EV/EBITDA EV/EBITDA EV/EBITDA

Public net debt/EV      0.552**
                          2.43
Public D/EBITDA                     0.323*
                                     1.87
Public I/EBITDA                               0.333**
                                                2.15
Pre-LBO log EV/EBITDA                                                           0.114***
                                                                                  3.716
High-yield spread                                        -0.071***   -0.063    -0.070***
                                                           -3.924    -0.854      -4.434
Public log EV/EBITDA                                        0.199     0.388       0.170
                                                            1.473     1.417       1.403
North America                                               0.063     0.292       0.155
                                                            1.276     1.038       1.718

Constant                0.213***   0.550***   0.116***   1.938***    1.144     1.670***
                           3.23       4.54       3.96      5.729     1.166       4.948

Observations               98        144        153         148        97          99
R-squared                0.106      0.017      0.019       0.264     0.049       0.331




                                                 62
                     Appendix B: Definition of Fund Ranking Variables


“Fund Raising” and “Number of Funds Raised” Ranks: For the deals in our data set, we
managed to identify 188 sponsors for which we had information about fund structure and fund
raising from CIQ and Preqin. For each of these sponsors, we constructed a yearly observation of
how many funds and how much total money (in 2008 USD) the sponsor had raised since
inception. For each year, we then ranked these 188 sponsors relative to each other according to
number of funds raised and dollars raised. If in a given year, a sponsor had not yet raised any
fund, that sponsor was excluded from the ranking in that year. From the ranking we calculated a
percentile for each year and sponsor from 0 to 1. For example, Hellman & Friedman had a
fundraising rank of 0.13 in 2005, meaning that up to and including 2005, they had raised more
money than 87% of the 188 sponsors. In the regressions, we use dummy variables for whether a
deal was done by a sponsor in the top decile according to these measures.


“Number of Deals in Last Three Years” Rank: For this variable, we started with the universe
of all buyout deals in CIQ (around 19800 deals from 1969 to 2008), and matched them to buying
sponsors uniquely identified in CIQ. Each deal is matched to between 1 and 12 sponsors,
depending on how many sponsors participated in the deal. There is a total of around 6300 unique
sponsors that have participated as buyers in at least one LBO deal in CIQ. For each month, we
calculated how many CIQ deals they had participated in for the last three years. For each month,
we then ranked the total universe of sponsors relative to each other according to number of deals
done in the last three years. If in a given month, a sponsor had not yet participated in any deal,
that sponsor was excluded from the ranking in that month. From the ranking we calculated a
percentile for each month and sponsor from 0 to 1. For example, Hellman & Friedman had a deal
rank of 0.043 in January of 2005, meaning that from February 2002 to January 2005, they
participated in more deals than 95.7% of all sponsors active in CIQ up to that date. In the
regressions, we use a dummy variable for whether the sponsor was in the top two percentiles
according to this measure.




                                                   63
