NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID BANKRUPTCY REFORM CAUSE MORTGAGE DEFAULT TO RISE?
Wenli Li
Michelle J. White
Ning Zhu
Working Paper 15968
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15968

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

We are grateful to Mark Watson at the Kansas Fed for his invaluable support on the LPS mortgage
data, to Susheela Patwari for very capable research assistance and to Gordon Dahl, Joseph Doherty,
Ronel Elul, Roger Gordon, Richard Green, Ed Morrison, Nick Souleles, Paul Willen, and the referees
for extremely helpful comments. We also benefitted from the comments of participants at various
conferences where we presented earlier drafts. Michelle White is grateful for the support of the Cheung
Kong Graduate School of Business, Beijing, where she was a visiting professor while working on
this paper. The views expressed here are the authors’ and do not represent those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Wenli Li, Michelle J. White, and Ning Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Did Bankruptcy Reform Cause Mortgage Default to Rise?
Wenli Li, Michelle J. White, and Ning Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 15968
May 2010, Revised October 2010
JEL No. G21,K35,R21
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that the U.S. bankruptcy reform of 2005 played an important role in the mortgage
crisis and the current recession. When debtors file for bankruptcy, credit card debt and other types
of debt are discharged—thus loosening debtors’ budget constraints. Homeowners in financial distress
can therefore use bankruptcy to avoid losing their homes, since filing allows them to shift funds from
paying other debts to paying their mortgages. But a major reform of U.S. bankruptcy law in 2005
raised the cost of filing and reduced the amount of debt that is discharged. We argue that an unintended
consequence of the reform was to cause mortgage default rates to rise.
We estimate a hazard model to test whether the 2005 bankruptcy reform caused mortgage defaults
to rise, using a large dataset of individual mortgages. Our major result is that prime and subprime
mortgage default rates rose by 23% and 14%, respectively, after bankruptcy reform. We also use
difference-in-difference to examine the effects of three provisions of bankruptcy reform that particularly
harmed homeowners with high incomes and/or high assets and find that their default rates rose even
more. Overall, we calculate that bankruptcy reform caused the mortgage default rate to rise by one
percentage point even before the start of the financial crisis, suggesting that the reform increased the
severity of the crisis when it came.
Wenli Li
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
wenli.li@phil.frb.org
Michelle J. White
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu

Ning Zhu
Graduate School of Management
UC, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8609
ningzhu.zhu@gmail.com

Introduction
The financial crisis and the recession of 2008-09 were triggered by the bursting of the
housing bubble and the subprime mortgage crisis that began in late 2006/early 2007. But
we argue in this paper that U.S. personal bankruptcy law also played an important role.
Because credit card debts and other types of unsecured debt are discharged in bankruptcy,
filing for bankruptcy loosens homeowners’ budget constraints and allows them to shift
funds from paying other debts to paying their mortgages. Bankruptcy thus gives
financially distressed homeowners a way to avoid losing their homes when their debts
exceed their ability-to-pay. The availability of debt relief in bankruptcy was widely
known, the costs of filing were low, and there was little stigma attached to filing. Even
debtors with high incomes and high assets could take advantage of bankruptcy. But a
major reform of U.S. bankruptcy law that took effect in October 2005 raised the cost of
filing and reduced the amount of debt discharged. It therefore caused bankruptcy filings
to fall sharply. In this paper we argue that an unintended consequence of bankruptcy
reform was to increase the number of mortgage defaults by closing off a popular
procedure that previously helped financially distressed homeowners to pay their
mortgages. The reform therefore contributed to the severity of the mortgage crisis by
pushing up default rates even before the crisis began.
We use a large dataset of individual mortgages to test whether the 2005 bankruptcy
reform caused mortgage defaults to rise. We find that mortgage defaults after the reform
rose by 23% for homeowners with prime mortgages and 14% for those with subprime
mortgages. Default rates of homeowners with high incomes or high assets—who were
particularly negatively affected by bankruptcy reform—rose even more. We estimate
that the 2005 bankruptcy reform caused the mortgage default rate to rise by one
percentage point, thus adding to the severity of the mortgage crisis when it came.
Bernstein (2008) and Morgan, Iverson and Botsch (2008) first suggested that the
2005 bankruptcy reform caused mortgage defaults to rise. Bernstein did not provide any
empirical tests. Morgan et al hypothesized that bankruptcy reform caused mortgage
defaults to rise by more in states with high homestead exemptions, because homeowners
3

in these states gained the most from filing for bankruptcy prior to the reform. They
tested their hypothesis by examining whether foreclosure rates rose more in states that
have high or unlimited homestead exemptions. But they did not find very strong support
for their hypothesis.1 Also because Morgan et al used aggregate state-level data
covering a long time period, they could not distinguish between the effects of bankruptcy
reform versus the effect of the mortgage crisis on default rates. In contrast, we examine
the relationship between bankruptcy reform and mortgage default using a large sample of
individual mortgages and a short time period that ends before the start of the mortgage
crisis. Our data also allow us to examine how the reform affected default rates in general
and default rates of homeowners with high income and/or high assets.
Our paper also relates to the recent literature explaining mortgage default using data
on individual mortgages, including Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig (2010), Gerardi,
Shapiro and Willen (2007), Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund (2008), Demyanyk and van
Hemert (2008), Rajan, Seru and Vig (2009), Elul (2009), and Jiang, Nelson, and Vytlacil
(2009). We add to this literature by showing that bankruptcy law is another important
factor explaining mortgage default.
The paper proceeds as follows. We start by discussing how U.S. bankruptcy law
treats mortgage debt and how the 2005 bankruptcy reform affected homeowners’
incentives to default on their mortgages. We then describe our dataset, our empirical
model, and the results. In last section, we estimate how many additional mortgage
defaults occurred as a result of bankruptcy reform.
Homeowners and Bankruptcy Before and After the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform2
US bankruptcy law provides two separate personal bankruptcy procedures—Chapter
7 and Chapter 13—and both are relevant for homeowners in financial distress. Prior to
1

Morgan et al (2008)’s model explained whether foreclosure rates rose by more after
bankruptcy reform in states with high or unlimited homestead exemptions, using
aggregate data by state-quarter. They found a positive and significant relationship only
for subprime mortgages in states with high, but not unlimited, homestead exemptions.
We re-examine their model below, using our data.
2
See Elias (2006), White (2007), Eggum, Porter and Twomey (2008), Carroll and Li
(2008), and White and Zhu (2010) for discussion of bankruptcy reform and how it affects
homeowners.
4

2005, all debtors were allowed to choose between them. Under Chapter 7, most
unsecured debts are discharged. Debtors are only obliged to use their assets above an
asset exemption level to repay unsecured debt; future earnings are entirely exempt.
States set the asset exemption levels and have different exemptions for different types of
assets, but the homestead exemption for equity in an owner-occupied home is nearly
always the largest. In states with high homestead exemptions, even debtors with high
assets and high income may gain from filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. Under
Chapter 13, debtors must have regular earnings and follow a court-supervised plan to
repay some of their debt from future earnings over a 3 to 5-year period. They are also
obliged to use their non-exempt assets—if any—to repay.
How does filing for bankruptcy help homeowners in financial distress? Consider
Chapter 7 first. Chapter 7 helps homeowners save their homes because discharge of
unsecured debt increases their ability to pay their mortgages.3 In addition, filing under
Chapter 7 stops mortgage lenders from foreclosing for a few months, which gives
homeowners who have fallen behind on their mortgage payments additional time to pay.
But the terms of residential mortgage contracts cannot be changed in Chapter 7. Thus
filing under Chapter 7 helps homeowners save their homes only if they can repay their
mortgage arrears within a few months.
Chapter 7 also helps homeowners who give up their homes. They gain from having
both unsecured debts and deficiency judgments (claims by lenders for the difference
between the amount owed on the mortgage and the sale price of the home in foreclosure)
discharged in bankruptcy. Homeowners also gain from filing because bankruptcy delays
foreclosure and they get cost-free housing during the bankruptcy procedure.4 They also
get more time to sell their homes privately and obtain the highest price.
Homeowners’ gain from filing under Chapter 7 can be expressed as:
GainChapter 7  U 7  H 7  max[ A  X A ,0]  C7

3

Berkowitz and Hynes (1999) first suggested that filing for bankruptcy helps
homeowners keep their homes by reducing unsecured debt.
4
In some states, homeowners can even stay in their homes through foreclosure, which
means that they become tenants and the lender (now the landlord) must go through an
eviction procedure to force them to leave (Elias, 2008).
5

Here U 7 is the value of unsecured debt discharged in Chapter 7. Homeowners receive
U 7 in bankruptcy regardless of whether they keep their homes or not. H 7 is the reduction

in the present value of future housing costs when homeowners file under Chapter 7. If
homeowners save their homes in Chapter 7, then H 7 is small or zero. If they give up
their homes, then H 7 equals the reduction in the present value of future housing costs,
including their gain from having cost-free housing during the bankruptcy process, having
deficiency judgments discharged, and having lower housing costs if they shift from
owning to renting. A is the value of homeowners’ assets, which we assume are entirely
in the form of home equity, and X A denotes the state’s asset (homestead) exemption.
max[ A  X A ,0] is therefore the value of homeowners’ non-exempt home equity. 5

When non-exempt home equity is positive, homeowners in bankruptcy must give up their
homes for sale by the bankruptcy trustee, since some of their home equity must be used
to repay unsecured debt. Finally, C 7 is homeowners’ cost of filing for bankruptcy under
Chapter 7, including both time costs and out-of-pocket costs.
Now consider Chapter 13. Homeowners gain from filing under Chapter 13 if they
owe large amounts on their mortgages, but wish to save their homes. Under Chapter 13,
they propose a repayment plan to repay their mortgage arrears in full, plus interest, over 3
to 5 years. They must also make all of their normal mortgage payments during the plan.
Lenders cannot proceed with foreclosure as long as homeowners are making the required
payments and, if homeowners complete all of the payments specified in the plan, then the
original mortgage contract is reinstated. Thus Chapter 13 gives homeowners more time
to repay their mortgage arrears than Chapter 7. Also, second mortgages can be
discharged in Chapter 13 if they are completely underwater and bankruptcy trustees
sometimes challenge fees and penalties that mortgage lenders add to overdue payments. 6
5

Retirement accounts are generally exempt in bankruptcy; most other financial accounts
are non-exempt. But homeowners can convert non-exempt financial assets into exempt
home equity by paying down their mortgages before they file for bankruptcy. The
additional home equity is exempt as long as total home equity is less than the state’s
homestead exemption.
6
Having a second mortgage discharged in Chapter 13 requires that a valuation hearing be
held, which raises bankruptcy costs. See Porter (2008) for discussion of how lenders
often add high fees to mortgages in default.
6

Prior to 2005, homeowners proposed their own Chapter 13 plans and were allowed to
choose the length of the plan period and the amount of unsecured debt to be repaid. They
frequently proposed plans that repaid their mortgage arrears in full, but paid only a token
amount to unsecured creditors. Bankruptcy judges generally accepted these plans as
long as homeowners would not be required to repay any of their unsecured debt if they
instead filed under Chapter 7. 7
Homeowners who do not plan to save their homes also gain from filing under
Chapter 13. More types of debt can be discharged in Chapter 13 than in Chapter 7 and
homeowners can delay foreclosure and live cost-free in their homes for longer in Chapter
13, particularly if they propose and then withdraw several repayment plans.
Homeowners’ gain from filing under Chapter 13 can be expressed as:
GainChapter13  U13  H13  I13  max[ A  X A ,0]  C13 .

Here U and H have the same meaning as before, but they may take different values in
Chapter 13 than Chapter 7. U13 exceeds U 7 for some filers, because additional types of
debt can be discharged in Chapter 13. H13 also exceeds H 7 for many filers, because
homeowners receive cost-free housing for longer in Chapter 13 than Chapter 7 and
because second mortgages can only be discharged only in Chapter 13. I13 denotes the
present value of future income that is used to repay unsecured debt in Chapter 13; prior to
bankruptcy reform, this was generally a token amount. Finally, homeowners’ cost of
filing under Chapter 13 is higher than their cost of filing under Chapter 7, or C13 > C7 .
Thus prior to 2005, homeowners in financial distress gained from filing for
bankruptcy, regardless of whether they planned to save their homes or give them up.
Homeowners often defaulted first and then filed for bankruptcy either to save their homes
or to increase their gain from giving them up.8
Now consider how the 2005 bankruptcy reform changed homeowners’ gains from
defaulting and filing for bankruptcy. The reform made several important changes in
7

The “best interests of creditors” test, § 1129(a)(7) of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code,
requires that unsecured creditors receive no less in Chapter 13 than they would receive in
Chapter 7.
8
See Li and White (2009) for discussion of the timing of homeowners’ bankruptcy and
default decisions.
7

bankruptcy law. First, it raised homeowners’ costs of filing; a study by the Government
Accountability Office (2008) found that these costs rose by more than 50%. Costs rose
because of onerous new requirements on lawyers who represent debtors in bankruptcy,
which caused them to raise legal fees. Costs also rose because of new requirements that
filers undergo credit counseling before filing, take a course in debt management during
the bankruptcy process, and provide extensive documentation of their income and assets.
Higher filing costs are predicted to reduce homeowners’ probability of filing for
bankruptcy and to raise default rates for homeowners who previously would have used
bankruptcy to help pay their mortgages.
Second, the reform introduced a new “means test” that forces some high-income
homeowners to file under Chapter 13 and to repay some of their unsecured debt from
future income. The means test affects homeowners differently depending on whether or
not their home equity is exempt. Suppose first that home equity is entirely exempt.
Homeowners first compute their average family income during the six months prior to
filing and convert it to a yearly income figure, denoted Y. Then they compare their yearly
income to the median family income level in the state, adjusted for family size. State
median income levels vary widely: they ranged from $46,000 for a family of three in
Mississippi to $85,000 for a family of the same size in New Jersey and Connecticut,
using 2005 values. If Y is less than the state median income level, then homeowners are
allowed to file under Chapter 7. But if Y exceeds this level, then they must compute
individual income exemptions, denoted X Y . They start with pre-determined allowances
for housing costs, transport costs, and personal expenses. Then they add their mortgage
and car loan payments in excess of the pre-determined housing and transport allowances.
Then they add a list of other allowed expenses. 9 The total equals their income exemption
X Y . Homeowners’ non-exempt income equals their actual income minus the income

exemption, or Y  X Y . If Y  X Y exceeds $2,000 per year, then they must file under
9

The pre-determined amounts for housing, transport costs and personal expenses are
taken from Internal Revenue Service formulas for collecting from delinquent taxpayers.
Other allowed expenses include the costs of caring for elderly or disabled relatives, some
children’s education expenses, tax payments, mandatory payroll deductions, costs of
home security, and telecommunication costs. See
www.justice.gov/ust/eo/bapcpa/meanstesting.htm.
8

Chapter 13 if they file for bankruptcy at all and they must use all of their non-exempt
income for five years, or 5(Y  X Y ) , to repay debt. Since homeowners’ obligation to
repay debt from future income was a token amount prior to bankruptcy reform, those
with high incomes now benefit less from filing. These homeowners are predicted to
default on their mortgages more often. We refer to this test as the “income-only means
test.”
A different version of the means test is used for homeowners who have non-exempt
assets/home equity. Prior to the reform, these homeowners were obliged to use their
non-exempt home equity, A  X A , plus a token amount of future income to repay
unsecured debt in Chapter 13 bankruptcy. After the reform, their obligation to repay
equals the maximum of their non-exempt assets, A  X A , or their non-exempt income
over 5 years, 5(Y  X Y ) . These homeowners gain less from filing after bankruptcy
reform if 5(Y  X Y ) exceeds A  X A . We refer to this test as the “income/asset means
test.”
Finally, the reform imposed a new cap of $125,000 on the homestead exemption that
applies to homeowners who live in states with homestead/asset exemptions exceeding
$125,000 and have owned their homes for less than 3 1/3 years. 10 Affected homeowners
are required to use home equity above the cap to repay in bankruptcy, which forces them
to give up their homes if they file. The homestead exemption cap makes filing for
bankruptcy less attractive for some high-asset homeowners and is therefore predicted to
increase mortgage default.
To illustrate these provisions, suppose a homeowner has unsecured debts totaling
$100,000, income per year of $92,000, home equity of $25,000, and no other financial
assets. Suppose she lives in Texas, which has an unlimited homestead exemption. Prior
to bankruptcy reform, all of her unsecured debt was discharged in bankruptcy and she
had no obligation to repay from either her home equity or her future income. Thus her

10

The states with homestead exemptions greater than $125,000 during our period include
Arkansas, Florida, Iowa, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, and the District of Columbia (all
have unlimited homestead exemptions), Arizona ($150,000), Massachusetts ($500,000),
Minnesota ($200,000), and Nevada ($200,000, raised to $350,000 in 2006). See Elias
(2007) and earlier editions.
9

gain from filing was $100,000 in discharged debt minus filing costs. After bankruptcy
reform, suppose the homeowner’s income exemption X Y equals the median income level
in Texas, which was $49,000 for a three-person family in 2005. Her non-exempt income
therefore is $92,000 - $49,000 = $43,000 per year, or $215,000 over five years. Since her
home equity is still exempt, she is subject to the income-only means test, which obliges
her to use all of her non-exempt income to repay debt. And since her non-exempt income
exceeds her debts of $100,000, she receives no debt discharge in bankruptcy and no
longer gains from filing.
Now suppose the same homeowner lives in New Jersey, which has no homestead
exemption and a median family income level of $85,000. Everything else remains the
same. Prior to bankruptcy reform, the homeowner would have been obliged to use her
home equity of $25,000 to repay her debt in bankruptcy. Her gain from filing therefore
would have been $100,000 - $25,000 = $75,000 in discharged debt minus filing costs.
After bankruptcy reform, her non-exempt assets are still $25,000, but now she has nonexempt income of $92,000 - $85,000 = $7,000 per year, or $35,000 over five years.
Because she has both non-exempt income and non-exempt assets, she is subject to the
income/asset means test. And since her non-exempt income is higher, she must repay
$35,000 of debt in bankruptcy. Her gain from filing after the reform therefore falls to
$100,000 - $35,000 = $65,000 in discharged debt minus the new, higher filing costs.
Finally, suppose the same homeowner again lives in Texas, but now has home equity
of $200,000 and income of $45,000. Also suppose she has owned her home for less than
3 1/3 years at the time of filing. Her unsecured debt is still $100,000. Prior to the
reform, her home equity would have been entirely exempt in bankruptcy, so that her gain
from filing would have been $100,000 in discharged debt minus filing costs and she
would have been allowed to keep her home. After the reform, $200,000 - $125,000 =
$75,000 of her home equity becomes non-exempt and must be used to repay debt in
bankruptcy. As a result, her post-reform gain from filing falls to $100,000 - $75,000 =
$25,000 in discharged debt minus filing costs and she is now forced to give up her home
in bankruptcy.

10

Our predictions are therefore as follows: (1) The mortgage default rate is predicted to
rise for all homeowners following the 2005 bankruptcy reform, because the cost of filing
for bankruptcy rose. (2) Default rates of homeowners who fail the income-only means
test or the income/asset means test are predicted to rise after bankruptcy reform, since
both groups gain less from filing after the reform. (3) The default rate of homeowners
who are subject to the new cap on the homestead exemption is predicted to rise after
bankruptcy reform, since the cap reduces their gain from filing and forces them to give up
their homes if they file. Table 1 shows the three groups of homeowners who were
particularly negatively affected by bankruptcy reform as a function of whether they have
non-exempt assets and/or non-exempt income.
In the next section, we test the predictions that default rates of homeowners in general
rose after bankruptcy reform and that default rates of homeowners in the three
negatively-affected groups rose even more.11
Data and summary statistics
We use a large dataset of individual mortgages from LPS Applied Analytics, Inc. For
each mortgage, we have detailed information from the mortgage application, plus updates
each month on whether homeowners made their payments in full and whether they filed
for bankruptcy. Our sample consists of first-lien, 30 year mortgages used for home
purchase or refinance that originated between January 2004 and December 2005 and
were in effect during at least part of our sample periods. A complication is that
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita struck in August and September of 2005, respectively, and
caused many homeowners to delay paying their mortgages. Because their late payments
were recorded as defaults just around the time that bankruptcy reform went into effect,
we drop all mortgages in the affected counties (see table 2 for a list).12 We follow
individual mortgages until they are repaid in full, go into default, or until the sample
11

We ignore other changes made under the 2005 bankruptcy reform, because they cannot
be tested with our data. Morgan et al (2010) examines how bankruptcy reform affected
the terms of car loans.
12
We are grateful to Paul Willen for pointing out the relevance of the hurricanes. After
the hurricanes, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac urged mortgage lenders to waive fees and
penalties on late mortgage payments. But there was nonetheless a jump in the number of
recorded defaults in affected counties. See Bell (2005) for discussion.
11

period ends. Following the literature, we construct separate samples of prime and
subprime mortgages.13 It should be noted that our samples consist of mortgages that
originated near the peak of the housing bubble.
Figure 1 gives monthly average mortgage default rates for both samples in the months
before and after bankruptcy reform. Following the literature, we define default to occur
when mortgage payments are at least 60 days delinquent.14 Default rates are shown both
in their raw form and seasonally adjusted. Note that default rates for subprime mortgages
are much higher than for prime mortgages—the seasonally adjusted rates prior to
bankruptcy reform are around 1% per month for subprime mortgages compared to 0.16%
per month for prime mortgages.
Seasonal adjustment is important in our context, because mortgage default rates vary
seasonally and tend to be lowest in the spring and highest in the fall. Because bankruptcy
reform went into effect in October of 2005, we want to avoid concluding that reform
caused default rates to rise simply because they normally rise in the fall.15 For both
samples, non-seasonally adjusted default rates rose in the months prior to bankruptcy
reform, jumped at the time of bankruptcy reform, and dropped in the months after the
reform. The seasonally adjusted figures, in contrast, are fairly flat in the months before
and after bankruptcy reform, but jump around the time of the reform, although with some
fluctuations. The figures thus suggest a relationship between bankruptcy reform and
default rates.

13

LPS’ coverage of subprime mortgages is not as comprehensive as its coverage of prime
mortgages, but it improved in January 2004 when mortgages originated by Countrywide
Bank—one of the largest subprime lenders—were added. Because of the limited
coverage of subprime mortgages by LPS before 2004, we excluded mortgages that
originated prior to 2004 from our sample. We use lenders’ classifications of whether
individual mortgages are prime versus subprime. The prime mortgage category includes
alt-A mortgages, which are considered to be intermediate between prime and subprime.
14
Papers that use this definition in models of mortgage default and renegotiation include
Demyanyk and van Hemet (2008), Jiang et al (2009), Keys et al (2008) and Adelino et al
(2009).
15
See below for discussion of our seasonal adjustment procedure.
12

Another issue is there was a rush to file for bankruptcy just before the reform went
into effect, which may have affected the time pattern of default. 16

One possibility is

that homeowners who filed for bankruptcy just before the reform avoided defaulting on
their mortgages over the next few months. If so, then default rates before bankruptcy
reform would be unaffected, but default rates after bankruptcy reform would be lower.
Alternately, homeowners’ default and bankruptcy decisions may be more widely
separated over time. In a previous paper, Li and White (2009) found that homeowners
who file for bankruptcy generally default on their mortgages before filing and their
defaults occur up to three years earlier. In this case, if homeowners rushed to file for
bankruptcy before the reform, then the effect on default rates would be spread out over a
longer time period. To examine how the rush to file affected the time pattern of default
rates in our sample, we re-calculated the seasonally adjusted default rates shown in figure
1, omitting all mortgages in which the homeowner filed for bankruptcy in the last two
months before bankruptcy reform went into effect. The results, in figure 2, show that
default rates fall in the months prior to bankruptcy reform, but are almost unaffected after
bankruptcy reform. The figure suggests that keeping the September/October filers in our
sample will bias our estimates of the effect of bankruptcy reform downward.
Now turn to sample periods. We use short sample periods before versus after the
date of bankruptcy reform. This is both because other aspects of the economic
environment remain fairly constant and because short sample periods end before the
mortgage crisis began, thus allowing us to separate the effects of bankruptcy reform from
the effects of the mortgage crisis on default rates. Our base case model is run on a
sample period of three months before to three months after bankruptcy reform. Because
bankruptcy reform went into effect in the middle of October 2005, our sample period
actually covers seven months (July 2005 through January 2006). We also run our model
on a shorter period of two months before to two months after bankruptcy reform (August

16

The number of bankruptcy filings increased from around 1,500,000 per year in the
early 2000’s to 2,000,000 in 2005, with most of the increase occurring in the last month
or two before bankruptcy reform took effect. See
www.abiworld.org/AM/AMTemplate.cfm?Section=Home&TEMPLATE=/CM/ContentD
isplay.cfm&CONTENTID=61641 for data on bankruptcy filings and Mann (2007) for
discussion.
13

2005 through December 2005) and a longer period of six months before to six months
after bankruptcy reform (April 2005 through April 2006).17 All of these periods end
before housing prices peaked in June 2006, according to the Case/Shiller home price
index.18
Because the LPS dataset does not include any homeowner demographic
characteristics, we merge it with data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
to get homeowners’ income, sex, and race at the time of the mortgage application, and
whether they had a co-applicant for the mortgage.19 With the loss of observations from
the merge and from dropping mortgages in hurricane-affected areas, our sample sizes for
the three months before to three months after period are 353,225 and 310,187 separate
prime and subprime mortgages, respectively, and 2.1 million monthly observations for
each sample.20 Sample sizes for the other time periods are proportionately smaller or
larger.

17

We assign individual mortgages payments due in October 2005 to the pre- versus postbankruptcy reform period depending on whether the payment date is before versus after
October 17, 2005.
18
This is based on the non-seasonally adjusted version of the Case/Shiller index,
available at www.standardandpoors.com. Housing prices in Boston peaked much earlier
(in July 05), but remained near their peak levels over the following year.
19
HMDA data cover nearly all mortgage originations. Mortgages were matched based
on the zipcode of the property, the date when the mortgage originated (within 5 days), the
origination amount (within $500), the purpose of the loan (purchase, refinance or other),
the type of loan (conventional, VA guaranteed, FHA guaranteed or other), occupancy
type (owner-occupied or non-owner-occupied), and lien status (first-lien or other). The
match rate was 48%. We calculated summary statistics for all the variables that are
included in this study and found no significant differences between the means of the
matched observations and the original LPS dataset. This suggests that the matched
observations are a random subset of the original LPS dataset. See
www.ffiec.gov/hmda/history.htm for information on HMDA data. The sex variable in
HMDA is for the main mortgage applicant.
20
We start with a 10% random sample of prime mortgages and all subprime mortgages
that originated in 2004 or 2005. With the loss of observations from the HMDA match
and from dropping mortgages in hurricane-affected counties, our final samples are
approximately 5% of prime mortgages and 50% of subprime mortgages in the LPS
dataset. The number of mortgages dropped because they were in the hurricane-affected
counties are 59,728 prime and 41,235 subprime.
14

Now turn to how we calculate dummy variables to represent the three groups of
homeowners that were particularly negatively affected by bankruptcy reform. We first
calculate homeowners’ non-exempt income ( max[Y  X Y ,0] ) and non-exempt
assets/home equity ( max[ A  X A ,0] ). We have data on family income at the time of
mortgage origination, but do not have all the information needed to calculate individual
income exemptions according to the procedure specified by bankruptcy law. Instead, we
use the state median income level as a proxy for the income exemption X Y , so that nonexempt income equals the maximum of homeowners’ family income minus the state
median income level or zero. To calculate non-exempt home equity, we first calculate
the current value of the home each month by updating home value at the time of
mortgage origination using the average monthly change in housing values in the
homeowner’s metropolitan area since the date of mortgage origination. 21 We know the
mortgage principle amount each month, so home equity each month equals the current
value of the house minus the current mortgage principle. Non-exempt home equity then
equals the maximum of home equity minus the state’s homestead exemption or zero. 22
Define MT1 to denote homeowners who are harmed by the income-only means test.

MT1 equals one if homeowners have non-exempt income, but no non-exempt home
equity, or if Y  X Y  0 and A  X A  0 . Also define MT 2 to denote homeowners who
are harmed by the income/asset means test. MT2 equals one if homeowners’ non-exempt
income over 5 years exceeds their non-exempt assets/home equity, or if 5(Y  X Y ) 
A  X A  0 . Finally, define HC to denote homeowners who are harmed by the

homestead exemption cap. HC equals one if homeowners live in states with homestead
exemptions greater than $125,000 and if some of their assets/home equity become nonexempt because they exceed the new cap of $125,000, or if X A  $125,000 and
A  $125,000 . We apply this test only to homeowners whose mortgages were for
21

If the homeowner lives in a non-metropolitan area, we update the value of the house
using the average change in housing values in non-metropolitan areas of the state. Our
estimates of home equity are biased upward since we ignore second mortgages, for which
we have no data.
22
Asset/home equity exemption levels by state are from Elias (2006) and median state
income levels for 2005 are from the U.S. Trustee Program at the Department of Justice
(www.justice.gov/ust/eo/bapcpa/meanstesting.htm).
15

purchase, since we assume that homeowners whose mortgages were for refinance have
owned their homes for more than 3 1/3 years.
Finally, BR equals one in months when the 2005 bankruptcy reform was in effect.
Specification
We estimate Cox proportional hazard models of prime and subprime mortgage
default, where the baseline hazard depends on the age of the mortgage in months (see
Kiefer, 1988). We use the proportional hazard model because we wish to explain time to
default and because hazard models take account of both left- and right-censoring. Since
our sample periods are short, many of our mortgages originate before the sample period
starts and/or continue after the sample period ends, so that both types of censoring are
important. The baseline hazard depends on the age of the mortgage, in months. Figure 3
gives the baseline hazard rates for our prime and subprime mortgage samples. For both
samples, default rates rise steeply after the first few months and peak at around 12-19
months. Other researchers have found similar age profiles for subprime mortgages.23
The key variables of interest in our models are the bankruptcy reform dummy, BR,
and the interactions of BR with MT1, MT2 and HC. The coefficient of the bankruptcy
reform dummy measures the change in default rates after bankruptcy reform; if the
reform had not occurred, default rates would have been expected to remain constant after
controlling for the explanatory variables and mortgage age. The three interaction terms
measure difference-in-differences, or whether default rates increased by more after
bankruptcy reform for homeowners in each of the three groups than for other
homeowners. If bankruptcy reform had not occurred, default rates would not have been
expected to change differently for homeowners in the three groups than for other
homeowners. All of these variables are predicted to have positive signs.
Ai and Norton (2003) have pointed out that, while the coefficients of interaction
terms equal difference-in-differences in linear models, this result does not carry over to
non-linear models. Instead difference-in-differences in non-linear models must be

23

See Demyanyk and van Hemet (2009), Jiang et al (2009), and Keys et al (2010) for
discussion of default-mortgage age profiles.
16

evaluating using the full estimated model, including all of the results for the control
variables. We compute corrected difference-in-differences using this procedure.24
Our choice of control variables is guided by availability and by the recent literature
on mortgage default. Our demographic variables are those from HMDA, discussed
above.25 We also include dummy variables representing ranges of FICO scores (the
highest category is omitted) and ranges of loan-to-value ratios and debt-to-income ratios
(the lowest categories for each are omitted). 26 We include dummy variables for whether
the loan is a jumbo, whether it is fixed-rate (versus adjustable rate or hybrid), whether it
is for refinance (versus purchase), whether homeowners provided full documentation of
income and assets when applying for the mortgage, provided partial documentation, or
whether documentation information is missing (the omitted category is no
documentation), whether the property is single-family (the omitted category is multifamily), and whether it is a vacation home or an investment property (the omitted
category is primary residences). Additional dummy variables include whether the
mortgage was securitized (versus held in the lender’s portfolio) and whether it was
originated by the lender that services it, acquired wholesale, or acquired from a
correspondent (the omitted category is mortgages originated by independent mortgage
brokers).27 We include a measure of homeowners’ benefit from refinancing their
24

We use Stata 11 margins and nlcom commands for these calculations. For example, the
difference-in-difference for the interaction of bankruptcy reform with the homestead
exemption cap is [ Dˆ ( HC  1, BR  1)  Dˆ ( HC  0, BR  1)] / Dˆ ( HC  0, BR  1) [ Dˆ ( HC  1, BR  0)  Dˆ ( HC  0, BR  0)] / Dˆ ( HC  0, BR  0) , where Dˆ ( HC  1, BR  1)

denotes the predicted probability of default when HC and BR both equal 1 and the control
variables are assumed to take their mean values. The division by the default rate when
HC = 0 is to take out the baseline hazard. Other difference-in-difference terms are
calculated using the same procedure. We also compute corrected values for the
coefficients of BR, MT1, MT2 and HC. The only papers we have found that use a hazard
model and compute difference-in-differences correctly are Chen (2008), which uses a
much smaller dataset, and Elul et al (2010). We use Stata 11 for these calculations.
25
Following the terms of our agreement with LPS Applied Analytics, the results for the
demographic variables are not reported.
26
Debt-to-income ratios include second mortgages and non-mortgage debt.
27
Correspondents are mortgage brokers that originate mortgages only for a single lender;
while independent mortgage brokers sell to multiple lenders. Correspondents’ interests
are more closely aligned with the interests of banks than those of independent mortgage
brokers. See Jiang et al (2009) for discussion of the role of mortgage brokers and Keys et
17

mortgages at the currently-available mortgage interest rate—it increases in size when
interest rates on new mortgages are lower.28 We also include several variables measuring
regional economic conditions: the lagged unemployment rate in the metropolitan area,
the lagged real income growth rate in the state, and the lagged average mortgage default
rate in the homeowner’s zipcode—all lags are one month. 29
Additionally, we include our seasonality measure, which takes a different value each
month. As noted above, default rates are highest in September-December and lowest in
March and April. 30 We do not include time dummies, because in our short samples they
would be collinear with the bankruptcy reform dummy. But we include state fixed
effects. We cluster observations by mortgage (results do not change in any substantive
way if we cluster by zipcode).
Table 3 gives summary statistics for our prime and subprime mortgage samples over
the time period three months before to three months after bankruptcy reform.31 The
income-only means test harms 27% of prime mortgage-holders versus 45% of subprime
mortgage-holders. Since the test applies only to homeowners whose home equity is
entirely exempt, it is more likely to affect subprime mortgage-holders since they have
less home equity. The opposite is true for the income/asset means test, which harms 31%
of prime mortgage-holders versus 11% of subprime mortgage-holders. This test requires
that homeowners have non-exempt home equity in addition to their non-exempt income,
so that it is more likely to harm prime mortgage-holders. Finally the homestead
al (2008) and Rajan et al (2009) for discussion of the effect of securitization on default
rates.
28
The measure is {r0[1-(1+rt)t-M]}/{ rt[1-(1+r0)t-M]}, where r0 is the interest rate on the
homeowner’s existing mortgage, rt is the interest rate currently available on new
mortgages, and M is the term of the mortgage. See Richard and Roll (1989).
29
Unemployment rates by metropolitan area are taken from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics; income data by state are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis; housing price
data by metropolitan area are from the Federal Housing Finance Agency.
30
The seasonality measure is calculated using the SAS X11 procedure, which was
developed by Statistics Canada. To calculate this, we first construct monthly average
default rates for our sample, using the longer period of March 2005 through October
2008. The X11procedure estimates trends using an iterative moving average (ARIMA)
procedure and then removes the trends by subtraction. Then it uses the same procedure
to estimate irregular components (including bankruptcy reform) and remove them. See
support.sas.com/documentation/cdl/en/etsug/60372/HTML/default/x11_toc.htm.
31
The mean default rates given in table 3 are not seasonally adjusted.
18

exemption cap, which requires very high home equity, applies to 5% of prime mortgageholders, but only 1% of those with subprime mortgages.
Results

Table 4 gives the results of estimating the hazard model using our base case sample
period of three months before to three months after bankruptcy reform. Only the results
for the control variables are shown. All results are given as proportional increases or
decreases in default rates relative to one—for example the coefficient of 1.13 for the
jumbo mortgage dummy in the subprime sample indicates that homeowners with jumbo
mortgages are 13% more likely to default than those with smaller mortgages, while the
coefficient of 0.78 on the fixed rate mortgage dummy in the prime sample indicates that
homeowners with fixed rate prime mortgages are 22% less likely to default than those
with variable rate prime mortgages. Tests of statistical significance are for whether the
results differ significantly from one (rather than zero).
Our results for the subprime mortgage sample are similar to those found by previous
researchers, but there has been much less research on default by prime mortgage-holders.
One interesting result is that default rates for prime mortgages are more responsive to
changes in FICO scores, but default rates for subprime mortgages are more responsive to
changes in loan-to-value ratios. All of the results for variables representing mortgage
sources are less than one, so that both prime and subprime mortgages originated by
independent mortgage brokers—the omitted category—are most likely to default.32 Our
results show that prime mortgages that were securitized are significantly more likely to
default, but—surprisingly— subprime mortgages that were securitized are significantly
less likely to default. The documentation variables are insignificant for prime mortgages,
suggesting that higher levels of documentation are not associated with reduced likelihood
of default.33 Also homeowners with both types of mortgages are more likely to default if

32

This is similar to the results of Jiang et al (2009) for subprime mortgages, using
different data.
33
This differs from the results of Jiang et al (2009) and Sherlund (2008) for subprime
mortgages. Both found that subprime mortgages that lacked full documentation were
more likely to default.
19

they live in zipcodes with higher lagged average default rates, implying that defaults may
respond to persistent local shocks.
Table 5 gives the results for the key variables, still using the three month before to
three months after sample. Because the interaction terms are correlated with the
bankruptcy reform dummy and with each other, we show the results when they enter both
individually and together. The adoption of bankruptcy reform led to a substantial
increase in mortgage default rates in both samples—using the figures in column (5), the
increases are 23% for prime mortgages and 14% for subprime mortgages. Both results
are highly significant (p < .001). In columns (2) – (4), we separately enter each of the
three dummy variables MT1, MT2 and HC and their interactions with bankruptcy reform
and, in column (5), we enter all of them together. The coefficients of MT1, MT2 and HC
are either less than one or greater than one, but insignificant. Since all of these variables
are correlated with higher levels of income and assets, we expect them to be associated
with lower default rates.
Now turn to the difference-in-differences. Using the results in column (5) for prime
mortgages, default rates rose following bankruptcy reform by 26% for homeowners
subject to the income-only means test, 11% for homeowners subject to the income-asset
means test, and 30% for homeowners subject to the homestead exemption cap—all
relative to the changes in default rates of homeowners not subject to these provisions.
The first two results are statistically significant at the 1% and 10% levels, respectively.
The result for the homestead exemption cap is just short of significance in column (5),
but is strongly statistically significant in column (4), when it is entered by itself. For
subprime mortgage-holders, default rates rose following bankruptcy reform by 5% for
homeowners subject to the income-only means test and by 28% for homeowners subject
to the homestead exemption cap, relative to homeowners not subject to these provisions.
Both results are significant at the 5% level. However, homeowners subject to the
income/asset means test are 11% less likely to default after bankruptcy reform and the
result is statistically significant. The fact that the difference-in-difference result for the
income/asset means test goes the wrong way may simply reflect the fact that our measure
of this variable is the most subject to error, since it depends on the relative size of our
estimates of both non-exempt income and assets. Overall, our results suggest substantial
20

support for the hypothesis that bankruptcy reform caused mortgage default rates to rise
overall and to rise by even more for homeowners subject to the three provisions.
Table 6 shows the results when we rerun the model on the shorter sample period of
two months before to two months after bankruptcy reform and the longer sample period
of six months before to six months after bankruptcy reform. Results are given only for
the bankruptcy reform dummy and the three interaction terms. The figures in the middle
column of table 6 repeat those in table 5, column (5), for the three months before to three
months after sample period. In both samples, the bankruptcy reform dummy remains
statistically significant regardless of time period and the interaction terms also remain
similar in size and significance. However, the results for the homestead exemption cap
interaction become larger and more significant in both samples as the sample period
becomes shorter—the difference-in-differences for the shortest sample period are 44%
and 56% for prime and subprime mortgages, respectively, compared to 30% and 28% in
the base case period and 17% and 22% in the longest sample period, respectively. This
probably reflects the fact that homeowners who became subject to the cap had a
particularly strong incentive to rush to file for bankruptcy just before the reform went into
effect, since after the reform they could no longer keep their homes and their high home
equity in bankruptcy. The rush to file caused default rates by this group of homeowners
to fall just before bankruptcy reform by more than the fall for homeowners generally and
rise after bankruptcy reform by more than the rise for homeowners generally—thus
magnifying the increase in default rates in the shortest sample period. The same
explanation probably also applies to the time pattern of the income-only means test
interaction in the prime mortgage sample, which also is largest in the shortest sample
period and becomes smaller as the sample period gets longer.
As robustness checks, we ran placebo tests assuming that bankruptcy reform went into
effect at fictitious dates. Our fictitious dates are assumed to be June 2005 (four months
early) and February 2006 (four months late). We also tried a fictitious date of October
2006, since the effect of seasonality should be nearly the same. The specification used is
otherwise the same as in table 5, column (5). The results are given in table 7. For the
prime mortgage sample, all of the results either become negative or remain positive but
21

are insignificant. For the subprime sample, however, two results are positive and
significant: the bankruptcy reform dummy and the income-only means test interaction—
both for the fictitious bankruptcy reform date of February 2006. The positive result for
the bankruptcy reform dummy reflects the fact that subprime mortgage default rates in
our sample rose during the period March – May 2006, even after seasonal adjustment.
We also reran our base case model, dropping mortgages of homeowners who filed for
bankruptcy in September or early October 2005 from the sample. As discussed above,
our prediction is that the coefficient of bankruptcy reform will increase in size when these
homeowners are omitted, because they have lower default rates in the months prior to
bankruptcy reform and approximately the same default rates after bankruptcy reform.
The results are shown in table 8. The coefficient of the bankruptcy reform dummy
increases from 23% to 26% for the prime mortgage sample and from 14% to 20% for the
subprime mortgage sample when we drop September/October bankruptcy filers. Both
results remain significant at the 1% level.
Finally as an additional check on our results, we ran a version of Morgan et al
(2008)’s model, using our data and our specification. Morgan et al argue that bankruptcy
reform caused mortgage default rates to rise by more in states with higher homestead
exemptions, because prior to the reform, filing for bankruptcy was most favorable for
homeowners in these states. To test their model, we drop our HC, MT1 and MT2
variables and substitute the dollar value of the state’s homestead exemption (normalized
by the appraised value of the house), plus a dummy variable that equals one for
mortgages in states with unlimited homestead exemptions. Both are entered by
themselves and also interacted with the bankruptcy reform dummy. The sample period
that we use is three months before to three months after bankruptcy reform. The
specification is otherwise the same as in tables 4 and 5.
The results are shown in table 9. The bankruptcy reform dummy remains statistically
significant and approximately the same size as in table 4. The interaction of bankruptcy
reform with the homestead exemption variable is insignificant in both samples, but the
interaction of bankruptcy reform with the unlimited exemption dummy is positive and
highly significant in both. In states with unlimited homestead exemptions, prime and

22

subprime mortgage default rates increased by 19% and 27%, respectively, after
bankruptcy reform.
The large and significant results for the unlimited homestead exemption interaction
are probably due to the fact that this variable is correlated with the homestead exemption
cap and the income-only means test. The homestead exemption cap is more likely to be
binding for homeowners living in states with unlimited homestead exemptions, because
only these states (plus a few others) have home equity exemptions greater than $125,000.
Also the income-only means test harms homeowners if they have non-exempt income but
no non-exempt home equity. Homeowners in states with unlimited homestead
exemptions are more likely to be harmed by this test than homeowners in other states,
because home equity is always exempt when the homestead exemption is unlimited. The
proportion of all homeowners with prime and subprime mortgages who were harmed by
the adoption of either the homestead exemption cap or the income-only means test is .28
and .46, respectively. But for homeowners in states with unlimited homestead
exemptions, these figures are .55 and .62, respectively. Thus the bankruptcy
reform/unlimited homestead exemption interaction is probably significant because it
captures the combined effect on default rates of the homestead exemption cap and the
income-only means test.
Overall, the results support our hypotheses that bankruptcy reform led to a general
increase in mortgage default rates because filing for bankruptcy became more costly and
also led to even larger increases in default rates by homeowners who were harmed by the
adoption of the two means tests and the homestead exemption cap.

Conclusion and policy implications

Our main result is that the 2005 bankruptcy reform caused mortgage default rates
to rise. Using the results for the sample period three months before to three months after
bankruptcy reform, we find that the default rate of homeowners with prime and subprime
mortgages rose by 23% and 14%, respectively, after bankruptcy reform. Default rates of
homeowners with prime and subprime mortgages rose even more after bankruptcy reform
23

if they were subject to one of the new means tests or to the cap on the homestead
exemption, compared to the increases for homeowners not harmed by these provisions.
These results suggest that bankruptcy reform squeezed homeowners’ budgets by raising
the cost of filing for bankruptcy and reducing the amount of debt discharged in
bankruptcy. It therefore increased mortgage default by closing off a popular procedure
that previously helped financially distressed homeowners save their homes.
We can use the results to predict the number of additional mortgage defaults that
occurred because of the 2005 bankruptcy reform. Consider first the general effect of the
increase in the cost of filing for bankruptcy. There were 22 million mortgage
originations during the period 2004-05, of which approximately 81% were prime and
19% were subprime.34 Default rates in our sample are approximately 2.3% and 15% per
year for prime and subprime mortgages, respectively. Using mortgages that originated in
2004-05 as a base, we calculate that the adoption of bankruptcy reform increased the
number of mortgage defaults per year by 180,000. (See table 10.) In addition, the
adoption of the two means tests and the homestead exemption cap caused defaults to rise
by an additional 54,000 per year. Thus even before the mortgage crisis began, the 2005
bankruptcy reform was responsible for around 180,000 + 54,000 = 224,000 additional
mortgage defaults per year, or 1% of all mortgages that originated in 2004-05.
The Bush and Obama Administration have both tried a number of programs to deal
with the housing crisis by encouraging mortgage lenders to renegotiate mortgages rather
than foreclose when homeowners default. None of these programs have worked very
well. Our results suggest that a simple change such as rolling back the cost of filing for
bankruptcy to pre-2005 levels would help in dealing with the housing crisis by reducing
the number of mortgage defaults.

34

See Mayer and Pence (2008). They give a range of figures, based on different
definitions of subprime mortgages. We use the average of their high versus low figures.
24

Figure 1:
Monthly Average Default Rates With and Without Seasonal Adjustment
Prime Mortgages
0.0030

0.0025

0.0020

0.0015

0.0010

default rates—non‐seasonally
adjusted

0.0005

default rates—‐seasonally adjusted

0.0000

‐0.0005

Subprime Mortgages
0.0200

0.0150

0.0100
default rates—non‐seasonally
adjusted

0.0050

default rates—seasonally
adjusted

0.0000

25

Figure 2:
Monthly Average Default Rates With and Without Homeowners Who Filed for
Bankruptcy in September and October 2005
Prime Mortgages
0.0025

0.0020

0.0015

default rates—entire sample

0.0010

default rates—without Sept/Oct
bankruptcy filers

0.0005

0.0000

Subprime Mortgages
0.0160
0.0140
0.0120
0.0100
0.0080
0.0060

default rates—entire sample

0.0040

default rates—without Sept/Oct
bankruptcy filers

0.0020
0.0000

26

Figure 3.
Baseline Hazard Model
0.0150

0.0020

0.0125
0.0015

0.0100
0.0010

0.0075

0.0005
0.0050
subprime mortgages ‐‐ left
axis

0.0025

0.0000

prime mortgages ‐‐ right axis

0.0000

‐0.0005
6

7

8

9

10

11

12

12

13

14

15

16

17

age of loan in months

27

18

19

20

20

21

Table 1:
Changes in Homeowners’ Obligation to Repay in Bankruptcy
Due to the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform

All home equity exempt

Some home equity non-exempt

All income
exempt

No change

Must repay more if
homestead exemption cap is
binding (HC = 1);
otherwise no change

Some
income
non-exempt

Must repay more if nonexempt income exceeds
$2,000 per year
(MT1 = 1);
otherwise no change

Must repay more if
non-exempt income over 5 years >
non-exempt home equity
(MT2 = 1);
otherwise no change

Note: prior to the 2005 bankruptcy reform, all income was exempt.

28

Table 2:
Counties Declared as Major Disaster Areas by FEMA after Katrina and Rita

Hurricane

State

County or Parish

Katrina

Alabama

Baldwin, Marengo, Mobile, Pickens, Greene, Hale,
Tuscaloosa, and Washington Counties

Mississippi

Adams, Amite, Attala, Claiborne, Choctaw, Clarke, Copiah,
Covington, Forrest, Franklin, George, Greene, Hancock,
Harrison, Hinds, Holmes, Humphreys, Jackson, Jasper,
Jefferson, Jefferson Davis, Jones, Kemper, Lamar,
Lauderdale, Lawrence, Leake, Lincoln, Lowndes, Madison,
Marion, Neshoba, Newton, Noxubee, Oktibbeha, Pearl River,
Perry, Pike, Rankin, Scott, Simpson, Smith, Stone, Walthall,
Warren, Wayne, Wilkinson, Winston, and Yazoo

Louisiana

Acadia, Ascension, Assumption, Calcasieu, Cameron, East
Baton Rouge, East Feliciana, Iberia, Iberville, Jefferson,
Jefferson Davis, Lafayette, Lafourche, Livingston, Orleans,
Pointe Coupee, Plaquemines, St. Bernard, St. Charles, St.
Helena, St. James, St. John, St. Mary, St. Martin, St.
Tammany, Tangipahoa, Terrebonne, Vermilion, Washington,
West Baton Rouge, and West Feliciana

Louisiana

Acadia, Allen, Ascension, Cameron, Calcasieu, Beauregard,
Evangeline, Iberia, Jefferson, Jefferson Davies, Lafayette,
Lafourche, Livingston, Plaquemines, Sabine, St. Landry, St.
Martin, St. Mary, Terrebonne, Vermilion, Vernon, and West
Baton Rouge

Texas

Angelina, Brazoria, Chambers, Fort Bend, Galveston, Hardin,
Harris, Jasper, Jefferson, Liberty, Montgomery, Nacogdoches,
Newton, Orange, Polk, Sabine, San Augustine, San Jacinto,
Shelby, Trinity, Tyler, and Walker.

Rita

Note: These counties or parishes were declared to be Major Disaster Areas where federal
aid in the form of individual assistance was made available. See the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) website: www.fema.gov/news/disasters.fema?year=2005.

29

Table 3: Summary Statistics
Three Months Before to Three Months After Bankruptcy Reform
Prime Mortgages

Subprime
Mortgages

Default rate per month
.002 (.044)
.013 (.114)
Income-only means test (MT1)
.265 (.442)
.451 (.498)
Income/asset means test (MT2)
.314 (.464)
.108 (.310)
Homestead exemption cap (HC)
.049 (.215)
.010 (.101)
Average income*
$101,526 (89,780)
$73,037 (59,328)
If FICO score 650 to 750*
.522 (.500)
.233 (.148)
If FICO score 550 to 650*
.138 (.345)
.623 (.485)
If FICO score 350 to 550*
.007 (.084)
.124 (.329)
Debt payment-to-income ratio > 0.5*
.084 (.277)
.044 (.206)
Debt payment-to-income ratio (0.4, 0.5)*
.119 (.323)
.191 (.393)
Debt payment-to-income ratio missing*
.344 (.475)
.528 (.499)
Loan-to-value ratio > 1.0*
.017 (.131)
.0002 (.016)
Loan-to-value ratio (0.8,1.0)*
.217 (.412)
.422 (.494)
If full documentation*
.365 (.482)
.564 (.496)
If partial documentation*
.076 (.264)
.022 (.148)
If documentation information missing*
.159 (.366)
.108 (.310)
If single-family house*
.747 (.435)
.811 (.392)
If fixed rate mortgage*
.609 (.489)
.244 (.430)
If jumbo mortgage*
.149 (.356)
.089 (.284)
If second home*
.021 (.145)
.007 (.083)
If investment property*
.027 (.162)
.034 (.182)
If occupancy type missing*
.566 (.495)
.347 (.476)
If loan was to re-finance*
.353 (.478)
.526 (.499)
If mortgage was securitized
.244 (.430)
.823 (.381)
If loan was originated by the lender
.513 (.500)
.433 (.496)
If loan was acquired wholesale, but not
from a mortgage broker
.195 (.396)
.170 (.376)
If loan was acquired from a correspondent
lender
.221 (.415)
.103 (.304)
Homeowner’s gain from refinancing
1.069 (.240)
.840 (.145)
Lagged cumulative delinquency rate
(zipcode)
.084 (.300)
.340 (.722)
Lagged unemployment rate (MSA) (%)
4.582 (1.281)
4.737 (1.306)
Lagged real income growth rate (state) (%)
1.567 (1.749)
1.432 (.494)
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample period is July 2005
through January 2006. Variables marked with asterisks are observed only at
origination, while other variables are updated each month.

30

Table 4:
Results of Cox Proportional Hazard Models Explaining Mortgage Default
Three Months Before to Three Months After Bankruptcy Reform
Prime Mortgages

Subprime
Mortgages

If FICO score 650 to 750
3.928 (.308)***
1.784 (.207)***
If FICO score 550 to 650
13.523 (1.094)*** 4.089 (.468)***
If FICO score 350 to 550
36.358 (3.630)*** 6.805 (.790)***
If FICO score is missing
1.196 (.063)***
.847 (.020)***
Debt payment-to-income ratio > 0.5
1.057 (.074)
1.149 (.043)***
Debt payment-to-income ratio (0.4 to 0.5)
1.237 (.063)***
1.191 (.027)***
Loan-to-value ratio > 1.0
1.684 (.153)***
4.552 (.786)***
Loan-to-value ratio (0.8 to 1.0)
1.962 (.081)***
.965 (.015)***
If full documentation
.880 (.058)*
1.001 (.063)
If partial documentation
1.102 (.089)
1.236 (.093)***
If documentation information missing
.815 (.070)***
.952 (.067)
If single-family house
1.070 (.044)
1.196 (.025)***
If fixed rate mortgage
.778 (.032)***
0.681 (.014)***
If jumbo mortgage
1.046 (.074)
1.134 (.036)***
If second home
.948 (.099)
1.091 (.087)
If investment property
1.071 (.095)
.981 (.039)
If occupancy type missing
.997 (.047)
1.437 (.036)***
If loan was to re-finance
.892 (.036)***
.820 (.013)***
If mortgage was securitized
1.152 (.058)***
.809 (.020)***
If loan was originated by the lender
.658 (.041)***
.753 (.024)***
If loan was acquired wholesale, but not from .827 (.055)***
.873 (.026)***
a mortgage broker
If loan was acquired from a correspondent
.809 (.051)***
.753 (.024)***
lender
Homeowner’s gain from refinancing
.296 (.080)***
.164 (.012)***
Lagged average mortgage default rate
1.074 (.030)***
1.077 (.008)***
(zipcode)
Lagged unemployment rate (MSA)
1.016 (.018)
1.053 (.008)***
Lagged real income growth rate (state)
.953 (.014)***
.972 (.004)***
Seasonal variable
Y
Y
State dummies?
Y
Y
Notes: ***, ** and * indicate whether the coefficient is significantly different
from one at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in
parentheses. The sample period is July 2005 through January 2006.

31

Table 5:
Results of Cox Proportional Hazard Models Explaining Mortgage Default
Three Months Before to Three Months After Bankruptcy Reform
Prime Mortgages

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Income-only means test
(MT1)
Income/asset means test
(MT2)
Homestead exemption cap
(HC)
Bankruptcy reform*incomeonly means test (BR*MT1)
Bankruptcy reform
*income/asset means test
(BR*MT2)
Bankruptcy reform
*homestead exemption cap
(BR*HC)

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Income-only means test
(MT1)
Income/asset means test
(MT2)
Homestead exemption cap
(HC)
Bankruptcy reform*incomeonly means test (BR*MT1)
Bankruptcy reform*
income/asset means test
(BR*MT2)
Bankruptcy reform*
homestead exemption cap
(BR*HC)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1.228***
(.046)

1.229***
(.046)
0.937*
(.035)

1.234***
(.047)

1.227***
(.046)

1.234***
(.047)
0.858***
(.035)
0.771***
(.035)
0.913
(.110)
1.255***
(.067)
1.106*
(.064)

0.815***
(.035)
1.066
(.105)
1.265***
(.068)
1.029
(.065)

Subprime Mortgages
(1)
(2)
(3)
1.157*** 1.142*** 1.150***
(.026)
(.028)
(.026)
0.913***
(.016)
1.043
(.029)

1.427***
(.203)

1.298
(.112)

(4)
1.156***
(.026)

(5)
1.139***
(.025)
0.881***
(.015)
0.943**
(.027)
0.983
(.028)
1.054**
(.027)
0.892***
(.052)

0.963
(.072)
1.073***
(.027)
0.854***
(.053)
1.301***
(.141)

1.277**
(.146)

Notes: ***, ** and * indicate whether the coefficient is significantly different from one at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample period is
from July 2005 through January 2006. All equations include the control variables shown in table
3.

32

Table 6:
Results of Cox Proportional Hazard Models Explaining Mortgage Default
Varying Sample Periods
Prime Mortgages

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Bankruptcy reform*income-only
means test (BR*MT1)
Bankruptcy reform* income/asset
means test (BR*MT2)
Bankruptcy reform * homestead
exemption cap (BR*HC)

+-2 months

+-3 months

+-6 months

1.226***
(.056)
1.354***
(.082)
1.118*
(.074)
1.440*
(.255)

1.234***
(.047)
1.255***
(.067)
1.106*
(.064)
1.298
(.112)

1.243***
(.039)
1.130***
(.053)
1.151***
(.053)
1.173
(.164)

+2 months

+- 3 months

+- 6 months

1.213***
(.039)
1.043
(.033)
.900*
(.056)
1.557***
(.162)

1.139***
(.025)
1.054**
(.027)
.892***
(.052)
1.277**
(.146)

1.092***
(.015)
1.048***
(.023)
1.059
(.042)
1.215**
(.116)

Subprime Mortgages

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Bankruptcy reform*income-only
means test (BR*MT1)
Bankruptcy reform* income/asset
means test (BR*MT2)
Bankruptcy reform*homestead
exemption cap (BR*HC)

Notes: ***, ** and * indicate whether the coefficient is significantly different from one at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. All equations include
the control variables shown in the table 3. “+-2 months” indicates the sample period two months
before to two months after bankruptcy reform. Other sample periods are defined in the same
way.

33

Table 7:
Results of Placebo Tests Using Hypothetical Dates for Bankruptcy Reform
Prime Mortgages

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Bankruptcy reform*income-only means
test (BR*MT1)
Bankruptcy reform* income/asset means
test (BR*MT2)
Bankruptcy reform* homestead exemption
cap (BR*HC)

+-3
months
June 05

+-3
months
Feb 06

+-3
months
Oct 06

1.130
(.092)
.795***
(.092)
1.064
(.089)

1.122
(.109)
.771***
(.072)
1.034
(.069)

1.041
(0.043)
.996
(.070)
.950
(.064)

1.227
(.316)

.746
(.187)

.994
(.174)

+-3
months
June 05

+-3
months
Feb 06

+-3
months
Oct 06

1.026
(.038)
.919***
(.036)
1.017
(.171)
1.076
(.804)

1.207***
(.061)
1.168***
(.047)
.996
(.070)
.701***
(.082)

1.034
(.022)
1.056
(.034)
.994
(.066)
1.046
(.150)

Subprime Mortgages

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Bankruptcy reform*income-only means
test (BR*MT1)
Bankruptcy reform* income/asset means
test (BR*MT2)
Bankruptcy reform *homestead exemption
cap (BR*HC)

Notes: ***, ** and * indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from one at the
0.1%, 1%, and 5% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. All equations include
the control variables shown in the table 3, plus MT1, MT2 and HC. “+-3 months June 05”
indicates that the hypothetical date of bankruptcy reform is June 2005 and the sample period is
March - September 2005.

34

Table 8:
Results of Cox Proportional Hazard Models Explaining Mortgage Default
Excluding Homeowners Who Filed for Bankruptcy September and October 2005
Three Months Before to Three Months After Bankruptcy Reform

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Bankruptcy reform*income-only means
test (BR*MT1)
Bankruptcy reform *income/asset means
test (BR*MT2)
Bankruptcy reform *homestead
exemption cap (BR*HC)

Prime
Mortgages

Subprime
Mortgages

1.261***
(.048)
1.253***
(.067)
1.109*
(.064)
1.307
(.211)

1.203***
(.035)
1.028*
(.018)
.965
(.049)
1.317***
(.140)

Notes: ***, ** and * indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from one at the
0.1%, 1%, and 5% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. The value of the
homestead exemption is normalized by the appraised value of the house. The unlimited
homestead dummy equals one for mortgages in states with unlimited homestead exemptions. All
of the control variables shown in table 3 are also included.

35

Table 9:
Results of Cox Proportional Hazard Models Explaining Mortgage Default
Morgan et al’s (2009) Specification
Three Months Before versus After Bankruptcy Reform

Bankruptcy reform (BR)
Homestead exemption
Unlimited homestead
exemption dummy
Bankruptcy reform *
Homestead exemption
Bankruptcy reform *
Unlimited homestead
exemption dummy

Prime Mortgages

Subprime Mortgages

1.206***
(.045)
1.292***
(.166)
.815
(.113)
1.118
(.551)
1.186***
(.072)

1.120***
(.024)
.876***
(.044)
.724***
(.052)
1.812
(.740)
1.267***
(.034)

Notes: ***, ** and * indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from one at the
0.1%, 1%, and 5% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. The value of the
homestead exemption is normalized by the appraised value of the house. The unlimited
homestead dummy equals one for mortgages in states with unlimited homestead exemptions. All
of the control variables shown in table 3 are also included.

36

Table 10:
Number of Additional Mortgage Defaults
Resulting from the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform

Bankruptcy
Reform
Total mortgages originated 2004-05
Prime mortgages:
Proportion of all mortgages
originated in 2004-05
Proportion affected by the change
Mortgage default rate/year
Increase in default rate after
bankruptcy reform
Subprime mortgages:
Proportion of all mortgages
originated in 2004-05
Proportion affected by the change
Mortgage default rate/year
Increase in default rate after
bankruptcy reform
Number of additional mortgage
defaults/year

22,000,000

Incomeonly
Means Test
22,000,000

Income/
Asset
Means Test
22,000,000

Homestead
Exemption
Cap
22,000,000

.81

.81

.81

.81

1.00
.024
.234

.265
.022
.255

.312
.014
.106

.045
.014
.298

.19

.19

.19

.19

1.00
.147
.139

.451
.132
.054

.108
.131
0

.010
.150
.277

180,000

40,000

8,000

5,000

Note: The figure in the bottom row, left column, equals 22,000,000(.81*1.0*.024*.234 +
.19*1.0*.147*.139). The other figures are calculated in the same way. We do not
calculate an increase in the number of mortgage defaults by subprime mortgage-holders
subject to the income/asset means test, since this result was non-positive. Mortgage
default rates are converted from monthly to yearly using the conversion factor
11
 t  0 (1  m) t , where m is the monthly default rate.

37

References

Adelino, Manuel, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul Willen, “Why Don’t Lenders Renegotiate
More Home Mortgages? Redefaults, Self-Cures, and Securitization,” FRB of Boston
Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 0904 (2009). SSRN abstract 1433777.
Ai, C. R. and Norton, E. C. (2003), Interaction terms in logit and probit models,
Economics Letters, 80(1), pp. 123–129.
Bernstein, David (2008), “Bankruptcy Reform and Foreclosure,”
papers.ssrn.com/so13/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1154635.
Bell, Kay (2005), “Paying your mortgage after a natural disaster,”
www.bankrate.com/brm/news/mortgages/place1.asp.
Berkowitz, Jeremy, and Richard Hynes, “Bankruptcy Exemptions and the Market for
Mortgage Loans,” J. of Law & Economics, 42, 809-830 (1999).
Chen, Jie, “Evidence from the Swedish 1997 Reform: The Effects of Housing Allowance
Benefit Levels on Recipient Duration,” Urban Studies 45: p. 347 (2008).
Carroll, Sarah, and Wenli Li, “The Homeownership Experience of Households in
Bankruptcy,” Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank working paper, June 3, 2008.
Demyanyk, Yulia, and Otto van Hemert, “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis,”
ssrn.com/abstract=1020396 (2008).
Eggum, John, Katherine Porter, and Tara Twomey, “Saving Homes in Bankruptcy:
Housing Affordability and Loan Modification,” Utah Law Review, vol. 2008:3, pp. 11231168.
Elias, Stephen, The New Bankruptcy: Will it Work for You? Nolo Press, 2006.
Elias, Stephen, The Foreclosure Survival Guide. Nolo Press, 2008.
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas S. Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, and
Robert Hunt. “What Triggers Mortgage Default?” manuscript, 2010.
Elul, Ronel, “Securitization and Mortgage Default: Reputation versus Adverse
Selection.” Working paper, Research Dept., FRB Philadelphia, 2009.

38

Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen (2007), “Subprime
outcomes: Risky mortgages, homeownership experiences and foreclosures,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper 0715.
Government Accountability Office, “Bankruptcy Reform: Dollar Costs Associated with
the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005,” U.S. GAO-08697 (June 2008).
Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Aiko Nelson, and Edward Vytlacil, “Liar’s Loan? Effects of
Origination Channel and Information Falsification on Mortgage Delinquency,” August
2009.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Did
Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly J. of
Econ., vol. 125, pp. 307-362 (2010).
Kiefer, Nicholas M., “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions,” J. of Ec. Lit.,
vol. XXVI, pp. 646-679 (June 1988).
Li, Wenli, and Michelle J. White, “Mortgage Default, Foreclosures and Bankruptcy.”
NBER working paper 15472 (2009).
Mann, Ronald J. “Bankruptcy Reform and the ‘Sweat Box’ of Credit Card Debt.” Univ.
of Illinois Law Review, vol. 2007:1, 375-404 (2007).
Mayer, Christopher and Karen Pence, “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where and to
Whom?” NBER working paper 14083 (2008). In Edward Glaeser and John Quigley,
eds. Housing and the Built Environment: Access, Finance, Policy. Cambridge, MA:
Lincoln Land Institute of Land Policy.
Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence and Shane Sherlund, “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,”
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-59, Federal Reserve Board, 2008.
Morgan, Donald P., Benjamin Iverson, and Matthew Botsch, “Seismic Effects of the
Bankruptcy Reform,” Staff Report no. 358, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2008).
Forthcoming, Economic Policy Review, published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Securitization and Distressed Loan
Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis,” Chicago Booth School of
Business Research Paper No 09-02, 2010. Ssrn abstract 1321646.
Porter, Katherine, “Misbehavior and Mistake in Bankruptcy Mortgage Claims,” Texas
Law Review, vol. 87:1, pp. 121-182 (2008).

39

Rajan, Uday, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2009, “The Failure of Models that Predict
Failure: Distance, Incentives, and Defaults,” working paper, London School of Business
(2008).
Richard, Scott F., and Richard Roll, “Prepayments on Fixed-rate Mortgage-backed
Securities,” Journal of Portfolio Management, vol. 15(3), 73-82 (1989).
Sherlund, Shane, “The Past, Present, and Future of Subprime Mortgages.” Unpublished
paper, Federal Reserve Board, September 2008.
White, Michelle J., "Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards," J. of Economic Perspectives,
pp. 175-199, Fall 2007.
White, Michelle J., and Ning Zhu, "Saving Your Home in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy,"
Journal of Legal Studies, January 2010.

40

