NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INERTIA AND OVERWITHHOLDING:
EXPLAINING THE PREVALENCE OF INCOME TAX REFUNDS
Damon Jones
Working Paper 15963
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15963

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

I thank Emmanuel Saez, Ulrike Malmendier and David Card for research guidance. I am grateful for
additional feedback from Alan Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Stefano DellaVigna, Jim Hines, Patrick Kline,
Botond Koszegi and Bruce Meyer. I'd also like to thank Naomi Feldman and Paul Chen for assistance
in finding rare IRS documents. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Damon Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Inertia and Overwithholding: Explaining the Prevalence of Income Tax Refunds
Damon Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 15963
May 2010
JEL No. D14,H24,K34
ABSTRACT
Over three-quarters of US taxpayers receive income tax refunds, indicating tax prepayments above
the level of tax liability. This amounts to a zero interest loan to the government. Previous studies have
suggested two main explanations for this behavior: precautionary behavior in light of tax uncertainty
and/or a forced savings motive. I present evidence on a third explanation: inertia. I find that tax filers
only partially adjust tax prepayments in response to changes in default withholdings or tax liability.
I use four different settings for identification: (1) a 1992 change in default federal withholding, (2)
a panel study of child dependents and tax liability, (3) the expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) during the 1990s and (4) a change in default enrollment rules for the Advance EITC option.
In the first two cases, I find that individuals offset less than 30% of a change to their expected refund
after one year, and about 50% of this shock after three years. Adjustments in tax prepayments by EITC
recipients offset no more than 2% of a change in tax liability, though evidence from the Advance EITC
indicates that information can significantly increase responses. Given the evidence on inertia, the design
of default withholding rules is no longer a neutral decision made by the social planner, but rather, may
affect consumption smoothing, particularly for low-income tax filers.
Damon Jones
Stanford University
SIEPR
366 Galvez St.
Stanford, CA 94305-6015
and University of Chicago, Harris School
and also NBER
damonjones@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

A growing body of evidence suggests that the behavior of a substantial share of the population
deviates from what is typically assumed in economic theory [see Rabin, 1998; DellaVigna,
2008, for overviews]. Recent studies have shown that departures from "standard" behavior
may be particularly important in the …eld of public …nance, especially when it comes to
calculating the welfare e¤ects of various policies [Bernheim and Rangel, 2008; Chetty et al.,
2009]. This paper presents new evidence on “non-standard” behavior in the public …nance
domain, based on US income tax withholding patterns.
Every year approximately 100 million taxpayers (nearly 80 percent) receive a tax refund
because they have overwithheld taxes in the previous year. Overwithholding generates $155
billion in annual income tax refunds— on average 7 percent of adjusted gross income (AGI)
[IRS, 2004]. Many overwithholders have relatively high incomes and may view the foregone
interest on their tax overpayments as a trivial loss. However, a surprising fraction of lowincome tax …lers have limited (or even zero) tax liability, pay relatively high interest rates
to …nance consumption until their refund arrives and in some cases pay additional fees
to accelerate the delivery of the refund via refund anticipation loans [Berube et al., 2002;
Elliehausen, 2005].
Previous studies have o¤ered two main explanations for overwithholding: precautionary
behavior in light of uncertain tax liability and asymmetric penalties [High…ll et al., 1998]
and “forced savings” arising from time-inconsistent preferences and/or mental accounting
[Thaler, 1994; Neumark, 1995; Fennell, 2006]. Such models typically assume that tax …lers
actively choose their withholdings and frequently readjust as incentives change. In contrast, I
explore an additional explanation based on inertia (or incomplete adjustment). Speci…cally,
I consider cases in which there is an external force or "shock" that changes the level of
one’s withholdings relative to one’s tax liability, thus altering one’s expected refund level. I
subsequently observe to what extent tax …lers respond to this external shock. I …nd that tax
…lers only partially adjust their withholdings, o¤setting roughly 30 percent of the change in
their refund level after one year. In addition, I argue that this response may be related to
the salience of the external shock.
I begin by exploiting exogenous variation in withholding levels brought about by a Presidential Executive Order. In 1992, the Bush administration reduced the default level of
income tax withholdings for wage earners below a speci…ed income threshold, with the aims
of stimulating the economy [Shapiro and Slemrod, 1995]. Importantly, the level of tax liability for this group remained constant. Thus, in the absence of a behavioral response, the
1

policy would result in a reduction in the refund level or increased balance due for treated
tax …lers. Comparing outcomes before and after the policy across "treated" and "untreated"
groups, I …nd that within the …rst year of this new policy, tax …lers o¤set about 30 percent
of the mandated change in withholdings. In the three years following this policy change,
withholding changes by tax …lers o¤set between 17 and 28 percent of the initial shock to the
refund level.1
I then consider the relationship between the number of child dependents and the refund
level, using a panel of tax returns from the years 1979 to 1990. In an event study framework,
I identify the change in tax liability following a change in the number of child dependents.
Estimating the subsequent change in tax prepayments yields another test of the inertia
hypothesis. I …nd that prepayments are adjusted to o¤set 23 percent of the change in tax
liability in the …rst year. Three years following the shock, prepayments have adjusted to
account for 51 percent of the change in tax liability. I additionally …nd evidence of an
asymmetric response and salience of a zero tax balance. In particular, when the loss of a
child dependent causes a tax …ler to transition from receiving a refund in the baseline year
to owing a balance due in the following year, the corresponding adjustment in prepayments
is much larger, between 56 and 78 percent. This response is much more pronounced than
in the opposite case when a balance due becomes a tax refund or in general for tax liability
changes in either direction that are not large enough to be the di¤erence between a refund
or balance due.
Next, I turn attention to the population eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC)— a refundable tax credit that directly reduces tax liability [see Hotz and Scholz,
2003, for an overview]. Overpayments for this group are on average 13 percent of income,
which, in combination with potential borrowing constraints, may hinder the ability to smooth
consumption. To test for inertia among these tax …lers, I make use of variation in tax liability
generated by the dramatic expansion of the EITC during the 1990s. Using repeated cross
sections of tax return data, I estimate the relationship between expected EITC amounts and
average tax prepayments. I show that di¤erential growth in EITC levels is a strong predictor of relative refund levels, which suggests that tax prepayments are not adjusted much in
response to this particular reduction in tax liability. For every $1 increase in the EITC, I
1

Feldman [2008] uses this 1992 change in default withholdings as an instrument in identifying the e¤ect of
the timing of income on IRA savings. A key identifying assumption is that individuals do not undo the 1992
change in defaults, or rather, that tax …lers are substantially inert. She shows evidence that withholdings are
a¤ected by the change in defaults. I complement her …ndings by decomposing this change into a mechanical
e¤ect and behavioral response and comparing the relative magnitude of the two.

2

can rule out a response greater than $0.02 in reduced tax prepayments. Thus, there is little
evidence of o¤setting behavior on the part of tax …lers in this group.
Finally, I complement this evidence of inertia among EITC recipients with administrative
panel data on Advance EITC participation within a large …rm. The Advance EITC is an
option that allows EITC eligible workers to receive a portion of their EITC in every paycheck,
as opposed to receiving the entire credit as a "lump sum" at in the end of the tax year.
Thus, the decision to make use of this option is equivalent to lowering tax prepayments. I
observe data from a …rm that introduces a new policy requiring employees to renew Advance
EITC payments annually. Consistent with the preceding results, I …nd that this shift in
default enrollment has signi…cant e¤ects on Advance EITC participation. Ending a policy
of automatic renewal reduces take-up to about 65 percent of its original level. The e¤ect of
this shock on tax prepayments is much smaller than in the previous three cases. This is in
part due to e¤orts by the employer to limit the e¤ects of the default change. An employer
intervention, in the form of targeted notices highlighting the new rules, was implemented
prior to the …rst renewal date and again following the second one. In comparing the two
cases, it appears that (1) in the absence of the informational intervention, the default e¤ects
would have been much more pronounced and (2) these informational e¤orts taken by the
employer help to o¤set a majority of the default e¤ects.
These …ndings have at least three implications. First, caution must be taken when using the observed levels of income tax refunds to generate inferences about preferences. For
example, the prevalence of overwithholding has been cited as evidence of time-inconsistent
preferences and/or mental accounting [Neumark, 1995; Thaler, 1994; Fennell, 2006]. However, the presence of inertia confounds such an interpretation.2 Second, to the extent that
defaults drive the behavior of inert tax payers, the decisions made by a social planner in
setting default withholdings may no longer have neutral e¤ects. Similar conclusions have
been made in other arenas where default e¤ects have been detected [Madrian and Shea,
2001; Choi et al., 2003; Johnson and Goldstein, 2003; Abadie and Gay, 2006; DellaVigna
and Malmendier, 2006]. Default withholding rules in the US generally predispose individuals
toward refunds. This is especially relevant for tax …lers in the lower tail of the income distribution, where sizeable refundable credits and a possibly higher incidence of inertia result
in a signi…cant share of income that is overwithheld. This phenomenon may be purposeful,
increasing savings for these tax …lers. On the other hand, given the evidence on inertia, it
might also be the case that default withholding rules generate ine¢ ciently high amounts of
2

This point is similarly made by Barr and Dokko [2007].

3

tax prepayments and result in costly constraints on liquidity throughout the year. Third,
the data is generally consistent with the idea that the salience of a change in tax liability or
default withholdings is related to the level of inertia. This is most cleanly shown with the
e¤ect of information on Advance EITC enrollment.3
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 explains the US income tax withholding system. Next, I present an empirical framework for studying inertia in Section 3. I then
describe the data used in this study and provide descriptive statistics on overwithholding in
Section 4. I present empirical results on inertia in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes with a
discussion.

2

Institutional Details

In the US, individuals are taxed on income as they receive it, in a so-called "pay-as-you-earn"
system. Throughout the year tax …lers make prepayments either through withholdings, which
are taken out of each paycheck, or through quarterly, estimated payments to the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS), which typically account for non-wage sources of income. At the end
of the year, annual income has been fully realized, and tax liability is determined. If tax
prepayments are too low, the tax …ler must pay the remaining balance, with a possible interest
penalty. If prepayments are too high, tax …lers receive a refund, although no interest is
earned on the excess tax prepayments. Given the uncertainty involved, it may prove di¢ cult
to exactly equate prepayments to tax liability. Nevertheless, clear feedback is received every
year with the …ling of a tax return, in the form of a refund or balance due. Lower-income
tax …lers may qualify for refundable credits, which can result in a negative tax liability. In
this case, a refund is received even if tax prepayments are zero. Notwithstanding, refundable
credits may be partially shifted from an end-of-the-year payment into each paycheck via the
Advance EITC option [Committee on Ways and Means, 2004].
In a traditional employment setting, the employer automatically withholds tax prepayments for an employee each pay period. Employees determine the withholding amount using
a W-4 form [see IRS, 2009b]. Speci…cally, the W-4 form involves choosing a number of allowances, which roughly re‡ect the anticipated number of exemptions to be claimed on the
tax return. The higher the number of allowances, the lower are one’s withholdings per pay
period. The W-4 form provides guidelines for choosing a number of allowances based on the
3

Jones [Forthcoming] shows that information does not increase Advance EITC participation for previously
unenrolled workers. However, I show here that information does mitigate the e¤ect of default changes on
workers who are already enrolled in the Advance EITC program.

4

major factors a¤ecting tax liability: number of dependents, deductions, marital status and
number of jobs. In addition to choosing a number of allowances, tax …lers may designate an
additional dollar amount to be withheld from each paycheck, allowing in theory for a continuous menu of withholding amounts. Withholdings are then computed by the employer using
the employee’s W-4 form, the employee’s level of earnings and an IRS-provided withholding
schedule. A W-4 form can be resubmitted at any time should tax liability be expected to
change but is generally only required at the onset of employment. In the event that an
employee submits an incomplete W-4 or no W-4, the employer is required to choose zero
allowances, resulting in the maximum level of withholdings [IRS, 2009a]. This default rule
may help explain why prepayments are initially set high. The evidence I present below on
inertia and asymmetric adjustment may help to explain why prepayments tend to remain
high overtime.

3
3.1

An Empirical Model of Withholding
General Framework

I will now motivate the empirical analysis with the following simple model of income tax
refunds. Consider the refund level:
R (A; E; Z) = P (A; E; Z)

L (A; E; Z) ;

where R ( ), P ( ) and L ( ) are the refund, tax prepayment, and tax liability level respectively.
There are two endogenous determinants of prepayments and liabilities, A and E. These can
be thought of as the number of allowances and earnings. Finally, there is an exogenous policy
parameter Z, which may represent some feature of the tax code. Now consider the change
in the refund level given a change in the policy parameter Z:

@R
=
@Z

|

@P
@A

@L
@A

@A
@P
+
@Z
@E
{z

behavioral response

+
|

@P
@Z

@L
,
@Z
{z
}

mechanical e¤ect

5

@L
@E

@E
@Z
}

(1)

where the …rst two terms on the right-hand side constitute a behavioral response by the tax
payer and the third term, the mechanical e¤ect, represents the direct e¤ect of the policy
change. I make the following simplifying assumptions, which are relevant to the types of
policy changes that I consider:
Assumption 1 Allowances do not a¤ect tax liability:
@L
=0
@A
Assumption 2 Changes in tax liability and tax prepayments brought about by an earnings
response are o¤setting:
@P
@L
=
@E
@E
Assumption 3 The policy change either only a¤ects tax prepayments or only a¤ects tax
liability:
@L
@P
= 0 or
=0
either
@Z
@Z
The …rst assumption describes the nature of allowances. Adjusting the number of allowances only a¤ects withholdings. The second assumption captures the nature of automatic
withholdings. If earnings change, withholdings from the paycheck are automatically adjusted
in much the same way as tax liability via tax withholding schedules. The marginal withholding rate is (approximately) the same as the marginal tax rate.4 The …nal assumption
describes a feature of the policy changes under consideration. In each case, either the default
withholding level changes with no accompanying change in tax liability, or vice versa. Using
these assumptions, the change in refund level in Equation (1) simpli…es to:
@P @A
@P
@R
=
+
@Z |@A{z@Z} |{z}
@Z
4PB

(2)

4PM

when the policy a¤ects default withholdings, or

@R
@P @A
=
@Z |@A{z@Z}
4PB

4

@L
@Z
|{z}

(3)

4LM

This assumption may not hold for all tax …lers, especially those married …ling jointly. In some of the
analysis, I estimate prepayment adjustments separately for single and married tax …lers.

6

when the policy a¤ects tax liability. Here again, the changes are decomposed into the
behavioral response via tax prepayments, 4PB , and the mechanical e¤ects on prepayments
and liabilities, 4PM and 4LM , respectively. In measuring the tax …ler’s response to the
policy change, consider the following two extreme cases:
Case 1 (Full Adjustment) Under full adjustment the agent adjusts prepayments to fully
o¤set the policy change:
@R
= 0;
@Z
and thus equations (2) and (3) can be rearranged as follows to de…ne the adjustment rate,
, i.e. the ratio of the behavioral response to the mechanical e¤ect:
4PB
=1
4PM
4PB
= 1:
4LM

P

L

(4)

Case 2 (Full Inertia) Under full inertia the agent does not o¤set the policy change at
all:
@A
= 0;
@Z
and thus the above adjustment rates become:
P

=

L

= 0:

(5)

In practice, I estimate these adjustment rates by regressing an observed change in tax
prepayment level on the expected mechanical change in prepayments or liabilities. Variation
in the mechanical change is brought about by some policy change or other shock to the
refund level, Z. Though the details of vary slightly, I generally use some variation of the
following speci…cation:
4PB =
(6)
P 4PM (Z) + X + "
when the policy a¤ects prepayments and
4PB =

L

4LM (Z) + X + "

(7)

when the policy a¤ects tax liability. The vector X includes a group of control variables.
The key identifying assumption is that the policy variable, Z, does not directly a¤ect the
7

underlying target refund level, and thus only a¤ects tax prepayments via a change in default
prepayments or tax liability.

3.2

Speci…c Applications

I use the preceding framework to estimate an adjustment rate, , in four di¤erent settings.
In each case, there is a unique shock that a¤ects the expected refund level. I subsequently
observe the taxpayers’ response to this event. In the Section 5 below, I outline the key
features of the di¤erent sources of identi…cation. In two cases, the 1992 change in default
withholdings and the Advance EITC case study, there is a change in default withholdings
while holding liability constant. In the other two cases, the panel study of child dependents
and the 1990s EITC expansion, tax liability changes without a compensating adjustment of
default withholdings. In each case, I use a di¤erent econometric approach. I relate each of
these approaches to the general empirical framework described above. I also highlight two
other signi…cant di¤erences across the four events: the relative salience of each shock and
the direction (up or down) in which the shock pushes the refund level in the absence of a
behavioral response.

4
4.1

Data Description
Data Overview

The primary data used in this analysis come from the IRS Statistics of Income (SOI) Division.
For almost every year since 1960, the IRS has released a public-use sample of income tax
returns. Sample sizes range from 80,000 to 150,000. In addition to selected cross sections
of the IRS public-use …le, I use a panel of tax returns from the same source. The IRS tax
panel follows a subset of tax …lers from 1979 to 1990. This unbalanced, longitudinal data
set contains about 45,000 observations for the …rst three years, and then between 10,000
and 20,000 observations in each year thereafter. The data contain detailed information
on sources of income, and include most of the information provided on the IRS 1040 tax
return. Most importantly, the data include tax prepayments, disaggregated into withholdings
from wages and estimated tax payments, tax liability and the level of refund/balance due.
Demographic information is limited to marital status, number of children, other dependents
and an indicator for age equal to or above 65 years. For the additional analysis of the Advance
EITC, I use administrative panel data collected by Jones [Forthcoming]. Within a …rm of
8

about 80,000 employees, I observe all employees who receive Advance EITC payments from
February 2006 until September 2008. Enrollment peaks at about 400. The data include the
weekly Advance payment amount and other information about the retail location in which
the employee works.

4.2

Descriptive Statistics

I provide summary statistics on overwithholding for tax …lers in 2004 in Column (4) of Table
1. On average, individuals receive a refund of $1,000 and make prepayments that are 3 times
as large as their tax liability. These refunds comprise 7 percent of AGI for the average tax
…ler. Finally, the share of tax …lers receiving a refund is just below 80 percent. Panel A of
Figure 1 depicts a skewed right distribution of refunds that visually reinforces the summary
statistics. One may notice the mass of …lers at a zero balance. This is mainly comprised of
individuals with both zero tax liability and zero tax prepayments.5
Further visual evidence reveals two signi…cant patterns of overwithholding. First, individuals claim less than the total number of allowances to which they are entitled and are
also clustered at zero allowances, which is the default level set for workers by employers.
Panel B of Figure 1 presents an estimated distribution of actual allowances along side a
counterfactual distribution of allowances. The former is estimated using wage and withholding data to impute the number of allowances taken on the W-4 form.6 The latter uses
demographic information from the tax return to calculate the total number of allowances to
which the individual is actually entitled. Second, we see in Panel C of Figure 1 that refunds
are persistent. Here I use the 1979 -1990 panel of tax …lers, calculate the share of time that
a refund is received for each individual and plot the distribution of this statistic. Contrary
to the idea that individuals may ‡uctuate between under- and overwithholding, nearly half
of all tax …lers always receive a refund.

5

Results

5.1

1992 Change in Default Withholdings

In his 1992 State of the Union Address, President Bush announced a decrease in default
withholdings aimed at stimulating a sluggish economy [Shapiro and Slemrod, 1995]. New
5
6

This discontinuity in the distribution at a zero balance may also be evidence of tax evasion.
See the appendix for further details on this estimation procedure.

9

withholdings tables were issued in February of that year and employers were instructed to
incorporate the new tables as soon as possible [IRS, 1992]. The typical reduction in annual
withholdings was $187 and $423 per job for single and married wage earners with taxable
wages below $64,000 and $110,000 respectively.7 Panel A of Figure 2 demonstrates the
nature of the change in withholdings. Importantly, there was no concurrent reduction in
tax liability. Within the framework presented of Section 3, Z corresponds to the default
withholding rules. There is no change in tax liability due to the policy change, @L=@Z = 0,
and thus I am estimating the adjustment rate P . The mechanisms, A, by which individuals
o¤set the policy are (1) submitting a new W-4 with a lower number of allowances to raise
withholdings or (2) increasing estimated payments. For this analysis, I use repeated cross
section data from the IRS SOI public use samples. Table 1, Column (1) provides descriptive
statistics on the sample used. In terms of income and refund propensity, this sample, which
represents about half of the entire tax …ler population, falls somewhere between the general
population of tax …lers and the EITC population.
In terms of salience, tax payers are made aware of the 1992 policy change through two
main avenues. First, individuals receive a higher after-tax paycheck every pay period once
the employer implements the change in withholdings tables. Shapiro and Slemrod [1995]
…nd that about one-third of survey respondents noticed a reduction in withholdings a month
after the policy took e¤ect. Second, when the tax return is …led, the tax …ler should receive
a lower refund or owe a higher balance than usual. In addition, employers were instructed
to directly notify their employees of the change in withholdings, and also to instruct them
on how to o¤set the reduction in withholdings. The new Employer’s Tax Guide reads, "If
some of your employees do not want their withholding changed, they should complete new
Forms W-4" [IRS, 1992]. In comparison to the other shocks that I analyze, this policy change
generates downward pressure on the refund level. In the absence of adjustment, the tax …ler
will be more likely to owe a balance at the end of the year.
Panel B of Figure 2 plots refund levels for married tax …lers from 1980 to 2000. The
sample is restricted to tax …lers with AGI below $110,000 (in year 2000 dollars), which is
roughly the maximum income for which default withholdings changed in 1992. The sample
is further split by composition of income. The …rst group, "wage earners," has wage and
salary income above $7,364 and thus is subject to the withholding change. The second group,
"non-wage earners," has wage and salary income below this threshold and is therefore not
7

These amounts are presented in terms of year 2000 dollars and represent the maximum changes. Actual
changes may vary for individuals in the phase-in or phase-out region of the withholding adjustment, as
depicted in Figure 2, Panel A.

10

subject to the change in default withholdings. Non-wage earners may have other sources of
income, such as self-employment, interest or dividend income. I refer to the two groups as
the "treatment" and "control." The vertical lines in the Figure denote the period over which
default withholdings were reduced. We see a noticeable decline in refunds for wage earners
during the policy change. The same is not true for non-wage earners. This visual evidence
is merely suggestive, however, as the di¤erence in composition of income may be correlated
with signi…cant, unobservable di¤erences between the two groups.
5.1.1

Di¤erence-in-Di¤erence Estimates

As an initial step toward estimating an adjustment rate, I compare withholdings before and
after the policy and also between the "treatment" and "control" tax …lers using a di¤erencein-di¤erence (DD) estimator. First, data are grouped into cells based on year and marital
status. The cells are further divided into two groups based on wage and salary income. One
group has enough wage and salary income to be a¤ected by the change in withholding tables,
while the other does not. These cuto¤s are $3,007 and $7,364 for single and married …lers
respectively. Those with wages below the cuto¤s may have other sources of income, such
as self-employment income or investment income. The data are then split by adjusted gross
income (AGI) into intervals of $10,000. Finally, cells of single and married …lers with AGI
above $70,000 and $110,000 respectively were dropped, as tax …lers in these groups were
generally not subject to the change in withholdings. This procedure resulted in 36 cells per
year. All variables were then averaged at the cell level using sample weights.
The net e¤ect of the policy change on prepayments is 4P = (4PM + 4PB ). That is,
the total change in prepayments is the sum of the mechanical and behavioral components. I
can estimate this net e¤ect using cell averages in the following regression:
Pgt =

g

+

t

+ 4P Tgt + Xgt + "gt ;

(8)

where Pgt denotes average tax prepayments in the form of either withholdings or estimated
payments, g and t are cell and year …xed e¤ects and Xgt is a vector of average tax liability
and EITC credits. The variable Tgt is a treatment indicator that equals 1 if both the cell year
is after the policy change and the cell wages are within the eligible range to be a¤ected by
the executive order. This regression is run for groups of two years, comparing 1991 outcomes
to those in each of the years 1992, 1993, and 1994. I similarly estimate so called "placebo"
regressions: the change in withholdings between 1990 and 1991 and the change in estimated

11

payments between 1991 and 1992, both quantities unlikely to be a¤ected by the change in tax
policy. Robust standard errors and standard errors clustered at the cell level are calculated.
This method does not allow me to separately identify the mechanical and behavioral e¤ects.
However, I can approximate P using the following identity:
P

=

4PM 4P
4PM

(9)

As stipulated in the executive order, I can substitute a mechanical e¤ect, 4PM , of $187
and $423 for single and married tax …lers respectively. This will tend to underestimate the
adjustment rate, since I am substituting the maximum mechanical e¤ect rather than the
actual e¤ect for those in the phase-in and phase-out of the withholdings change.
Column (1) of Table 2 reports the estimates for the full sample, and separately for single
and married …lers. The average decrease in withholdings, 4P, is $255. The net e¤ects for
single and married …lers are on the same order of policy change, $157 and $369 respectively.
Using the identity in (9), this implies an P of 0.16 and 0.13 respectively. In Columns (2)
and (3), I conduct the DD estimate between 1991 and each of the years 1993 and 1994. We
see that the e¤ect is still signi…cant three years out, with an implied P of 0.17 and 0.28 for
single and married …lers respectively. I also conduct two "placebo" experiments in Columns
(4) and (5) of Table 2. Column (4) indicates that there are not comparable changes in
withholdings between 1990 and 1991. Also, there were no signi…cant changes in estimated
payments between 1991 and 1992, which are not e¤ected by the executive order. Thus, it
appears that the drop in withholdings is due to the change in defaults in 1992.
5.1.2

Incorporating Information from Withholding Tables

I can go a step further by using information on the relationship between withholdings,
wages and allowances to arrive at an alternative measure of P . This alternative method
of estimating the mechanical e¤ects, behavioral responses and adjustment rates requires the
following three components:
P0 (Ai0 ; E i ) : baseline withholdings prior to the policy change
P1 (Ai0 ; E i ) : withholdings following the policy change, holding allowances …xed
P1 (Ai1 ; E i ) : withholdings after the policy change and change in allowances.
where withholdings, P ( ), are a function of allowances, Ai , and wage earnings, E i , as described in IRS withholding tables. The 0 and 1 subscripts denote pre- and post- policy
12

variables respectively, for the ith individual in 1992. I observe post-policy withholdings
and earnings, and thus can infer the distribution of post-policy allowances. However, I do
not observe pre-policy 1992 withholdings and thus cannot make direct inferences regarding
pre-policy allowances, Ai0 . Therefore, I make the following assumption:
Assumption 4 In the absence of the policy change, the distribution of allowances would
have remained constant between 1991 and 1992:
F0 (A0 )jt=91 = F0 (A0 )jt=92
If this holds, I can estimate the distribution of allowances in 1991 and use this as a
proxy for the pre-policy distribution of allowances in 1992. I similarly use data from 1992
to estimate the distribution of post-policy allowances in 1992, arriving at estimates of the
conditional distributions, F^0 (A0 j ) and F^1 (A1 j ), where is a vector containing income
group and marital status.8 Using these conditional distributions, I estimate withholdings as
follows:
Z
i
i
i
^
P 0 A0 ; E
=
P0 a; E i dF^0 aj i
Z
i
i
i
P^1 A0 ; E
=
P1 a; E i dF^0 aj i
Z
i
i
i
^
P 1 A1 ; E
=
P1 a; E i dF^1 aj i :
For a given individual, then, the mechanical e¤ect and behavioral response are de…ned as
follows:
i
4PM
= P^1i Ai0 ; E i
4PBi = P^1i Ai1 ; E i

P^0i Ai0 ; E i
P^1i Ai0 ; E i :

(10)
(11)

Finally, I use the estimated mechanical e¤ects and behavioral responses in the following
regression:
i
i
4PBi =
+ "i ;
(12)
P 4PM + x
where x is a control variable measuring the level of tax liability. For this procedure I report
both standard errors clustered within each income-by-marital cell and bootstrap standard
errors.
8

Additional details regarding the estimation of these distributions are provided in an appendix.

13

Panel C of Figure 2 lends credence to this method. The graph shows the estimated
distribution of allowances from 1990 to 1993, using the same methods as in Figure 1. First,
we see that the distribution is relatively stable between 1990 and 1991, suggesting that in the
absence of a policy change, the distribution of allowances would have remained constant from
1991 to 1992. We also see that the distribution shifts in 1992 in the direction toward lower
allowances and thus higher withholdings, which would be expected of individuals attempting
to o¤set the policy change. This is evidence of a behavioral response.
In Table 3, I estimate the fraction by which this behavioral response o¤sets the mechanical e¤ect of the policy shock. The sample is again restricted to individuals within the
range of a¤ected wages. Using Equation (10), I estimate an average mechanical decrease
in withholdings of $237, with conditional averages of $180 and $392 for single and married
…lers respectively. In contrast, I estimate an average behavioral response of only $60 in
additional withholdings using Equation (11). Estimating Equation (12), this translates into
an estimate of 0.30 for P . Tax …lers only o¤set 30 percent of the decrease in withholdings
during the …rst year of the policy change. This estimate is slightly larger than the DD estimate. Whereas the approximation using simple DD estimate assumes that every tax payer
received the maximum reduction in withholdings, the current estimate re‡ects the fact that
some taxpayers received a smaller reduction in withholdings.

5.2

Panel Study of Child Dependents

I further explore inertia by estimating the e¤ect of child dependents on tax liability and
tax prepayments. Adding a child increases the number of exemptions that a taxpayer can
claim, reducing taxable income. In addition, tax credits such as the EITC become available
for households within certain income ranges. Thus, when one either loses or gains a child
dependent, tax liability will rise or fall in a predictable manner. Returning to the general
empirical framework, the so-called policy variable, Z, is now number of children dependents.
While there is a change in tax liability via the number of exemptions claimed, the automatic
withholding from wages does not adjust unless a new W-4 form is …led. Thus we have a case
where @P=@Z = 0, and I am therefore estimating L = 0.
To examine this phenomenon I use panel data on tax returns spanning 1979 to 1990. I
perform an event study of the loss or gain of a child dependent. Following a change in the
number of child dependents, tax …lers receive direct feedback on the change in tax liability
when the tax return is …led. The loss or gain of a child will result in a lower or higher
refund level, respectively. In addition, if a new W-4 form is …led for any reason, the tax
14

payer is explicitly directed to take into account any changes in the number of children that
are claimed [IRS, 2009b]. Within this context, I can directly compare the e¤ect of being
pushed toward a refund or toward owing a balance on subsequent prepayments and refund
probabilities.
In Column (2) of Table 1, we see that, compared to the other cases that I consider, this
sample is the most representative of entire tax …ling population. The data are essentially
trimmed of the top 1 percent of incomes, for whom information on children is obscured for
con…dentiality purposes. While 84 percent of the changes in child dependents from year to
year involve one child, I pool all changes, which may include two or more dependents lost or
gained. Losses and gains are equally likely to occur in the sample. Nonetheless, losses and
gains of children may not be directly comparable events. The former tends to happen later
in the life cycle. Furthermore, the loss of a child may be commonly preceded by a divorce or
negative shock to income. In the analysis that follows I include income and marital status
as control variables.
5.2.1

Pooled Estimates

I will …rst estimate the adjustment rate assuming that the response is the same whether a
tax …ler loses or gains a dependent. I estimate the following structural equation using two
stage least squares (2SLS):
prepaymentit =

i

+

t

+

L

(13)

liabilityit + Xit + "it :

The …rst stage and reduced form regressions are as follows:

liabilityit = ~i + ~t +

10
X

k= 10

prepaymentit =

i+

t+

10
X

k= 10

4Lkl

Lossi;t

k

10
X

k= 10

4Plk Lossi;t

k

10
X

k= 10

4Lkg Gaini;t
4Pgk Gaini;t

k

k

+ ~ Xit + ~"it(14)
+ Xit + "it(15)
;

where i and t are individual and time …xed e¤ects. The vector Xit includes a cubic in
AGI, marital status and an indicator for age above 65 years. The Lossi;t k and Gaini;t k are
a set of dummy variables indicating that at time t a change in dependents has taken place k
periods in the past, or in the future for k < 0. The coe¢ cients 4Lkl and 4Lkg in equations
equation (14) can be thought of as the mechanical e¤ect on current tax liability of a change
15

in child dependents k periods ago for losers and gainers respectively. The coe¢ cients 4Plk
and 4Pgk in (15) can likewise be thought of as the behavioral response by tax payers. I
summarize these changes using the following weighted averages:
4LkM =

4PBk =

l
l

4Lkl +

4Plk +

g
g

4Lkg

4Pgk ;

(16)
(17)

where l and g are the share of losers and gainers in the sample. The 4LkM and 4PBk are
measures of the average mechanical e¤ect and behavioral response. Finally, the parameter
L measures the response of tax prepayments to changes in tax liability. The 2SLS method
allows me to isolate the variation in liability generated by the loss or gain of a child dependent.
In Figure 3, I plot the coe¢ cients from Equation (14).The horizontal axis measures time
and the vertical axis measures outcomes relative to the year in which the number of child
dependents changes. Though liability is generally declining as the event nears, there is a
sharp increase in tax liability when a dependent is lost. The inverse is true for gains in
dependents. We also observe that the estimates become increasingly noisy as time passes.
Therefore, I focus on windows of three years after the event when reporting point estimates.
Figure 3 also plots the associated dynamics of tax prepayments, estimated using Equation
(15). Here we see prepayments do not change as sharply following the baseline year.
In Table 4, I report the point estimates underlying these …gures. As can be seen in
Column (1), a change in the number of dependent translates into an immediate change in
tax liability of about $590 dollars. This change in tax liability persists over the next three
years. In Column (2) of Table 4, we see that the response of tax prepayments is not as large:
$138 following a change in the number of dependents. This response gradually increases over
time. Finally, the adjustment rate estimated from Equation (13), L , is reported in Column
(3). In the …rst year following the change in tax liability the adjustment rate is about 0.23.
Tax prepayments do not fully adjust; three years after the change in dependents, only 51
percent of the shock has been undone.
5.2.2

Losers versus Gainers and the "Zero Balance" E¤ect

Though the results thus far demonstrate that tax …lers have a limited response to changes
in tax liability or default withholdings, inertia alone does not explain a bias toward refunds.
One possibility is that there is a di¤erential response for changes that cause the refund to
decrease versus those that cause it to increase. One can examine this hypothesis by separately

16

estimating adjustment rates for those who lose a child and those who gain a child and seeing
whether the adjustment rate is larger for the former group.
Table 5 presents adjustment rates separately for losers and gainers in Columns (1) and
(2). The two groups have very similar responses to changes in tax liability in the three years
following the change in number of child dependents. If anything, losers appear to display
more inertia in the …rst year. Thus, evidence of an asymmetric response does not show up
for the general sample.
An alternative theory is that tax …lers generally exhibit the same response to increases
and decreases in tax liability, but changes near a zero balance are more salient and trigger
a greater reaction. Given that most tax …lers initially have excess withholding, we may not
pick up the salience of a zero balance in the general population. Thus, in Columns (3) and
(4), I restrict the sample to tax …lers that have an initial refund level or balance due less
than $1,000. For this sample, a loss of a child dependent is likely to cause a tax …ler who
had previously received a refund to owe a balance due. The converse is true for a tax …ler in
this sample who gains a child. Now, losers have an adjustment rate between 0.56 and 0.78
in the …rst three years following a change in dependents, while gainers’adjustment rates are
much closer to zero, and possibly even negative. The results suggest that transitioning from
receiving a refund to owing a balance is particularly salient to tax …lers and prompts a larger
response. Such variation in inertia is consistent with the observed prevalence of income
tax refunds. However, I cannot completely rule out the presence of unobserved di¤erences
between losers and gainers and between the full sample and "zero balance" sample that drive
these results.

5.3

1990s EITC Expansion

Introduced in 1975, the EITC is a tax credit available to low income, working households.
The earning subsidy may constitute as much as 40 percent of income, with a maximum
bene…t of $5,657 in 2009. The maximum earnings thresholds are $43,279 for single …lers
with three or more children, $40,295 for single …lers with two children, $35,463 for single
…lers with one child and $13,440 for single …lers with no children. For married couples, the
earnings threshold is relaxed by an additional $5,000. The credit is refundable–meaning
once it has reduced tax liabilities to zero, the remaining credit is paid out as a transfer
[see Mo¢ tt, 2003, for an overview]. The maximum EITC amount nearly tripled during the
1990s, growing from $1,255 in 1990 to $3,888 in 2000 [Committee on Ways and Means, 2004].
For eligible households, this created a signi…cant downward trend in tax liability over the
17

same period. However, IRS withholding tables do not account for EITC eligibility, and the
W-4 form used to determine withholdings makes no explicit mention of the need to adjust
withholdings in expectation of an EITC refund.
In terms of the general framework for inertia, the policy variable, Z, is now the level
of the EITC for eligible tax …lers. In this case, there is a change in tax liability but no
accompanying change in withholding defaults: @P=@Z = 0 and I am again estimating L .
The mechanism, A, for o¤setting the policy is again the lowering of withholdings through the
W-4 form or the lowering of estimated payments. Individuals may also sign up for Advance
EITC payments in order to o¤set the change in tax liability. I discuss this option in the next
section.
In terms of salience, the frequency of feedback provided by the EITC is generally at the
annual level. Over time, eligible households are presented with larger and larger refunds.
Further signals of EITC expansion may result from the marketing and outreach e¤orts of tax
preparers, both free and commercial, who encourage eligible households to …le a tax return
and claim the EITC. An understanding of the connection between the EITC and tax liability,
however, may be quite elusive for recipients. For example, EITC recipients generally do not
bunch at kink points in the EITC schedule [Saez, Forthcoming], though making the schedule
more salient may increase bunching [Chetty and Saez, 2009]. As compared to the other cases
under consideration, the EITC expansion drives eligible tax …lers toward receiving a larger
refund in the absence of any behavioral response.
To estimate the e¤ect of the EITC on prepayments, I make use of repeated cross sections
of tax return data from the 1990s. First, I exclude tax …lers with zero prepayments, who have
no means of further lowering prepayments. I group observations annually into four categories.
The …rst group is ineligible for the EITC. The next three groups are EITC-eligible tax …lers
with zero, one or two or more children. In order to account for changes in group composition
that occur due to changes in EITC eligibility, income variables are adjusted to 2000 levels
and EITC eligibility is based on year 2000 criteria using the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER) Internet TAXSIM model.9 Next, I calculate group-by-year averages and
estimate the following linear model:
P gt =

g

+

t

L

EIT C gt +

X gt + "gt ;

(18)

where g indexes the four groups, t is a year index, the ’s are group and year …xed e¤ects
9

For more on the TAXSIM model see Feenberg and Coutts [1993] or visit the NBER website at http:
//www.nber.org/~taxsim/.

18

and Xgt is a vector of average observable controls including a cubic in income, tax liability,
and the child tax credit. The outcome, Pgt , measures average tax prepayments for group g
in year t. There is a negative sign in front of L since @liability=@EIT C = 1.
As shown in Column (3) of Table 1, this sample represents about a quarter of the entire
tax …ling population and occupies a lower segment of the income distribution than the
tax …lers in the previous two cases. As such, the costs of overwithholding may be the
greatest for this group. It is surprising, then, that these tax …lers are particularly prone to
overwithholding. We see in Table 1 that they make tax prepayments that are on average
more than 8 times as much as they owe. This ties up an average of 13 percent of income in
overwithholdings throughout the year. As I will show, this high propensity to overwithhold
is in part due to the interaction of growing tax credits and high levels of inertia.
As demonstrated in the Panel A of Figure 4, the credit underwent signi…cant expansions
during the early 1990s, especially for families with 2 or more children. I use this variation
in tax liability to test for inertia in prepayments. Panel B of Figure 4 illustrates a strong
positive correlation between EITC levels and refund levels across the groups and over time.
This visual evidence suggests that there was little to no adjustment of tax prepayments in
response to increases in EITC levels. In Panel C of Figure 4, I have plotted tax prepayments
over the same time period. Tax prepayments do not appear to decline in response to the
EITC increases. During the 1990s, when the EITC underwent its most pronounced growth,
the level of tax prepayments among eligible tax …lers is relatively ‡at. In 1992 there are
sharp declines in prepayments, which, as has been shown, is due to a 1992 Executive Order.
Finally, to the extent that there is a decreasing trend in tax prepayments, it is nearly
identical for eligible and non-eligible tax …lers. This underscores the notion that changes in
tax prepayments over this period were not in response to EITC growth.
Table 6 reports the coe¢ cients estimated from Equation (18). After controlling for a
cubic in income, the tax liability and the child tax credit, the change in tax prepayments in
response to EITC growth is not statistically signi…cant.10 Controlling for group or time …xed
e¤ects does little to change this result. Thus, there is strong evidence of nearly full inertia
with respect to EITC growth; I can rule out an adjustment rate, L , larger than 0.02.
10

Without any controls, those who received the EITC have lower average prepayments. This is a spurious
relationship re‡ecting the fact that EITC-eligible tax …lers have much lower incomes, and thus mechanically
withhold less than non-eligible tax …lers.

19

5.4

Change in Enrollment Defaults for the Advance EITC

I extend the analysis of inertia among EITC recipients with a case study of the Advance
EITC. The Advance EITC is an option that allows EITC eligible workers to receive a portion
of their refundable credit earlier in each paycheck, as opposed to a one time payment at
the end of the tax year. In e¤ect, this option gives tax …lers another method by which
withholdings may be reduced and even allows for withholdings to be reduced below zero.
The program requires employees to …ll out a W-5 form indicating that they expect to receive
the EITC. Though this option has been available since 1979, participation in the program
is very low. It is estimated that between 0.5 and 3 percent of eligible workers make use of
the Advance EITC [Jones, Forthcoming]. One distinctive feature of this program is that
individuals must renew Advance EITC payments every year. Here, the policy variable, Z,
is Advance EITC participation, which automatically ends at the renewal date if no action
is taken. In this case, tax prepayments are a¤ected, but tax liability does not change for
tax …lers: @L=@Z = 0 and we are estimating p . The primary method by which individuals
o¤set the policy, A, is to re-enroll in the Advance option. Alternatively, individuals may
lower withholdings through allowances or lower estimated payments.
I will present evidence from data collected by Jones [Forthcoming] in the context of a …eld
experiment. The data track Advance EITC enrollment within a large …rm that introduces
the annual renewal requirement to employees. This feature, mandated by law, requires
the Advance recipient to renew payments at the beginning of every calendar year. The
participating …rm had previously followed a policy of automatic renewal, but then switched
to an active renewal requirement in order to comply with IRS tax code. The data cover the
…rst two renewal dates introduced by the …rm. Prior to the …rst date, all Advance EITC
recipients within the …rm were made aware of the upcoming change. The same was not done
at the second date. However, following the second deadline, e¤orts were taken by the …rm
to re-enroll individuals who had been removed. This informational intervention separates
tax …lers in this sample from the previous three cases, in that the salience of the change
in default withholdings is far greater. The mechanical e¤ect of the policy is a reduction in
Advance payments to zero and the behavioral response is measured by the re-enrollment of
employees into the Advance program. Comparing Advance payments before and after the
deadlines will yield an estimate of the adjustment rate, p .
Figure 5 displays the e¤ects of the deadline on participation, as well as the countervailing
e¤ect of the company’s noti…cation e¤orts. The vertical lines denote the …rst and second
renewal dates. Because the company only realized its need to comply well into the year
20

2007, the …rst renewal requirement is not introduced on the typical date of January 1st.
Subsequent renewal dates are enforced annually at the beginning of January. This allows
the default e¤ect to be identi…ed separately from any general end of the year e¤ects on
enrollment.
As can be seen in Figure 5, the introduction of a renewal requirement reduces Advance
EITC enrollment by more than 25 percent at the …rst renewal date. The drop in enrollment at the …rst date is not as steep as that of the second renewal date, which implies
that the informational notice helped mitigate the e¤ect of the renewal requirement. At the
second renewal date, when no prior notice is provided, enrollment temporary reaches zero
and then begins to sharply rebound, following e¤orts by the …rm to re-enroll employees.
Although in both cases enrollment recovers signi…cantly, the change in defaults appears to
have permanently reduced long-run enrollment.
Table 7 reports the adjustment rate, P , associated with the change in enrollment at
the deadline. As can be seen both graphically and from the Table, the employees are much
more e¤ective in o¤setting the shock to withholdings than in the three previous settings.
Just months after each renewal requirement, the rebound in enrollment implies an P of
0.82 and 0.75 respectively for the …rst and second dates. This is true whether one considers
enrollment or weekly Advance EITC payments as the margin of adjustment.

6

Discussion and Conclusion

For the majority of cases, I observe estimates of an adjustment rate in the …rst year that
range from nearly 0 in the case of the EITC to about 0.30 following a change in default
withholdings. The e¤ect of these shocks on the refund level appears to persist for some time.
In the case of the 1992 change in default withholdings, the e¤ect of new withholdings tables
appear to remain even after three years. The ratio of the net drop in withholdings and the
initial decrease intended by the policy change imply an adjustment rate between 0.27 and
0.38 after three years. Further evidence is drawn from the panel study of child dependents
and tax liability. In Table 4 we see that 3 years after a change in the number of dependents,
tax …lers appear to adjust prepayments by only 51 percent of the change in liability.
There are some exceptional cases that are worth noting. Though EITC recipients generally exhibit the greatest amount of inertia, I …nd very di¤erent results in a case study
involving the Advance EITC. Tax …lers exhibit a much greater response after default rules
dictating Advance enrollment are changed, o¤setting more than 75 percent of the default

21

e¤ect. In that instance, the employer took signi…cant e¤ort to preempt the default e¤ects.
Relative to the other examples I consider, these tax …lers receive direct information signaling
the change that has taken place.
Another outlying case is found when considering child dependents and tax liability. When
a change in child dependents causes a switch from a refund to balance due, the adjustment
rate after one year increases from 0.11 to 0.56 for tax …lers. The same is not true for tax
…lers who experience a change from owing a balance due to receiving a refund, or in general
for tax …lers who experience a change in number of dependents but no change in refund
status. Thus, individuals appear to be fairly indi¤erent to nudges in their refund level, even
particularly large ones, such as the growth in EITC levels, regardless of the direction of the
drift. However, if the nudge causes them to transition from receiving a refund to owing a
balance, action is more likely to be taken to undo the shock to the refund level.
In both cases, the salience of the change in tax liability or default withholdings may be
triggering a greater response. This is most notable in the case of the Advance EITC. In
Figure 5 we see a marked di¤erence in the reduction in enrollment between the …rst and
second renewal dates. The key di¤erence between the two dates is the timing of information
regarding the policy change. A similar story may underlie the heightened response to a
change in child dependents when one has a near zero tax balance. Individuals (or their
accountants) may follow a simple rule of thumb of never owing a balance to the IRS. Or,
a newly acquired balance due may be associated with a penalty and/or an increase in the
perceived risk of being audited. Alternatively, individuals may bank on receiving some
"windfall" of cash in the form of an income tax refund and subsequently …nd having to
write a check to the IRS particularly discouraging. In any of these cases, a zero balance
may emerge as a focal point. These theories are only speculative, as the data used here are
limited in their ability to sort out these stories.
Another pattern that emerges is that inertia is greatest among the lower-income population, those receiving the EITC. This is made clear in Table 6, Column (4) where I rule out an
adjustment rate greater than 0.02. This is reinforced in the case of Advance EITC. Though
tax …lers were very responsive to changes in the Advance EITC, Figure 5 suggests that in
the absence of an employer intervention, the default e¤ect would have been much larger.
These results are intriguing given the fact that the bene…t of reducing withholdings is likely
to be the greatest among lower-income tax …lers, who may face liquidity constraints. At the
same time, the cost of adjusting withholdings and uncertainty with respect to tax liability
may also be the greatest among this group, which may more than outweigh the bene…ts. In

22

any event, defaults will tend to a¤ect outcomes the most for this group.
The evidence that I have documented has two additional implications. First, the observed
preponderance of income tax refunds is traditionally attributed to precautionary behavior in
response to uncertain tax liability or commitment savings in response to time-inconsistency.
However, to disentangle these alternative theories, one must …rst account for the inertia that
partially breaks down the link between outcomes (refund levels) and active decisions (preferences). Second, the presence of inertia changes the interpretation of default withholding
rules designed by a social planner. If taxpayers fully and frequently adjust their withholdings, defaults are essentially neutral. However, the evidence presented here suggests that
these default withholdings rules may actually a¤ect outcomes such as the timing of income
and perhaps the ability to smooth consumption.
Policy makers have at di¤erent times attempted to capitalize on the inertia and low
salience of withholdings. A leading case is the 1992 Executive Order mentioned above. This
policy relied on the assumption that tax payers would not undo a withholdings change and
furthermore spend the extra income despite having to owe back the money at the years
end. Survey evidence suggests that about 43 percent did indeed do just that [Shapiro and
Slemrod, 1995]. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 includes a tax credit
that is disbursed via a reduction in withholdings, which is coupled with an equal reduction
in tax liability. It has been argued that distributing stimulus payments via withholdings is
more likely to stimulate demand than one-time rebate checks, since the former is less salient
or subject to di¤erent mental accounting rules [Surowiecki, 2009]. Most recently, the state of
California increased withholdings in November 2009 by 10 percent, with no accompanying
increase in tax liability. The state’s explicit aims are to …ll budgetary gaps in the short
run via zero-interest loans from wage earners [Goldmacher and Hennigan, 2009]. Again, the
policy hinges on the assumption that tax payers will not readjust their withholdings. In each
of these cases, the a¤ect of withholding policies on tax payers can vary greatly.
If these withholding-based policies have di¤erential e¤ects, one may wonder what the
distribution of costs is across incomes. The costs depend on the distribution of consumer
debt, investment opportunities and credit access, which can be estimated with the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF). I use the 2004 SCF data to impute interest rates for tax payers in
the 2004 IRS SOI data set. Next, I calculate the opportunity cost of overwithholding in terms
of lost interest, which serves as a lower bound for the cost. Table 8 shows that these costs are
fairly modest at an average of $63 per year. At the other extreme, overwithholding can be
much more costly if individuals cannot borrow or draw on savings to smooth consumption.

23

As an upper bound on the cost, I calculate the welfare loss of an uneven consumption pro…le
throughout the year due to overwithholding. Depending on the curvature of utility, these
costs can be of an order of magnitude larger, with an average of about $1,000 as seen in
Table 8. These types of costs, which stem from credit constraints, are most relevant for
lower-income groups. As a share of income, the costs of consumption smoothing range from
14 percent among individuals in the bottom quintile of income to 1 percent for the top
quintile.11
It is also worth noting that the status quo of a refund-biased withholding system is by no
means a universal phenomenon. Consider the Working Tax Credit (WTC), the UK analog of
the EITC. The WTC, similarly a tax credit for low-income workers, is disbursed on a weekly
or monthly basis, and thus its timing is more similar to the Advance EITC in the US [Brewer
et al., 2008]. An interesting question, then, is why and how have the UK and US systems
come to be so di¤erent in the timing of refundable credits? Furthermore, do UK taxpayers
share the same a¢ nity for large income tax refund payments? In the presence of strong
preferences for large refunds, we would expect to observe many UK workers demanding a
lump sum payment in lieu of the more frequent WTC. However, this does not appear to be
the case in the UK [Brewer et al., 2008]. Thus, identifying preferences over large refunds and
determining the optimal setting of withholding defaults remains an open debate. In light
of the …ndings presented in this study, future inquiry into the subject must account for the
presence of inertia.

References
Abadie, Alberto and Sebastien Gay (2006), “The impact of presumed consent legislation
on cadaveric organ donation: A cross-country study.” Journal of Health Economics, 25,
599–620.
Barr, Michael S. and Jane K. Dokko (2007), “Paying to save: Tax withholding and asset
allocation among low- and moderate-income taxpayers.”Unpublished.
Bernheim, Douglas and Antonio Rangel (2008), “Beyond revealed prefernce: Choicetheoretic foundations for behavioral welfare economics.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. Forthcoming.
Berube, Alan, Anne Kim, Benjamin Forman, and Megan Burns (2002), “The price of paying
11

More details on the imputation of interest rates and calculation of consumption smoothing costs are
provided in the appendix.

24

taxes: How tax preparation and refund loan fees erode the bene…ts of the EITC.” The
Brookings Institution, Metropolitan Policy Program, Washington, D.C.
Brewer, Mike, Emmanuel Saez, and Andrew Shephard (2008), “Means-testing and tax rates
on earnings.” In The Mirrlees Review: Reforming the Tax System for the 21st Century
(Sir James Mirrlees, Tim Besley, Richard Blundell, Malcolm Gammie, and James Porterba,
eds.), Oxford University Press. Forthcoming.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft (2009), “Salience and taxation: Theory and
evidence.”The American Economic Review, 99, 1145–1177.
Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez (2009), “Teaching the tax code: Earnings response to an
experiment with eitc recipients.”NBER Working Paper No. 14836.
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2003), “Optimal defaults.”American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93, 180–185.
Committee on Ways and Means (2004), Green Book. Government Printing O¢ ce, Washington, D.C.
DellaVigna, Stefano (2008), “Pyschology and economics: Evidence from the …eld.” Journal
of Economic Literature. Forthcoming.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier (2006), “Paying not to go to the gym.” The
American Economic Review, 96, 694–719.
Elliehausen, Gregory (2005), “Consumer use of tax refund anticipation loans.” Credit Research Monograph #37, Credit Research Center, McDonough School of Business, Georgetown University.
Feenberg, Daniel and Elizabeth Coutts (1993), “An introduction to the TAXSIM model.”
Journal of Policy Analsyis and Management, 12, 189–194.
Feldman, Naomi (2008), “Mental accounting e¤ects of income tax shifting.”Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Fennell, Lee Anne (2006), “Hyperopia in public …nance.”In Behavioral Public Finance (Edward J. McCa¤ery and Joel Slemrod, eds.), 141–172, Russell Sage.
Goldmacher, Shane and W. J. Hennigan (2009), “California to withhold a bigger chunk of
paychecks.”Los Angeles Times Online. http://www.latimes.com.
High…ll, Jannett, Douglas Thorson, and William V. Weber (1998), “Tax overwithholding as
a response to uncertainty.”Public Finance Review, 26, 376–391.
Hotz, V. Joseph and John K. Scholz (2003), “The earned income tax credit.”In Measn-Tested
Transfer Programs in the U.S. (Robert Mo¢ tt, ed.), 141–198, Universeity of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
25

IRS, Internal Revenue Service (1992), Employer’s Tax Guide (Revised February 1992). Department of the Treasury, Washington, D.C.
IRS, Internal Revenue Service (2004), “2004 statistics of income public use tax …le.”
IRS, Internal Revenue Service (2009a), Employer’s Tax Guide. Department of the Treasury,
Washington, D.C.
IRS, Internal Revenue Service (2009b), Form W-4, Employees Withholding Allowance Certi…cate. Department of the Treasury, Washington, D.C. http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/
fw4.pdf.
Johnson, Eric J. and Daniel Goldstein (2003), “Do defaults save lives.” Science, 302, 1338–
1339.
Jones, Damon (Forthcoming), “Information, preferences and public bene…t participation:
Experimental evidence from the advance EITC and 401(k) savings.”American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea (2001), “The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
participation and savings behavior.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1149–
1188.
Mo¢ tt, Robert A., ed. (2003), Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. University of Chicago Press.
Neumark, David (1995), “Are rising earnings pro…les a forced-saving mechanism?” The
Economic Journal, 105, 95–106.
Rabin, Matthew (1998), “Pyschology and economics.” Journal of Economic Literature, 36,
11–46.
Saez, Emmanuel (Forthcoming), “Do taxpayers bunch at kink points?” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy. Unpublished.
Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod (1995), “Consumer response to the timing of income:
Evidence from a change in tax withholding.” The American Economic Review, 85, 274–
283.
Surowiecki, James (2009), “A smarter stimulus.” The New Yorker Online. http://www.
newyorker.com.
Thaler, Richard H. (1994), “Psychology and savings policies.” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 84, 186–192.

26

Figure 1: Descriptive Statistics
A. Distribution of Refunds (Balances)

0

Share of Tax Filers
0.01
0.02
0.03

Share of Tax Filers
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

0.04

0.5

0.05

B. Actual vs. Potential Allowances

0

4

6+

Allowances

0

-4000

2

-2000

0
Refund

2000

4000

Actual

Potential

0

Share of Tax Filers
0.1
0.2
0.3

0.4

0.5

C. Distribution of Refund Probabilities

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
Share of Years with a Refund

0.8

1

Note: (A) The distribution of refunds and balances are for US tax …lers in 2004, taken from the IRS SOI
public use …le. (B) Actual number of allowances is estimated using the amount of withholdings reported on
the tax return in conjunction with wages, marital status, AGI and IRS withholding tables. See the
appendix below for further details on this procedure. Potential allowances were calculated using income
and demographic information reported on the tax return in conjunction with the instructions on the W-4
form. Data are for US tax …lers in 2004, taken from the IRS SOI public use …le. The sample is restricted to
tax …lers with only wages as a source of income, who used the standard deduction and had an AGI of less
than $200,000. (C) The …gure presents the distribution of individual refund probabilities for US tax …lers
from 1979-1990, estimated using panel data from the IRS SOI public use …le. Analysis is restricted to
individuals with at least three years of data.

27

Figure 2: E¤ect of Default Change in Withholdings
B. Refunds (Balances) for Married Tax Filers
Refund (Balance)
-1000 -500
0 500 1000 1500

A. Change in Default Withholdings

Withholdings

"Control"

"Treatment"

"Treatment"

< Policy Change
"Control"

1980

1985

1990
Year

Wages

1995

Before Change

Wage Earners

After Change

Non-Wage Earners

2000

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Share of Tax Filers

0.4

0.5

C. Distribution of Allowances

0

2

4

6+

Allowances
1990

1991

1992

1993

Note: (A) Graphical demonstration of the adjustments made to withholdings tables following the 1992
Executive Order. (Not Drawn to Scale). (B) Refund levels are for married tax …lers with AGI below $110K.
Those in the …rst group, "wage earners," have wage income above $7,364 and thus are subject to the 1992
change in defaults. Those in the second group, "non-wage earners," have wage income below this threshold
and thus were not subject to the change in defaults. The vertical lines denote the period over which default
withholdings were changed. (C) The distribution of allowances claimed by US tax …lers for the years 1990
to 1993 is estimated using IRS SOI public use …les. The sample is restricted to tax …lers with more than
95% of income from wages, who used the standard deduction and had an AGI of less than $200,000.

28

Figure 3: Change in Liability and Prepayments Associated with a Change in Child Dependents

1000 2000

Gain of a Dependent

0
-2000 -1000

Adjusted Tax Liability

Loss of a Dependent

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

-5

0

5

10

0 1000 2000
-2000-1000

Adjusted Prepayments

Relative Year

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

Relative Year
Point Estimate

95% Confidence Int ervial

Note: The expected change in tax liability and prepayments at the time of a change in dependents is
estimated using a panel of US tax …lers spanning 1979 to 1990. Coe¢ cients are obtained in an event study
regression, as speci…ed in Equations (14) and (15).

29

Figure 4: Mean EITC, Refund Level and Prepayments, 1980-2004

1980

3000
2000
1000
0

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

B. Refund Level

4000

A. EITC

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

3000

4000

C. P repayments

2+ Kids
2000

1 Kid
No Kids

0

1000

Low-Income Ineligible

1980

1990

2000

Note: Mean EITC, refund levels and prepayments are estimated for US tax …lers from 1981 - 2004, using
IRS SOI public use …les. The …rst three categories include individuals who qualify for the EITC and have
zero, one, or two or more children. The fourth category, "Low-income Ineligible" corresponds to individuals
who have AGI below 75% of the maximum EITC income threshold and who do not qualify for the EITC
for some other reason (e.g. age below 25, too much investment income, etc.).

30

500

Figure 5: E¤ect of Renewal Requirement on Advance EITC Enrollment

300
200
100

Second >
Renewal
Date

0

Advance EITC Enrollment

400

< First
Renewal
Date

5/1/06

9/1/06

2/1/07

7/1/07

12/1/07

5/1/08

9/1/08

Date

Note: Companywide enrollment in the Advance EITC program from February 2006 to June 2008. Vertical
lines indicate renewal dates beyond which enrollment is ended by default unless an employee actively
re-enrolls.

31

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sample Used In Analysis
1992 Change in
Default Withholdings

Panel Study of
Child Dependents

1990s EITC
Expansion

Tax Year
2004

Adjusted Gross Income
10th Percentile
Median
90th Percentile

3,188
17,928
46,154

4,624
26,256
75,240

2,094
8,497
23,695

4,516
27,047
89,965

Mean
Standard Deviation

21,789
17,295

35,246
35,049

10,811
20,959

46,745
329,022

Refund
Mean
Median

769
546

601
511

1,358
719

1,070
747

Prepayment to Liability
Ratio
Mean
Median

3:39
1:29

2:39
1:20

8:65
2:44

3:00
1:26

Refund to AGI Ratio
Mean
Median

0:06
0:04

0:03
0:03

0:13
0:09

0:07
0:03

Refund Probability

0:88

0:75

0:96

0:79

1991-1992

1979-1990

1990-2004

2004

0:45

0:99

0:25

1:00

61,378

293,011

153,178

150,047

Time Period
Share of Total
Filers
N

Note: Descriptive statistics are estimated for US tax …lers using IRS SOI public use …les. Dollar amounts
are reported in year 2000 levels.

32

Table 2: 1992 Withholdings Change - Di¤erence-in-Di¤erence Estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

Treatment - Change
in Withholdings 4P
Full Sample

N
33

Single

N
Married

N

(4)

(5)

Placebo 1 - Change
in Withholdings

Placebo 2 - Change in
Estimated Payments

1991 vs. 1992

1991 vs. 1993

1991 vs. 1994

1990 vs. 1991

1991 vs. 1992

255:10
(44:20)
f62:92g

271:88
(41:29)
f58:79g

206:19
(45:62)
f64:95g

55:70
(22:10)
f31:44g

32:78
(27:10)
f38:41g

72

72

72

72

72

157:08
(37:97)
f54:68g

164:59
(41:10)
f59:21g

155:37
(51:10)
f73:59g

45:21
(22:56)
f32:48g

17:99
(37:75)
f54:21g

28

28

28

28

28

368:93
(51:15)
f73:18g

410:39
(49:29)
f70:50g

303:59
(54:79)
f78:37g

69:04
(40:51)
f57:93g

58:37
(39:60)
f56:59g

44

44

44

44

44

Note: Estimates are obtained from a di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimate of the change in withholdings as speci…ed in Equation (8). Data are
repeated cross sections from the IRS SOI public use …les. Tax …lers are aggregated by marital status and year and then into AGI intervals of
$10,000. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, while those in braces are clustered at the income by marital status level. One,
two and three stars denote statistical signi…cance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively. Dollar amounts are reported in year 2000 levels.

Table 3: 1992 Withholdings Change - Mechanical E¤ect, Behavioral Response and Adjustment Rate Estimates

Full Sample

N
Single

N
Married

N

(1)

(2)

(3)

Mechanical E¤ect:
4PM

Behavioral E¤ect
4PB

Adjustment Rate:

236:51
f34:39g
[38:39]

59:54
f9:02g
[10:13]

0:30
f0:06g
[0:07]

13,972

13,972

13,972

180:13
f19:64g
[19:62]

45:06
f6:29g
[14:50]

0:28
f0:08g
[0:78]

9,231

9,231

9,231

391:71
f20:49g
[22:80]

99:39
f14:67g
[17:89]

0:26
f0:12g
[0:20]

4,741

4,741

4,741

P

Note: Mechanical e¤ects, behavioral responses and adjustment rates are estimated using Equations (10),
(11) and (12). Data are from 1992 IRS SOI public use …les. The sample is restricted to tax …lers with more
than 95% of income originating from wages or salary and with incomes within the a¤ected range of the
policy change in withholdings. Standard errors, clustered at the income group level are reported in braces,
while bootstrap standard errors are reported in brackets. One, two and three stars denote statistical
signi…cance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively. Dollar amounts are reported in year 2000 levels.

34

Table 4: Change in Child Dependents - Mechanical E¤ect, Behavioral Response and Adjustment Rate Estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

Mechanical E¤ect:
4LM

Behavioral Response:
4PB

Adjustment Rate:

Year 1

589:52
(30:02)

138:46
(35:31)

N

36,548

36,548

Year 2

618:55
(30:50)

202:42
(41:96)

N

25,650

25,650

Year 3

596:65
(43:90)

342:98
(55:53)

N

18,410

18,410

18,410

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Controls
Individual, Year FE

L

0:23
(0:06)
36,548
0:33
(0:06)
25,650
0:51
(0:08)

Note: Eestimates of mechancial e¤ect, behavioral response and adjustment rate are obtained using
Equations (13)-(17). Data are from a panel of US tax …lers from the years 1979-1990. Controls include a
cubic in AGI, an indicator of age above 65 years, marital status, and year and individual …xed e¤ects.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical signi…cance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively. Dollar amounts are reported in year 2000 levels.

35

Table 5: Change in Child Dependents - Salience of Zero Balance
(1)

(2)

(3)

Adjustment Rate:
Full Sample

(4)
L

"Zero Balance" Sample

Loss

Gain

Loss

Gain

0:11
(0:16)

0:32
(0:13)

0:56
(0:15)

0:20
(0:09)

16,631

17,521

6,202

8,259

0:34
(0:19)

0:39
(0:18)

0:78
(0:15)

0:02
(0:44)

11,694

11,401

3,287

2,804

Year 3

0:65
(0:39)

0:68
(0:19)

0:78
(0:26)

0:15
(0:25)

N

8,220

7,260

2,260

1,941

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Year 1

N
Year 2

N

Controls
Individual, Year FE

Note: Estimates of the adjustment rate are obtained using Equation (13). The "Zero Balance" sample is
restricted to tax …lers with a refund or balance due less than $1,000 in the base year. Data are from a
panel of US tax …lers from the years 1979-1990. Controls include a cubic in AGI, an indicator of age above
65 years, marital status, and year and individual …xed e¤ects. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical signi…cance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level
respectively. Dollar amounts are reported in year 2000 levels.

36

Table 6: 1990s EITC Expansion - Adjustment Rate Estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0:25
(0:06)

0:03
(0:05)

0:02
(0:04)

0:05
(0:03)

Controls
Group Fixed E¤ects
Year Fixed E¤ects

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

N

60

60

60

60

Adjustment Rate:

L

Note: The e¤ect of the EITC changes on prepayments is estimated using data for US tax …lers from the
years 1990-2004. Tax …lers are aggregated by year into four groups depending on EITC eligibility and
further by number of children for EITC-eligible tax …lers. Controls include a cubic in AGI, level of child
tax credit and tax liability. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. One, two and three stars
denote statistical signi…cance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

Table 7: Change in Default Advance EITC Enrollment - Mechanical E¤ect, Behavioral
Response and Adjustment Rate Estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

Advance EITC Enrollment
Mechanical
E¤ect:
4PM

Behavioral
Response:
4PB

Adjustment
Rate:

First Week

-391

228

6 Months

-391

First Week
9 Months

(4)

(5)

(6)

Weekly Advance EITC Payments
Mechanical
E¤ect:
4PM

Behavioral
Response:
4PB

Adjustment
Rate:

0.58

-$10,943

$6,491

0.59

321

0.82

-$10,943

$8,989

0.82

-321

2

0.01

-$8,989

$46

0.01

-321

241

0.75

-$8,989

$6,947

0.77

P

P

First Renewal:

Second Renewal:

Note: The mechanical e¤ect, behavioral response and adjustment rate are estimated with data from an
administrative panel used in [Jones, Forthcoming]. Dollar amounts are reported in year 2000 levels.

37

Table 8: Average Private Cost of Incorrect Withholding by Income Quintile
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Adjusted Gross Income
$0 to
$11,010 to $22,650 to $39,530 to Above
$11,010
$22,650
$39,530
$69,590
$69,590 Full Sample
Interest Costs:

$20

$78

$87

$91

$41

$63

Consumption
Smoothing Costs:
=1
=2
=3
=4

$389
$525
$546
$589

$850
$1,166
$1,314
$1,405

$572
$870
$1,051
$1,177

$523
$843
$1,052
$1,214

$1,051
$1,643
$2,018
$2,334

$677
$1,009
$1,196
$1,343

Note: The …rst row reports the cost in terms of lost interest. The next four rows report the equivalent
variation of deviating from a constant monthly consumption pro…le to one where income timing is distorted
by overwithholding and agents face borrowing constraints. The four cases vary by the curvature of utility
as parameterized by the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, . More details are provided in the appendix.

A
A.1

Appendix
Estimating the Distribution of Allowances

The distribution of allowances F^0 (Ai0 ) and F^1 (Ai1 ) are estimated as follows. The data for tax
…lers from 1991 and 1992 are restricted to individuals who claimed a standard deduction, with
wage and salary income comprising more than 95% of AGI and income below $70,000 and
$110,000 for single and married …lers respectively. This eliminates other sources of income
that may confound the relationship between wages and withholdings and reduces the sample
to those who were a¤ected by the policy change. Next, for a given level of wages, a level of
withholdings for each number of allowances was computed using IRS Publication 15, Circular
E: Employer’s Tax Guide for the given year. The number of allowances that generate the
closest match to actual withholdings is assigned to the tax …ler. Essentially, I invert the
P ( ) withholding functions. The discrete distribution of these estimated allowances are then
calculated for each year-by-income group, separately for married and single tax …lers, where
the income groups are de…ned by AGI intervals of $10,000. Under Assumption (4), I arrive at

38

estimates of the conditional distributions, F^0 (Ai0 j X i ) and F^1 (Ai1 j X i ), where X i is a vector
containing income group and marital status.

A.2

Calculating the Private Cost of Incorrect Withholding

A lower bound on the cost to the tax …ler of overwithholding is measured as the money
lost by giving the government an interest-free loan during the year. The relevant interest
rate used in calculating the opportunity cost of overwithholdings depends on whether or not
individuals are holding debt and the types of investment opportunities that are available to
them. To calculate the "Interest Cost" of withholding I use the 2004 Survey of Consumer
Finance (SCF) to impute interest rates for individuals in the 2004 IRS SOI data set.
For each observation in the SCF I record the maximum of (1) credit card interest rates
for those with positive credit card debt, (2) the July 2004 rate of 1.06 percent for 9-month
Certi…cates of Deposit (CD) for those with positive CD holdings or (3) a rate of 0.4 percent
for those with a positive savings account balance. An interest rate of zero is recorded for
individuals who hold none of the previous debts or assets. I then split the SCF into married
and non-married households and further into income deciles, based on the IRS SOI income
distribution. Next, for each observation in the IRS data set, I randomly draw an interest
rate from their corresponding marital status by income decile pool in the SCF. The imputed
interest rate is then multiplied by the individual’s income tax refund or balance due. Those
with a refund have a cost of overwithholding, while those with a balance due receive a bene…t
of underwithholding. The average costs in terms of loss or gained interest is reported for
each income quintile and the total sample in Table 8.
If individuals face imperfect credit markets and/or have no savings, then an upper bound
on the cost of overwithholding will be based on the inability to smooth consumption. To
calculate these costs, I consider a case where individuals have a discount rate of zero and
face an interest rate of zero. Income is received in T equal installments y. In this case,
an individual with concave utility will desire a ‡at consumption pro…le. Now assume that
tax prepayments are likewise paid in T equal installments, p and tax liability is also due
in T equal installments l. Denote the monthly net refund as r
p l. If the individual
overwithholds every period for T periods, she will receive a refund of T r in month T (net
withholdings of r are still incurred in month T ). Finally, assume that individuals cannot
borrow, so that consumption is equal to income minus net withholdings for overwithholders.
The cost of overwithholding is the equivalent variation, 4y, of deviating from a constant
consumption pro…le to one where the timing of income is distorted by overwithholding and
39

satis…es the following:
T
X

u (y

i=1

4y) =

"T 1
X

u (y

i=1

#

r) + u (y + (T

(A.1)

1) r) :

For individuals who underwithhold 4y is set to zero, as these tax …lers can achieve the
optimal, ‡at consumption pro…le by saving net withholdings until the last period and paying
all taxes owed then. I assume a Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) functional form
1
for utility: u (c) = c 1 1 or u (c) = ln(c) when = 1. Solving for 4y we have:
4y =

(

y
y

r)1
exp T T 1 ln (y
T 1
T

(y

1
+ T1 (y + (T 1) r)1
r) + T1 ln (y + (T 1) r)

1

when
when

6= 1
= 1:

(A.2)

The average, annual cost, T 4y, is calculated for each individual in the IRS SOI data set.
Time periods are set to one month, T = 12, y is one-twelfth of AGI and r is one-twelfth
of the refund level. The average cost within each income quintile is reported in Table 8 for
di¤erent values of .

40

