NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON CONSEQUENCES AND CRITICISMS
OF MONETARY TARGETING

Bennett T. McCallum

Working Paper No. 1596

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1985

This paper was prepared for the American Enterprise Institute's
Conference on Monetary Policy in a Changing Environment, held in
Washington, D.C., on February 8, 1985. The author is indebted to
Phillip Cagan and William Dewald for advice and suggestions and to
Marvin Goodfriend and Robert Hetzel for many helpful discussions.
In addition, valuable comments on a preliminary version were provided by Alfred Broaddus, Timothy Cook, Timothy Lane, Alvin Marty,
and Allan Meltzer. Partial financial support by the National
Science Foundation (SES 8).—O8691) is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1596
April 1985

On Consequences and Criticisms
of Monetary Targeting

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to review and evaluate the most important

existing criticisms of policy strategies that feature adherence to money
stock targets. Four main categories of criticism (and counterargumerits)

are analyzed. The first of these involves the claim that accurate money
stock control is infeasible while the second contends that such control can

only be obtained along with extreme volatility of interest rates, The third
emphasizes difficulties resulting from technical change and deregulation,

and the fourth concerns strategic issues of rules vs. discretion, activist
vs. non-activist policy, and the logical function of intermediate targets.

Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412) 578-2347

I. Introduction
The topic monetary targeting" has been discussed extensively in recent
years, in large part as a result of the Federal Reserve's professed adherence
to a policy strategy involving money stock targets during the period from

October 6, 1979, until the third quarter of 1982. Because of the

macro-

economic turbulence of that period and the severity of the recession that
followed, a large number of writings--both popular and professional--have
1/

been devoted to strenuous criticism of the notion of monetary targeting.

Proponents, in return, have argued that adherence to money stock targets
during the period was seriously incomplete and also that avoidable technical

flaws in the Feds implementation of the strategy were crippling and rendered
2/

experience irrelevant.

the

The purpose of the present paper is to review

and evaluate the most important of these criticisms and counterarguments.
The leading arguments put forth by critics of monetary targeting may

grouped into four main categories. The first of these involves the claim
that accurate control of the money stock is simply not feasible on a monthbe

to-month (or even a quarter-to-quarter) basis. This view is based in part
on the experience from October 1979 through September 1982--which period
will

be referred to below as "l979-82"--and in part on the properties of

detailed econometric models that emphasize money supply and demand behavior.

A second line of criticism accepts the feasibility of reasonably tight
month-to-month

at

monetary control, but contends that it can only

be obtained

the cost of inducing extreme volativity--and perhaps even explosive dynamic

movements--of short term interest rates. A third type of argument emphasizes
practical difficulties brought on by rapid but irregular technological change
and deregulation in the payments industry, a process that tends to be constantly

2

altering the macroeconomic significance of any officially-designated

monetary aggregate. Finally, there is a class of "strategic" (as opposed
to 'tactical") objections involving issues of rules vs. discretion and
activist vs. non-activist policy, as well as the debatable logic
of basing policy on the behavior of an intermediate target of any designation.
These four categories of criticisms will be emphasized below in Sections
ill-VI, respectively, though an entirely clean sectional demarcation will

not be possible. In addition, Section VII will present a brief summing-up.
That leaves Section II. In view of the enormous number of analytical
and empirical models of the "money market" that have been developed in the

literature, I am reluctant to present another. But the effects of various
operating procedures are central to the issues of Sections III and IV, and
discussion of these effects is greatly facilitated by reference to an
expository model that permits various points to be illustrated in an

explicit manner. Consequently, an extremely simple framework of that type
will be Laid out in Section II. It should be emphasized that this framework
is itself too simple to establish points; its function is to aid in the
exposition of results that are derived elsewhere by manipulation of more

complex theoretical or empirical models. Readers familiar with the
literature may consequently wish to proceed directly to Section III and
then refer to the framework in II as the occasion arises.

3

II. Illustrative Model
In our expository framework, we will, for maximum simplicity, ignore
currency and assume that excess reserves fluctuate randomly around an

average value that is negligible. Then in a system with contemporaneous
reserve requirements (CRR), total reserves may be expressed as
(1)

e

pMt +

TRt

p > 0

where Mt denotes deposits and p the reserve requirement ratio. Also,
is a white-noise stochastic disturbance that reflects both excess reserve

fluctuations nd the unpredictable component of required reserves that
exists in practice because of requirement schedules that are non-uniform
3/

in vari,ous respects.

The duration of the time periods implicit in (1)

will be discussed below.
Next, suppose that the demand for discount window borrowing is

BRt =

(2)

b(r-d)

+

b > 0

where r is a short-term interest rate, d is the policy-determined discount
a white-noise behavioral disturbance.

rate, and

Then, letting NRt

denote non-borrowed reserves, we have

pM +

(3)

e

=

NRt

+

b(r_d)

+

as one of the two equations of our stripped-down money market model. The

is a money (deposit) demand function, taken simply to be
+
a1 > 0
Mt =

second

(4)

a0

where

a1r

is a white-noise disturbance reflecting shocks to money demand.
Supposing

now that NR is the Fed's policy instrument, (3) and (4)

together determine

and r as

.NRt + (ba0/a1) -

(5) M

bdt

p + (b/a1)

-

e+(b/a1)

4

- NR +
(6)

r =

+e

-

bd

+

b

a1p

If at the start of a given period NRt is set at the value that is expected

to make Mt equal a target value Mt the resultant error will clearly be
*
(7)

Mt - Mt

=

e - e +(b/a1Yi
+ (b/a1)

Consequently, if the stochastic disturbances are mutually independent-—as
5/

we assume- -the mean-squared control error for Mt will be
2

+

2

E(M_M) =

(8)

where

o'

2

r

+

[p ?

(b/a1)

22

,t/

is the variance of e, etc., and E( )

is

the unconditional

expectation operator. In a similar way the mean square of the unplanned

movement in r can be expressed as
2

*2
E(r_r) =

(9)

22
2
+C+p
C
2

(a1+b)
where r denotes the value of rt that corresponds, at the planning stage,
to Mt.

The foregoing type of calculation can be made in an analogous fashion
for modified versions of (3) and (4) pertaining to alternative operating

procedures. Such calculations will be made and utilized in the course of
the following discussion.

III.. Monetary Control Tactics

The object of this section is to consider arguments against monetary

targeting that are based on a perceived infeasibility of money stock controL
To a considerable extent, these arguments overlap with ones that rely
crucially on actual U.S. experience during the period 1979-82 (i.e., October
1979 through September 1982)--the period of maximum attachment by the Fed

to monetary targets. It is, of course, very well known that short term
interest rates were extremely volatile during that period and that money
growth rate fluctuations were also unusually large--facts that can be readily
6/

verified by visual inspection of time plots of the relevant variables.
Sheer recognition of this volatility constitutes a type of argument against
monetary targeting that is extremely simple, but which could be effective

in the absence of an adequate response by targeting proponents. The main
couriterargument emphasizes flaws in the operating procedure employed by the

Fed during the period, so an evaluation of analyses of the effects of
alternative operating procedures--including, in particular, studies by

Lindsey and others (l98l)(1984) and Tinsley et al (l98lb)(1982)--is
essential to the discussion.

One preliminary matter that should be disposed of at the outset involves
a contention advanced by Friedman (1984), Brunner (1983), Poole (1982),

McCallum (1984), and others, namely, that the experience of 1979-82 did
not constitute a "monetarist experiment," That contention emphasizes that
money growth rates were both high and variable during the period, that activist
policy was not forsworn, and that operating procedures differed sharply from

those recommended by monetarists. That contention seems clearly correct
but does not imply a denial that the period did, nevertheless, involve a

6

greater degree of commitment to money stock targets than existed during
any previous period of comparable duration. That greater commitment was

in fact

present is indicated, it would seem, by the severity of the interest

rate fluctuations that were permitted to occur. Furthermore, Hoehn (1983)
has noted that a regression of the form

(10) r =

80

+ ai(rn_m) + disturbance

--where r is the federal funds rate, m

is

the log of Ml, and m denotes

the log of the midpoint of the Fed's target range for Ni--yields a much
larger estimate for a1 when (monthly) data for 1979-82 are used than when
7/

the regression is based on similar data for the previous three years. While far
from conclusive, this bit of evidence tends to support the view that the
Fed was encouraging, more strongly than before, adjustments designed to keep
8/

the money stock from departing from the official target path.
As another preliminary matter, it should be noted that an argument
against monetary targeting based on the experience of 1979-82 cannot
legitimately complain about the average level of interest rates during the
period or about the occurrence (or severity) of the 1981-83 recession, since

those two features were consequences of the relative tightness of monetary
9/

policy,

not the fact that this tightness was obtained and monitored by

emphasis on monetary targets.

Let us turn now to the main line of argument. Whether interest rate
volatility has serious detrimental effects on social welfare is a matter
on which there is considerable disagreement, with proponents of monetary

targeting clustering on the negative side. But even these economists would
probably agree that monetary targeting is undesirable if they believed that

7

the interest rate and money growth volatility observed during L979-82 were

necessary concomitants of that type of strategy. In fact, of course, they
strongly disagree with that hypothesis. Instead, Friedman (1982), Brunner
and Meltzer (1983), Poole (1982) and other proponents contend that the
operating procedures utilized by the Fed were very poorly designed; that
they led to an unnecessarily large amount of volatility for both money
growth and interest rates.
The basic point is, as is now widely understood, that the Fed's use
of a reserve aggregate as its main operating instrument is inappropriate
when regulations in force involve lagged reserve requirements (LRR),
i.e., provisions relating banks' required reserves to their deposits of

two weeks earlier. As many analysts have shown, this combination is a
10/

very poor one for the purpose of weekto-week monetary control.

This

can be easily seen in the context of the illustrative model of Section II.
Interpreting time periods as weeks, equation (3) becomes

(11) pM2 + e = NR + b(r_d) +
and it is readily verified that the mean-squared control error (MSE) for
Mt changes from expression (8) to
2

*2

(12)

E(Mt-M) =

22

2

+ e+(b/a)1 C,
2

(b/a1)

Thus the weekly money stock MSE is unambiguously greater under LRR than

under CRR (contemporaneous reserve requirements) when NR is used as the
11/

instrument and monetary targeting attempted in each case.

Furthermore,

expression (12) is unambiguously larger than that which would pertain if

the instrument were the interest rate, r, for in that case inspection of
(4) shows that the relevant MSE would be equal to c.

8

Intuitively, the reason for these results is quite simple. In particular,

with LRR in force the system (ll)(4) determining M and r is recursive:

(11) determines r for given values of NRt d. and Mt2 and then (given r) the
demand function (4) determines Mt. With LRR

in

effect, the use of a non-

borrowed reserves instrument amounts to an indirect (and therefore errorridden)

way of using a funds rate (re) instrument. This procedure may make
12/

for public relations purposes, but for monetary control it does not.

sense

Because of the inappropriateness of this procedure, proponents of money
.-...-.,...-4
LUL LJ.
L

That

.L.
JJ_ £17Q_Q)
?I

-..-.A LLL
.-L....-L LL1
i-i-.
U L1LU

L.L JLLL I..L1 .LV .

experience does not indicate how much r and Mt variability would

obtain if monetary targeting were conducted with an appropriate choice of

instrument and reserve regulations, such as total reserves (or

the monetary

13/

base) and CRR.

Recognizing the logical force of this

stock

argument, opponents of money

targeting have responded by pointing to results obtained from

simulations of econometric models which indicate that improvements

alternative operating procedures would

from

-iv

be non-existent or inadequate.

Our next task, then, is to examine the relevant findings of these econometric
studies.

The two major studies of this type of which I am aware have been
conducted by groups of researchers on the staff of the Board of Governors.
Reports of their work are available in papers by Lindsey and others (1981);
Lindsey, Farr, Gillum, Kopecky, and Porter (1984); Tinsley, Fries, Garrett,
and von zur Muehlen (1981); and Tinsley, Farr, Fries, Garrett, and

von zur Muehlen (1982). Let us consider first the JME paper by Lindsey

et al (1984). This contribution begins by correctly pointing out

that

9

the relative predictability of money stock "multipliers" for different
reserve measures, as computed from time series data, does not provide a
conceptually appropriate basis for evaluating the relative desirability

of these measures as instruments. Thus, for example, the greater historical
predictability of the monetary base multiplier relative to the non-borrowed
reserves multiplier does not necessarily imply that the base would be a
better instrument, for the multiplier errors are not uricorrelated in tF
sample periods examined with prediction errors for the reserve measures
themselves.

In fact, when Lindsey et al (1984) go on to examine the

characteristics as instruments of four reserve measures (total reserves,
non-borrowed reserves, total base, and non-borrowed base), as implied by
the properties of the Board's and San Francisco

monthly models, they

find that the non-borrowed reserves measure leads on average to the smallest

control errors. In their words, "these results suggest that neither a
total reserve nor a monetary base operating target would have led to more
precise short-run monetary control relative to the control available with

a non-borrowed reserve operating target" [i.e., instrument] (Lindsey et al
1984, p. 88). Some figures representative of their results are reported
16/

in Table 1.

These particular results do not, however, speak effectively to the
issue at hand, for they all presume the continuation of lagged reserve

requirements. And combining LRR with a total reserves instrument is clearly
even more inappropriate than combining it with a non-borrowed reserves

instrument. In that case, our schematic model would collapse to (4) and
(13)

pMt2 ÷

e

=

TRt

Table 1

Estimated Volatility Results Reported by Lindsey et al (1984)

a/

RMS

Control

Errors for Indicated Money Stock

First Exog. Assm.

Instrument

Mi-A

Mi-B

Second Exog. Assm.
Mi-A

Mi-B

(Board of Governors Model)

Non-borrowed reserves
Total reserves

Non-borrowed base
Total base

7.0

6.5

9.5

8.2

23.1

18.6

23.1

18.6

6.i

5.6

9.8

7.5

12.3

9.9

11.8

10.4

(San Francisco Fed Model)

5.4

5.6

5.2

4.9

10.6

10.6

9.4

9.0

Non-borrowed base

3.3

3.2

5.1

4.9

Total base

8.5

8.1

9.4

8.9

Non-borrowed reserves
Total reserves

These figures are root-mean-square monthly control errors, expressed in
annualized percentage points.

Assuming actual NR values were predetermined in sample period.

Assuming planned funds rate values were predetermined in sample period.

10

in which (13) includes neither of

the

endogenous variables, r and

while (4) includes both. The values of r and M

are

not even determinate

17/

in this admittedly oversimplified) system.

The JMCB paper by Tinsley et al (1982) does include results, obtained
from simulations with the Boards model, pertinent to a situation with

contemporaneous reserve requirements. And these results, excerpted in
Table 2, indicate that movement from LRR to CRR would reduce Ml control

errors with either a TR or a NR instrument. But the figures also suggest
that, contrary to the belief of targeting proponents, under CRR the TR
instrument would be less effective than the NR instrument--and by a

substantial amount. The plausibility of this finding, which seemed surprising
to me, can be illustrated by reference to our schematic model, With CRR and
a TR instrument, the system may be expressed as (4) and

(14) pM + e = TRt.
Then the Mt control error becomes simply e/p. and the mean-squared error is
2

(15)

*2 e
E(Mt-M) =
2

p

Comparing this with (8), the value with the NR instrument, we see that (15)

could easily be larger--even though the

and

disturbances no longer

matter--if the ratio b/a1 is large relative to p. And it is not at all hard

to believe that the latter could be true: if b =

a1, b/a1 would be several

times as large as p.

But by focusing attention on e, which includes the unpredictable component of
18/

required reserves,

this example reminds us of the potential importance

of another type of procedural improvement: greater uniformity and universality
of reserve requirements. And, fortunately, there are results reported in

Table 2

Estimated Volatility Results Reported by
Tinsley et al (l98l)(1982)

a/

Standard Deviations of Indicated Variables
Instrument and
Reserve Regime

Money stock
Control error

Federal Funds Rate
Error
Change

NR/LRR

11.0

(1.3)

5.0

9.6

TR/LRR

53.4

(8.3)

26.5

38.1

6.5

(1.0)

3.1

5.5

18.7

(2.8)

14.0

22.8

NR/UCRc,d

4.2

(0.7)

1.7

3.0

TR/UCRC,d

3.2

(0.4)

4.9

6.3

TR/CRRb

astandard deviations of monthly errors or changes, expressed in annualized
percentage points. Items in parentheses pertain to annua1t errors.

bontemporaneous reserve requirements on demand deposits only.

cTIflS1CY et al (1981), Table 15, lines 2 and 10.

d,,UCR,,

denotes uniform and contemporaneous requirements.

11

studies both by Lindsey and others (1981) and by Tinsley et at (1981)
that pertain to the effect of this type of institutional change. In

particular, Tinsley et al (1981) includes a table with results designed
to be applicable "if prediction errors associated with graduated (non-uniform)
reserve requirements and with non-universal (such as member vs. non-member)
reserve requirements are eliminated" (1981, pp. 60,61).

The last two rows in Table 2, above, depict the dramatic difference
that occurs in the absence of these reserve requirement prediction

errors. While there is still further improvement in monetary control with
the NR instrument, the improvement with the YR instrument is much greater,
the monthly standard deviation falling to 1/5 of its value under CRR and
1/17 of its value under LRR in the second and fourth rows of Table 2.

Indeed, the improvement in the performance of the total reserves instrument
is so great that it becomes the better of the two instruments for purposes
of monetary control.

The degree of improvement reflected in the last two rows of Table 2
is considerably greater, it should be said, than that indicated by the
figures in the lower half of Table 7 in Tinsley et al (1982), which are
there described as representing effects of "full implementation of the

reserve requirements of the Monetary Control Act of 1980" (p. 841). My
understanding is that these figures result from the use of regression
equation (2) in Table 2 of Tinsley et al (1982) in place of equation (1)
as the basis for predicting reserve requirements, a change that incorporates
only the effect of knowledge of demand deposits in large and small member
banks separately (and presumably a similar change for time deposits).
The difference in comparison to the figures shown in Table 2 is, apparently,

12

that only a small pàrtion of the prediction errors resulting from non-uniform
and non-universal requirements are attributable to the small vs. large

member-bank effect, It would accordingly seem that the results in Table 15

of

Tinsley et al (1981) are more relevant to the issue of concern.

As mentioned above, Lindsey and others (1981) also includes results-noted by Axilrod (1983)--for cases in which the ttrequired reserve ratio

on demand deposits and required reserves against savings and time deposits
[are] known with certainty"--i.e., cases in which required reserve prediction

errors are eliminated. The control errors for these cases, corresponding
to those for the Board model in Table 1, are reported in Table 3. Again
the improvement in results with the TR instrument is so strong that it
becomes superior, for monetary control, to the NR instrument in three of

the four cases examined. And the control errors are much lower with the
TR instrument in the two cases in which the money stock under consideration

is Mi-A. Of course Mi-B corresponds to the official definition as of 1984,
but the appropriate definition for the purposes of the present comparison
is the one with the smaller errors, since the object is to determine the
maximum feasible improvement in control.
From the values in Tables 2 and 3, then, we see that simulation results

with the Board's monthly econometric model support the contention of
monetary targeting proponents that better money stock control can be
obtained with a total reserve instrument than with non-borrowed reserves,
provided that contemporaneous, uniform, and universal reserve requirements

are in effect. The figures based on the assumed absence of prediction errors
for required reserves suggest, moreover, that monthly errors would be
substantially smaller under these preferred operating procedures than

Table 3

Estimated Volatility Results Reported by Lindsey and Others (1981)
Board Model, Without Prediction Errors for Reserve Requirements

a/

R4S Control

Errors for Indicated Money Stock

C'

b/

First Exog. Assm.

Instrument

Second Exog. Assm.

Mi-A

Mi-B

Mi-A

Mi-B

Non-borrowed reserves

7.1

6.6

9.2

7.9

Total Reserves

2.9

7.0

2.9

4.9

Non-borrowed base

5.9

5.5

9.6

7.2

Total base

7.3

5.9

5.8

7.4

a! b/ c/
See Table 1.

13

actually obtained during 1979-82. Based on the October 1979-October 1980
results, in fact, the pavis

errors

are suggested to be between one-half and

one-third of those actually experienced.

There are reasons, furthermore, for believing that the simulation
results obtained by Lindsey, Tinsley, and co-workers depict the operating
procedures utilized during 1979-82 in a more favorable light than is

warranted. The procedures actually in force during that period possessed
flaws, that is, that are not fully reflected in the simulation procedures

for the NR/LRR cases. Thus the potential for improvement in monetary
control relative to the actual experience of 1979-82 is underestimated by
the difference between the reported simulation error values for the NR/LRR

and TR/UCR cases. (Here UCR denotes "uniform and contemporaneous requirements.")
There are two main discrepancies, that I have in mind in making this
claim, between the representation of the NR/LRR regime in the formal

simulations and the procedure that existed in actuality. The first of
these discrepancies results from the time aggregation involved in working

with monthly data. In particular, required reserves for month t are
modelled as depending, under LRR, on the magnitude of deposits in months

t and t-l. Thus the required reserve variable is treated in a way that
makes it jointly dependent with deposits and the money stock, even though

it is in fact predetermined in each and every week. The model consequently
includes a second and "direct" mode of dependence of the money stock on
non-borrowed reserves, and thereby fails clearly to reflect the outstanding

feature of the NR/LRR regime described above: that it amounts to an
indirect method of using a funds rate instrument. In this respect, there
is a tendency for monthly models to underestimate the undesirable effects
of LRR with a reserve instrument.

14

The second way in which the Board's model fails to accurately represent
difficulties with the actual procedure of 1979-82 involves the crucial

relationship describing banks' demand for borrowed reserves. While our
19/
schematic model and the Board's econometric specification
express
this relationship as involving only current variables, Goodfriend (1983)

has convincingly argued that actual borrowing behavior involves

intertemporal considerations in an important way. The point at issue is
not merely a claim that the Board's borrowing equation is mispecified,
however,
1979-82,

instead

the main point

that the Fed did not behave, during

in the manner that the econometric simulations presume. Perhaps

(but not necessarily) because of
the

is

the

non-dynamic specification employed,

Fed's staff apparently felt uneasy about their understanding of the

borrowing relationship during 1979-82. But the way in which the Fed's
path for the NRt instrument was set depended crucially on knowledge or

assumptions concerning borrowing. Indeed, the logic of the procedure is to use
money targets and multiplier forecasts to generate planned total reserve

paths from which estimated borrowing quantities are subtracted to yield
20 /

"instrument"

paths for non-borrowed reserves.

Given the uneasiness about

knowledge of the borrowing equation, however, policy was in actuality
frequently conducted by beginning a post-FOMC meeting period with the
specified quantity of borrowings simply taken to be the most recent actual

quantity. This quantity would, moreover, typically be planned to remain
constant, in the absence of shocks, through the inter-meeting period. So
the actual procedure did not proceed by the Fed using knowledge of a stable

15

borrowing function to select optimal NRt paths for given M and TRt paths-21/

as the simulation procedure presumes.

This point warrants emphasis, for the basic logic of the NR/LRR
procedure requires--as an essential step in the derivation of the instrument
path--the use of some specification concerning borrowing magnitudes.

Without a model of borrowing behavior, the relationship between NRt and

interest rates is simply unspecified. Yet, as explained above, the
procedure in question affects the money stock only by affecting interest

rates and thereby the demand for money. The procedure works from the
instrument NRt to the target variable Mt by way of two relationships,

knowledge of which is therefore crucial: the borrowings equation and the
money demand function. It is consequently not a minor matter to note that, as
Tinsley et al (1982, p. 849) have remarked, "Along with the demand for
money, the borrowings function remains one of the more troublesome

specifications in the monthly model." All of this serves to indicate how
badly designed, for monetary control, the 1979-82 operating procedure
actually was.

The foregoing discussion does not, it should be stressed, presume
that monetary control over intervals as short as a week or month is

itself of intrinsic significance. Instead it presumes that effective
control over short intervals serves to facilitate improved control over
longer intervals--such as a year--which is the main matter of concern to

targeting proponents. That such a presumption is warranted is indicated
by the control-error standard deviations, shown in parentheses in Table 2,
22 /

calculated

by Tinsley et. al. (1981) for "annual" monetary targets.

can readily be seen, these standard deviations for annual errors are

As

16

highly correlated across control procedures with corresponding values

for monthly errors. Thus improved control from the TR/UCR regime at
the monthly interval translates into improved control--relative to other
regimes--at the annual level.

The absolute magnitude of the annual control-error values in Table 2
suggests, moreover, that a satisfactorily high degree of money stock
control can in fact be attained in a system with contemporaneous, uniform,
and universal reserve requirements; the standard deviations are O.77 with

a NR instrument and just O.47 with TR. And these figures pertain to a
periodduring which, because of the selective credit controls program,the
shocks to the system were probably much larger than normal. Consequently,
the main conclusion of this section is that a persuasive objection to monetary

targeting can not be based on an argument involving technical infeasibility

of

23 /

controlling the Ml money stock.

There is one qualification of the foregoing discussion that needs

to be mentioned before moving on. In particular, it needs to be acknowledged
that the cited results of Tinsley, Lindsey, and co-workers are all based
on the implicit assumption that behavioral parameter values (including
disturbance variances) would not themselves be altered by changes in

operating procedures. In otner words, the cited results assume that there
are no relevant difficulties of the type described in the famous "critiqu&'

of econometric policy evaluations put forth by Lucas (1976). Such
difficulties may, of course, be crucial for certain important issues.
But in the context of the particular issue at hand--whether reasonably
tight monetary control is possible under a TR/UCR operating regime--the
danger of going astray because of the Lucas critique does not appear to
24 /

be large.

The basis for this judgement is outlined in Appendix A,

which appears below following Section VII. The reasoning rests primarily
on the near-independence, under a TR/UCR regime, of the money stock from

17

shocks tomoney demand, aggregate supply, saving-investment behavior, etc.
The same properties of this regime that have commended it to monetary
targeting proponents on theoretical grounds also serve to reduce the
likelihood that control would be poorer than predicted econometrically
because of the Lucas critique.

IV. Interest Rate Variability
We turn now to a class of objections to monetary targeting that accept
the feasibility of accurate money stock control, but contend that such control
can be brought about only by inducing extreme volatility--and perhaps even

dynamic instability--of interest rate movements. Reservations of this
general

type have been expressed by explicit critics of monetary targeting,

including Bryant (1983) and Kaldor (1982) , but more frequently by writers
25/

who should be classified as skeptics rather than opponents.
There are three distinct concepts of interest rate volatility that are

pertinent to the discussion of this issue. The first two of these involve
single-period changes in the value of the relevant interest rate, henceforth

presumed to be the federal funds rate. In particular, as noted in Tinsley
et. al. (1981, p. 53), any period-to period change in the funds rate can be
decomposed

into planned and unplanned components. The first of these is

the change that is required at the planning stage in order to be consistent
with the money stock target--i.e., the funds rate change that would be

realized in the absence of stochastic shocks. The difference between this
planned

change and the actual change that comes about is then the unplanned

component, which is attributable to the stochastic shocks that occur during

the period in question. The third concept of funds rate volatility pertains
not to single-period changes, but instead to multiperiod oscillations or
explosions

induced by the dynamic properties of the monetary system.

With respect to unplanned single-period changes in the funds rate,

theoretical analysis can be conducted in much the same way as in

the

case

of money stock control errors. The planned component of single-period
changes is also

of

concern to targeting critics, however, and its behavior--

unlike that of the unplanned component--depends on lags, serial correlation
of disturbances, and other details of the dynamic specification of the

relevant system. There can be little prospect, then, of obtaining robust
conclusions regarding this component from theoretical analysis.
It is fortunate, consequently, that Tinsley et. al. (1981) have
deduced volatility measures, as reflected in the Board's monthly econometric
money market model, for single-period funds rate changes of both the

planned and unplanned type. The computed standard-deviation measures
pertaining to the six main operating procedures of present concern are

reported in the final two columns of Table 2 (above). From these figures
we see that, for each set of reserve regulations, use of a TR instrument
involves more funds rate volatility--both planned and unplanned--than would

obtain with a NR instrument. It will also be seen, however, that the
volatility measures are smaller with the TR instrument under a system of
contemporaneous, uniform, and universal reserve requirements than with the

NR instrument under lagged reserve requirements. This statement applies,
moreover, to both planned and unplanned components. Consequently, it
appears from the Board-model results that the sizeable reduction in money
stock errors that could have been realized during 1979-82, from the

adoption of a TR/UCR regime, would have also involved reduced funds rate
volatility--due to an improved position of the volatility frontier.

Let us then turn to the third concept of interest rate volatility
mentioned above, that of the "instrument instability" type discussed by
Cicollo (1974), Enzler and Johnson (1981), Higgins (1982), Radecki (1982),

19

and perhaps others. The basic idea of these analyses can be explained very
easily. Imagine, for simplicity, a money demand function of

the

following

form, in which both current and lagged values of the funds rate are relevant:

(16) m =

- lrt + 2r1 +

> °.

Now suppose that the monetary authority manages its instrument, whatever

its identity, so that m is kept constant over time: tn = m.

Then (16)

implies that the funds rate r must evolve over time according to the
stochastic difference equation
(17)

rt =

where B0 =

+

31r1

(0-m)/1,

happens that

B1 =

2'l'

and B2 =

l/.

Consequently, if it

is negative then period-to-period oscillations in rt will

be implied. And if 12I >

the dynamic behavior of r will be

26/
explosive.

Actual money demand functions will also include price-level and
income (scale variable) terms, of course, but if these variables adjust
much more slowly than rt then the qualitative features of our oversimplified

example will not be misleading. Furthermore, if the income variable is
included in (16) but it in turn responds via an investment/saving relation-

ship to r and rtL then the exemplified type of dynamic behavior will
27/

be induced or reinforced from that source.
In giving consideration to the possibility of non-explosive oscillations
of this type, the main point to be recognized is that the cyclical component

would be entirely predictable: whenever r is higher than normal,
equation (17) indicates that ri will tend to be higher or lower than
normal depending on the sign of b1.

Either

way, the opportunity would exist

for private investors to earn easy returns by exploiting the (stochastic)

regularity of the relationship. And in doing so they would, of course,
tend to eliminate the rt cycles. For this reason--mentioned by Tinsley et. al.

20

(1981, p. 32)--the possibility of severe but non-explosive interest rate
oscillations does not seem to warrant serious concern.
If, on the other hand, the

and

values implied a situation of

dynamic instability, then the existence of speculative forces would not be

sufficient to eliminate the difficulty under consideration. There is,

however, a more basic reason for doubting the relevance of this case. To
develop the argument, let us begin by noting that, from a theoretical

perspective, past values of interest rates should not have ! direct effect
28/
on asset demands.
That is because interest rates (or other prices)
prevailing in the past would seem to fall clearly in the category of bygones-and the irrelevance of bygones is of course one of the most fundamental

principles of economic analysis. This consideration argues strongly against
the appearance of lagged r terms in (16) and, therefore, even more strongly
against their predominance--which is needed for instability of the type in
question.

To this argument it might be objected that empirical evidence indicates
that, theoretical principles notwithstanding, lagged interest rate effects

are in fact empirically important. But the evidence does not establish
that the theoretical principle is incorrect, for the latter does not rule

out indirect effects. Suppose, to illustrate the point, that the quantity
of some asset demanded in period t would depend only on r in the
absence of adjustment costs, but that it is in fact costly--in terms of

valuable resources--to rapidly change m from its previous value. Then the

2"
variable m1 will be a relevant determinant of the demand for m, and if
were solved out of the implied relationship past values of rwould
enter instead. Furthermore, in the presence of adjustment costs, expected

21

future values of r would also be directly relevant. The demand function
t

for
(18)

/

m would in this case be of the form

+ vlr + i2Er 1 + 3Er+2 + ... +

m Xm1 +

where 0 < X < 1 and Er+ is the conditional expectation, based on full
information in period t, of r+.. Precisely what results would be
obtained, if the econometrician were to estimate an equation of the form
(16) when (18) was in fact correct, cannot be ascertained without adoption
of particular specifications concerning the
of the policy authority.

process and the behavior

But in a wide variety of cases, lagged r values

would be estimated by the econometrician to be relevant in (16), despite

their actual irrelevance when expectations and lagged m values are taken
32/

into account.

We now come to the main point of the present argument, which is that
instability will not prevail in a system composed of (18) plus a policy33 /

behavior equation that reflects period-by-period control of m. Suppose,
in particular, that the policy authority controls the supply of m so that
(19)

= m

+

i.e., so that m is constant over time except for a white-noise random term
Then if 'fl were also white, the solution
(20)

r = iT0 +

for r would be of the form

TTlm 1 + 21t + iT3!t,

where the ir coefficients are related to m, X, and the ''s. From inspection
of (20) it is apparent, however, that the behavior of rt will be dynamically

stable in this case whatever the values of the qs, although the system

features period-by-period control of m. Similar conclusions would be obtained,
furthermore, for other specifications of the
is itself stationary.

process, provided only that it

22

The foregoing argument depends, it should be acknowledged, on the

assumption of rational expectations. But in this particular asset-denand
context, that assumption seems entirely warranted, for systematic
expectatiorial errors would imply predictable cyclical movements from which
speculators could easily profit.

The conclusion of the various arguments of this section, then, is that
objections to monetary targeting, that are based on a presumption that
extreme volatility of interest rates would be required, are not compelling.
It appears, on the basis of theory and available evidence, than month-tomonth control of the money stock would not induce dynamic instability or
regular cycles, and that monthly funds-rate volatility would not be

excessive. For convincing arguments against targeting one needs, evidently,
to iook elsewhere.

V. Financial Innovations and Deregulation
Up to this point no consideration has been given to one of the most
prominent themes in the literature critical of monetary targeting, namely,
the argument that ongoing processes of deregulation and innovation in the
payments and financial industries give rise to frequent and unpredictable

changes in the economic significance of any operationally-specified monetary

aggregate. This theme hs been put forth not only by critics--e.g.,
Bryant (1980), Hester (1981), and Norris (1982)--but also by economists
who are more favorably inclined toward monetary targeting, including
Cagan (1979)(1982)

The critics' basic line of argument--that the introduction of new
financial assets alters asset demands go as to change the linkages relating

23

monetary aggregates to instruments and to aggregate demand--is too well
35/

known to warrant a review here.

The response of monetary targeting

proponents has emphasized the considerable extent to which these innovations
36/
have been stimulated by restrictive regulations and policy-induced inflation.
With the elimination of deposit rate ceilings that is now well-advanced,
and perhaps the payment of interest on reserves, the incentives for new

innovations will be sharply reduced. Thus the "optimistic view," to use
Cagan's (1982, p. 6) term, is that regulatory reforms are capable of slowing
innovations and reducing "their disturbing consequences for monetary policy."
Cagan goes on, however, to describe a "pessimistic counterpart that

cannot be summarily dismissed" (1982, p. 6). In his words,
the new electronic technology may make it cost-effective
and attractive to supply transactions services as
complements to other financial products outside depository
institutions. The growth of many new financial services
and instruments now appears inevitable. [These would bel
hard to control unless ... deliberately prohibited by
new regulations..,. It would be necessary to invest the
Federal Reserve with permanent authority to impose
reserve requirements on any instruments that possess
transaction capabilities. Whether this could be
accomplished effectively is not clear....
[Thus if]
financial developments blur the boundary between
transaction and other balances, a policy of imposing
reserve requirements on designated transaction
balances whose selection is essentially arbitrary
would be inequitable and would have to be abandoned.
Policy could then set targets for the monetary base
on the assumption that all payments ... have to be
cleared through transfers of base money ... and the
Federal Reserve could pursue its objectives by setting
[But such
growth targets for the monetary base....
a strategy] is untested and may be seriously questioned.
Moreover, further financial developments are imaginable
that would make the base useless for monetary policy....
[F]inancial institutions do not necessarily have to
settle their net payments through transfers of federal
funds. They could make arrangements to clear through
deposits held with a few major banks or clearing houses....
With this further development the monetary base would
consist almost entirely of currency. Furthermore, if an
electronic payments system progresses far enough,
currency could begin to decline (replaced by ubiguitous
charge cards). The payments system would then have
eliminated the government from the creation of money,
and the supply of transaction balances would be virtually
free of any government constraint. (Cagan, 1982, pp.6-8)

24
This scenario of Cagari's is certainly pessimistic from the standpoint

of monetary targeting. From a practical perspective, however, it seems
reasonable to stop short of the final step (i.e., the near-elimination of
37"

currency) in the present discussion of monetary targeting.

Indeed, the

issue of present concern does not involve the ultimate destination of the
innovation process--which must be speculative in the extreme--but the pace
and predictability of this process.

Even in this regard, however, it is difficult to find any firm

analytical basis for predictions concerning the future. Indeed, there
exists continuing disagreement among leading analysis concerning the

extent of difficulties created by innovations in the recent past. Thus,
while Lindsey (1984, pp. 15-20) emphasizes the role of innovations in
creating Ml demand shifts that hampered policy efforts during 1979-82,

Pierce (1984, p. 396) contends that "financial innovation did not produce
large, unexpected movements in the quantity of money demanded during
1979-82" and so

is not responsible for "the large fluctuations in money

growth that occurred."
Given this inconclusive state of affairs, my strategy will be to
draw only one (highly unexciting) conclusion and then move on to the next

topic, hoping this the present issue can somehow be finessed. The one
conclusion is that it seems unlikely that the Fed can entirely prevent
the emergence of financial instruments that are free of reserve requirements
yet which provide transactions services to holders--a conclusion that makes
money stock targeting a somewhat less attractive proposition than it would
be in the absence of ongoing innovation.

25

VI.

Strategic Issues
The most sweeping and uncompromising criticism of monetary targeting

that I am aware of is that provided by Bryant (1980)(1982)(1983). This
fact is worthy of mention because in Bryant1s opinion the objections
discussed above in Sections III, IV, and V are of secondary importance
compared to "strategic" issues concerning the desirability, rather than
38/

the feasibility, of adherence to money stock targets.

In this section,

we turn our attention to these strategic considerations, which involve
issues of rules vs. discretion as well as the role of intermediate-target
strategies in general.

Money stock targeting is, of course, but one particular type of an
intermediate-target strategy, i.e., a way of conducting policy that
focusses attention on the achievement of a target path for some variable
that is itself neither an ultimate goal variable nor a directly-controllable

instrument. Several writers--including Bryant (1980)(1983), B. Friedman
(1975), Kareken, Muench, and Wallace (1973), and Tobin (l977)--have
argued that

intermediate-target approach must be undesirable, as it

can be improved upon by a strategy that straightforwardly specifies
instrument settings (as functions of prevailing information) that are

optimal with respect to the ultimate goal variables. The intrusion of
an intermediate variable can only be redundant or detrimental to the

achievement of the actual objectives, according to this argument. Now
as a matter of theoretical principle, this position is rather appealing.
But at the level of actual policy implementation its force is seriously
weakened by the implicit assumption that tte policy authority possesses

a useful--imperfect, of course, but useful--model describing the

26

relationships linking his instrument variable(s) to the ultimate goal

variables that he seeks to influence. The poorer the model, the less
39 /

compelling is the logic of the anti-intermediate targeting position.
We wiii return to this point below, but first we need to emphasize
that the targeting critics' argument does not adequately come to grips
with the dynamic inconsistency phenomenon that has been prominent in

recent discussion of the rules vs. discretion issue. In particular,
it should be recognized that the analysis of Kydland-Prescott (1977)
and Barro-Gordon (1983) strongly suggests that the implementation of
"discretionary" (i.e., period-by-period) optimization calculations by
the monetary authority will not lead to a desirable sequence of outcomes
when the authority's objective function includes real (e.g., employment)

as well as nominal (e.g., inflation) magnitudes. Instead, these outcomes
will feature an unnecessarily large amount of inflation, on average, with
40/

no extra employment to compensate.

This inefficiency could be remedied, according to the Kydland-Prescott
and Barro-Gordori analysis, if instrument settings were based on a maintained

policy rule itself determined from optimization calculations utilizing the

authority's actual ultimate objectives. But in the absence of any effective
mechanism for precommitment of future choices, there is nothing to keep
the authority from recalculating "optimal" instrument settings

each period. In an economy that possesses the potential for dynamic
inconsistency--when, for example, employment levels depend on inflation
surprises--these recalculated settings will differ from those specified

by the rule. The recalculated settings will then be implemented by the
discretionary monetary authority and, in the models under review, will
41/

result in the undesirable consequences menticned above.

27
Now consider an intermediate target strategy that consists of period-

by-period optimization by the monetary authority with respect to a

surrogate objective function, rather than the true objectives. From the
foregoing description of the problem it would appear that this type of
strategy might possibly lead to instrument settings that would result in
ari improved attainment of the true objectives, relative to the outcomes

that would be forthcoming under the straightforward approach recommended

by the anti-intermediate-targeting argument. Indeed, that this can be the
case is carefully demonstrated in an imaginative and comprehensive treatment

by Rogoff (1983). Specifically, Rogoff shows that--in a model economy with
the sort of features that mainstream macroeconomists believe to be central

to

42 /

policy considerations--various forms of adherence to intermediate targets

can enhance outcomes in terms of social objectives. Thus it turns out that,
despite its intuitive appeal, the anti-intermediate-targeting argument is

not correct even as a matter of theoretical principle. Instead, because of
the excessive inflation that results (on average) from period-by-period
decision making when the monetary authorityts objective function includes
real variables, it appears that intermediate targeting of some nominal
43 /

magnitude is likely to be socially desirable.
This does not imply, however, that the money stock is necessarily the

best choice of a nominal intermediate target. Which of several candidates
(including the possibility of no intermediate target) is optimal depends,
unsurprisingly, on the relative magnitudes of various structural parameters

and disturbance variances. Nominal GNP targeting has better automatic
stabilizing properties than money stock targeting, however, in response to

money-demand or saving-investment shocks. Furthermore, the relationships
connecting nominal CNP to potentjl instruments are likely to be less

28

sensitive to the effects of technological innovation and deregulation than
are demand and supply functions for any operationally-defined money stock
Consequently, many economists would favor a strategy based on a

measure.

44 /

nominal GNP target over one with a money stock target.

I am personally

inclined to share this view, which is reinforced by combining the general
theme of the anti_intermediate-targeting argument with the belief that the
weakest portion of existing macroeconomic analysis is that pertaining to
the division of nominal GNP changes into inflation and output-growth
——-'LtLLUL LØLiL. LU *.LC1_.__
LLL £ Lild L U1UL1
compouencs. aU wflat SLllS iLIUL

stock

and nominal GNP targeting are closely related strategies, and that

the choice between them is a relatively minor technical matter in
comparison to the choice between one of them and targets involving real
45/

variables.

Officials of the Fed have gone on record, of course, as opposing
nominal GNP targeting--see, for example, Voicker (1983) and Solomon (1984).
The reasons mentioned, however, apply just as well to money stock targeting,
or are based on the misleading notion that nominal CNP is an ultimate
46.

objective rather than an intermediate target, or rely on presumptions of
47/

irrationality elsewhere in the society.

Perhaps such statements are made

only for public relations purposes, to defend the Fed's current and recent

actions. If that is a major motivation for the Fed's criticism of nominal
GNP targeting, then it might be helpful to refer to nominal GNP--as Tobin
(1983, p. 516) has suggested--as a "velocity-adjusted monetary aggregate."

29

Another way in which statements by Fed officials have been unconstructive
is by suggesting that policy rules necessarily imply constant values of
48/

instrument (or target) growth rates and so must be non-reactive,
responsive to current conditions.

i.e., non-

In fact, the crucial distinction brought

out by the Kydland-Prescott and Barro-Gordon analyses is between optimal
calculations of a maintained policy formula for setting instruments in
response

to current conditions (a "rule") and "optimal" calculations each

period of instrument settings themselves ("discretion"). The difference is
that

the former procedure takes appropriate account of the effect that

expectations have on current

simply

conditions in each period, while the latter

treats each period's expectations as given data even though they are

in part a reflection of the authority's past and present mode of behavior.
To ignore the central aspects of this distinction in discussing the rules
vs. discretion issue is to neglect the heart of the matter.
Tobin (1983) fully recognizes the analytical validity of this point,

but declines to accept it as a practical matter. His objection is that
"effectively binding rules are bound to be simple, like fixed growth rates

for intermediate monetary aggregates. Simplicity gives them their political
appeal and power" (1983, p. 508). But it is not our task as economists,
I would think, to decide what has political appeal. Tobin also states that
"It is not really feasible to spell out in advance what a central bank or
government will or will not do in a long list of contengencies" (p. 508).
But a rule that (for example) sets the annualized growth rate of the

monetary base for month t at the value 2(U1 -

6),

where

is the most

recently observed percentage unemployment rate, covers a very large number

of contingencies and must surely qualify as simple. One can certainly define
rules and discretion differently, but the Barro-Gordon definition is useful
in highlighting a crucial conceptual distinction.

30

This distinction does not, it should nevertheless be added, actually
pertain to the extent to which the decision making process is automated
or mechanized. Policy authorities not literally bound by any eriforcable
rule can make decisions that would correspond to those specified by the

rule. But to do so they would have to ignore, in each period, expectational
initial conditions. They would have to, in other words, abstain from
attempts to exploit existing expectations, which would require that they

not optimize with respect to the current situation. It is as an aid in this
process that intermediate targeting, by focussing attention on nominal
variables, can be socially productive.

An intermediate-target policy is not a fully specified rule, nevertheless,
for the latter would dictate movements of an instrument as opposed to the

path of a variable not precisely controllable by the authority. One advantage
of a fully specified rule is that it leads to clarity concerning departures
from target paths--it permits private agents and the policy authority
itself to be certain whether such departures are intentional or the consequence
of random shocks from non-policy sources.

In a previous paper, I have described qualitatively a rule of a type

that appears to me attractive. This rule would govern the behavior of the
monetary base, adjusting its growth rate up or down each month in response
to recent deviations of nominal GNP from a constant-growth path that would

5

be designed to be noninflationary.

Hall (1985) and Meltzer (1985) have

also suggested rules that should (i) provide automatic countercyclical
forces, (ii) adjust to technological changes so as to prevent sustained
inflation or deflation, and (iii) curtail attempts to exploit currently-

given expectations. Empirical analysis designed to explore the properties
of these and other rules has begun but needs to be taken farther.

31

VII. Conclusions
In conclusion, I will very briefly review the arguments developed above
and, in the process, attempt to bring out the ways in which they are
interrelated.
1979-82

First, in Section III it

is argued that the experience of

does not establish that accurate control of

the

(Ml) money supply

is infeasible, for the NR/LRR operating procedure employed during that
52/
episode is highly inappropriate for money stock control. Simulations
of the Fed's monthly money-market econometric model indicate that the move
to contemporaneous reserve requirements should reduce control errors to
53/
some extent.
More substantial reductions are predicted to be obtainable
from a system of uniform and universal (as well as contemporaneous) reserve
requirements and, with such a system in place, use of a total reserve
instrument would improve control even further--indeed, to an extent that
should be entirely satisfactory to proponents of tight monetary control.
In Section IV it is indicated that such steps would not induce extreme
volatility of short-term interest rates, the claim again being based in

large part on simulations with the Board staff's monthly model. In addition,
theoretical considerations are used to argue that strict Ml control would
not induce severe multiperiod oscillations or explosions (as opposed to
single-period changes) in interest rates.

Section V pertains to possible problems resulting from ongoing processes

of technical innovation and deregulation in the payments industry. The only
conclusion drawn is that the existence of these processes makes Ml targeting

a less attractive proposition than it would be otherwise. The absence of
stronger conclusions is not seriously damaging to the overall line of
argument, however, for in Section VI it is concluded that an intermediate-

32

target strategy could more fruitfully be based on the path of nominal GNP
than that of the money stock.

More significantly, Section VI points out that, because of the suboptimality of period-by-period decision making in an economy with price or
wage rigidities, nominal intermediate targets can in principle be helpful
in attaining ultimate goals even though these goals include real

(employment or income) magnitudes. Adherence to a nominal intermediate
target can provide some of the benefits of a policy rule. Such adherence
does not constitute a rule, however, for it does not fully prescribe
behavior

of a directly-controllable instrument and is thus open to misunder-

standing on the part of the public or the monetary authority itself.

Appendix A

The object here is to provide some basis for the judgement offered
above that Lucas-critique effects would not be likely to reverse the main
conclusion of Section III, namely, that accurate money stock control is
possible under an operating regime with contemporaneous, uniform, and
universal reserve requirements (TJCR) and a total reserves instrument.

We begin by noting that with a TR instrument, and in the absence of errors
pertaining to reserve requirements, the only source of control error is
excess reserves; if there were no excess reserves there would be no control

errors. In the presence of excess reserves, moreover, the extent of the
control errors will depend primarily upon the variance of shocks to the
excess reserve demand function and on the interest-rate sensitivity of this

same function. If this sensitivity is close to zero, the extent of
monetary control will be independent of shock variances and parameter values
in other parts of the system.

Consequently, we see that for the Tinsley et al results to significantly
underestimate money control errors under a TR/UCR regime, they would need
to be based on underestimates of the interest elasticity of excess reserve

demand and/or the disturbance variance pertaining to that function. That
the first of these conditions prevails seems unlikely because the Tinsley

et al (1981) excess reserve demand function features an elasticity
(with respect to the funds rate-discount rate spread) of approximately

0.3. But this figure is notably higher than is usually found in studies
of reserve behavior--indeed, most investigators are unable to find any
significant responsiveness of excess reserves to the interest rate differential.
Thus it seems unlikely that the true magnitude, even if it were enhanced
by a TR/UCR regime, would be greater than the figure used in the Tinsley
et al simulations.

The other main relevant consideration is that, from

a theoretical

perspective, it is difficult to rationalize excess reserve holdings,

except in frictional quantities, given the existence of a well-developed

federal funds market. That statement would remain relevant dnder
54/

alternative operating procedures, furthermore, except for

a regime with

LRR and a TR instrument--under which banks could be assured of avoiding
reserve deficiencies only by carrying large quantities of excess reserves.
Under a system with UCR and a TR instrument, then, theoretical

considerations would lead one to expect excess reserves to be both small

in magnitude and insensitive to the interest rate differential. But these
conditions are just the opposite of those that would be conducive to the
possibility of Lucas-critique effects that could invalidate the conclusion
of Section III.
Append ix B

The object here is to provide a non-technical description of the
logic of the argument concerning dynamic inconsistency, and rules vs.

discretion, developed by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and elaborated by

Barro and Gordon (1984). These writers assume that the monetary

authority's objectives are represented by a loss function in which t
arguments are the squared deviations of employment and inflation from

values determined by reference to microeconomic principles. It will
simplify matters without distortion of the argument, however, if we directly
assume that the objective function is increasing in the current money growth
surprise (surprise money growth enhances employment) and decreasing in the
square of money growth itself (imagine the optimal steady-state inflation

value is zero). Also, there are discounted values of similar terms
expected for all future periods, but that does not matter. Now, if the
authority were to adopt a policy rule by choosing among constant money
growth rates he would recognize that on average surprise values will be
zero whatever his choice, so the optimal choice would be a zero money

growth rate. Similarly, an average money growth rate of zero would be

implied by the optimal rule choice when a broader class o rules is
considered.

But suppose that, instead, the authority proceeds in a

discretionary manner, selecting current money growth rates on a period-

by-period basis. In each period, then, he will take the prevailing expected
money growth rate as a given piece of information (an initial condition).
The current surprise value is then under his control, so the optimum
choice of the current money growth rate is that which just balances the
marginal benefit of surprise money growth against the marginal cost of

money growth per Se. With an objective function of the type described,

this optimal value will be strictly positive. But rational private
agents understand this process, so the public's expectations about money

growth are correct on average. Thus the surprise magnitude is zero on
average, over any large number of periods, even though the monetary

authority views it as controllable within each period, Consequently,
there is on average rio benefit materializing from surprises to compensate

for the cost of a positive money growth rate. The discretionary regime
features more money growth (i.e., inflation) but the same amount of
surprise money growth (i.e., employment) on average as under the optimal
rule--consequences which are unambiguously poorer.

The logic of the foregoing example carries over, it must be emphasized,

to cases in which the optimal policy rule is activist in design. The crucial
step in obtaining superior outcomes is not constancy of instrument settings,
but the avoidance of making period-by-period optimization calculations which
attempt to exploit prevailing expectations--because of the effect that this

pattern will have on expectations prevailing in the future. Thus, if an
actual policymaker is not literally precommitted but somehow manages to
ignore the apparent possibility of exploiting expectations--and does so
each period--then the outcome could be as desirable as if some sort of a
binding rule were in place.

References

Anderson, Richard G., and Robert H. Rasche, 'What Do Money Market Models
Tell Us about How to Implement Monetary Policy?" Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 14 (November 1982, Part 2), 796-828.

Axilrod, Stephen H. "Monetary Policy, Money Supply, and the Federal
Reserve's Operating Procedures," Federal Reserve Bulletin 68
(January 1982), 13-24.

__________________

"Strategies

and Tactics for Monetary Control:

A Comment on Brunner and Meltzer." Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 18 (Spring 1983), 105-112.

Bailey, Martin J. National Income and the Price Level. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1962.

Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy
in a Natural Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy 91 (August 1983),
589-610.

Blinder, Alan S. "Nonetarism is Obsolete," Challenge (September/October 1981),
35-41.

______________

"Comment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No.1, 1984),

266-2 70.

Brurmer, Karl. "Has Monetarism Failed?" Cato Journal 3 (Spring 1983), 23-62.
Brunuer, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, "Strategies and Tactics for Monetary
Control," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 18
(Spring 1983), 59-104.

Bryant, Ralph C. Money and Monetary Policy in Interdependent Nations.

Washington: Brookings Institution, 1980.

"Federal Reserve Control of the Money Stock," Journal of

________________ •

Money, Credit, and Banking 14 (November 1982, Part 2), 597-625.

Controlling

_______________•

Money: The Federal Reserve and its Critics.

Washington: Brookings Institution, 1983.
Cagan, Phillip. "Financial Developments and the Erosion of Monetary
Controls." In Contemporary Economic Problems 1979, edited by

William Fellner. washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1979.
_______________

"Current Problems of Monetary Policy: Would the Gold

Standard Help?" Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1982.

Ciccolo, John H. "Is Short-run Monetary Control Feasible?" In Monetary
Aggregates and Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 1974.
Coats, Warren L. "Lagged Reserve Accounting and the Money Supply Mechanism."
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 8 (May 1976), 167-180.

Enzler, Jared, and Lewis Johnson, "Cycles Resulting from Money Stock Targeting."

In New Monetary Control Procedures, Vol. 1. Washington: Federal Reserve
Board, 1981.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "Targets, Instruments, and Indicators of Monetary
Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 1 (October 1975), 443-473.

____________________

"Time to Reexamine the Monetary Targets Framework."

New England Economic Review (March/April 1982), 15-23.
____________________

Testimony in Conduct of Monetary Policy, Hearings

before the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs; House of

Representatives; U.S. Congress. Washington: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1983.

__________________

"Lessons from the 1979-82 Monetary Policy Experiment.t'

American Economic Review 74 (May 1984), 382-387.

Monetary Policy: Theory and Practice.' Journal of

Friedman, Milton.

Money, Credit, and Banking 14 (February 1982), 98-118.
________________ •

"Nonetarisrn

in Rhetoric and Practice." Bank of Japan,

Monetary and Economic Studies 1 (October 1983), 1-14.
_______________ •

American

"Lessons

from the 1979-82 Monetary Policy Experiment."

Economic Review 74 (May 1984), 397-400.

Goodfriend, Marvin. "Discount Window Borrowing, Monetary Policy, and the
Post-October 6, 1979, Federal Reserve Operating Procedure,"

Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (September 1983), 343356.
____________________

"The Promises and Pitfalls of Contemporaneous Reserve

Requirements for the Implementation of Monetary Policy," Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review 70 (May/June 1984), 3-12.
"Reinterpreting Money Demand Regressions," CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 22 (Spring 1985),
forthcoming.

Goodfriend, Marvin, Gary Anderson, Anil Kashyap, George Moore, and

Richard D. Porter. "A Weekly Perfect Foresight Model of the
Nonborro'wed Reserve Operating Procedure," Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Working Paper 84-4, September 1984.
Gordon, Robert J.

"'Credibility'

vs. 'Mainstream:' Two Views of the

Inflation Process." In Inflation: Prospects and Remedies, edited by
William D. Nordhaus. Washington:

Center

for National Policy, 1983.

Hall, Robert E. "Monetary Policy With an Elastic Price Standard." In
Price Stability and Public Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, 1985, forthcoming.

Hester, Donald D. "Innovations and Monetary Control." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (No. 1,

1981), 141-189.

Hetzel, Robert L.

'The Formulation of Monetary Policy," Working Paper,

Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, October 1984 (a).

"Monetary Policy in the Early 1980s." Working Paper,

________________

Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, December 1984 (b).

Higgins, Bryon. "Should the Federal Reserve Fine Tune Monetary Growth?"
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review (January 1982),
3-16.

Hoehn, James G. "Recent Monetary Control Procedures and the Response of

i-.-..,
4 .-. 1L-....-.... r'...,..4-I. I
£GLCi—-.
LL c'1
.LLLLLQLI..JLO ILL
J.1.JL.LJ \JLLJWLLi.

of

t

DaLIr.

Dallas Economic Review (September 1983), 1-10.

_______________

"Alternative

Monetary Policy Regimes Under Rational

Expectations," working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,
October 1984.

Kaldor, Nicholas. The Scourge of Monetarism. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1982.

Kareken, John H., Thomas J. Muench, and Neil Wallace. "Optimal Open
Market Strategy: The Use of Information Variables." American Economic
Review 63 (March 1973), 156-172.

Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. "Rules Rather than Discretion:
The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy 85
(June 1977), 473-491.

Lane, Timothy D., "Instrument Instability and Short-Term Monetary Control,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (September 1984), 209-224.

Levin, Fred, and Paul Meek. "ImpLementing the New Operating Procedures:
The View from the Trading Desk." In New Monetary Control Procedures,

Vol. 1. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, 1981.

Lindsey, David B. "Non-borrowed Reserve Targeting and Monetary Control."
In Improving Money Stock Control, edited by Laurence H. Meyer, pp. 3-41.

Boston: Kluwer-Nihoff, 1983.
________________ "The Monetary Regime of the Federal Reserve System,"
Dartmouth Conference on Alternative Monetary Regimes. August 1984.
Lindsey, David E., and Others. "Monetary Control Experience Under the
New Operating Procedures." In New Monetary Control Procedures, Vol. 2.
Washington: Federal Reserve Board, 1981.
Lindsey, David E., Helen T. Farr, Gary P. Gillum, Kenneth J. Kopecky,

and Richard D. Porter. "Short Run Monetary Control: Evidence Under
a Non-Borrowed Reserve Operating Procedure," Journal of Monetary
Economics 13 (January 1984), 87-111.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 1.

Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co., 1976.
McCallum, Bennett T. "On Non-Uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models:
An Attempt at Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics 11
(March 1983), 139-168.

___________________

"Monetarist

Rules in the Light of Recent Experience,"

American Economic Review 74 (May 1984), 388-391.

____________________

"Bank Deregulation, Accounting Systems of Exchange,

and the Unit of Account: A Critical. Review," Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series in Public Policy 23 (Autumn 1985), forthcoming.

McCallum, Bennett T., and James G. Hoehn, "Instrument Choice for Money
Stock Control with Contemporaneous and Lagged Reserve Requirements,"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 15 (February 1983), 96-101.
Meltzer, Allan H.

'Rules for Price Stability: An Overview and Comparison."

In Price Stability and Public Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, 1985, forthcoming.

Morris, Frank E. "Do the Monetary Aggregates Have a Future as Targets of
Federal Reserve Policy?" New England Economic Review (March/April 1982),
—1/.
1'-•.

Pierce,

James L. "Did Financial Innovation Hurt the Great Monetarist

Experiment?" American Economic Review 74 (May 1984), 392-396.

Pierce, James L., and Thomas D. Thomson. "Some Issues in Controlling
the Stock of Money." In Controlling Monetary Aggregates II:

The Implementation. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series
No. 9, 1972.

Poole, William. "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple
Stochastic Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (May 1970),
197-216.

______________

"Federal Reserve Operating Procedures: A Survey and Evaluation

of the Historical Record since October 1979," Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 14 (November 1982, Part 2), 575-596.

and Charles Lieberman. "Improving Monetary Control,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 2, 1972), 293-312.

Radecki, Lawrence. "Short-run Monetary Control: An Analysis of Some
Possible Dangers," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review
(Spring 1982), 1-10.

Rogoff, Kenneth.

"The Optimal Degree of Commitment

to

an Intermediate

Monetary Target: Inflation Gains versus Stabilization Costs."
International Finance Discussion Papers No. 230, September 1983.

Solomon, Anthony N. "Unresolved Issues in Monetary Policy." Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review (Spring 1984), 1-6.
Tinsley, Peter A., and Peter von zur Muehien. "The Reliability of
Alternative Intermediate Targets," Federal Reserve Board,
November 1983.

Tinsley, Peter A., Gerhard Fries, Bonnie Garrett, and Peter von zur Muehien,
"Appendix C-Estimated Monetary Policy Consequences of Reserve Accounting
Procedures," Federal Reserve Board, September 10, 1981.
Tinsley, Peter A., Helen T. Farr, Gerhard Fries, Bonnie Garrett, and
Peter von zur Muehien, "Policy Robustness:

Specification and

Simulation of a Monthly Money Market Model," Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 14 (November 1982, Part 2), 829-856.

Tobin, James. "Macroeconomic Models and Policy."

In Frontiers of

Quantitative Economics, Vol. IIIB, edited by Michael Intrilligator.

Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co., 1977.

"Monetary Policy: Rules, Targets, and Shocks," Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 15 (November 1983), 506-518.

___________

"Overview." Price Stability and Public Policy. Federal

Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1985, forthcoming.

Volcker, Paul A. "Statement Before the House Committee
and Urban Affairs." Federal Reserve Bulletin 69

on Banking, Finance,

(August 1983), 617-621.

Wallich, Henry C. "Recent Techniques of Monetary Policy." Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Economic Review (May 1984), 21-30.

Walsh, Carl E. "Interest Rate Volatility and Monetary Policy," Journal of
Money, Credit, and Bankit 16 (May 1984), 133-150.

Footnotes

1-.

Among these are items by Blinder (198l)(l984), Bryant (1980 (1983),

B.M. Friedman (1982)(1984), Gordon (1983), Hester (1981), Kaldor (1982),
Morris (1982), and Tobin (1983).

2. In this category some leading items are Bruriner and Meltzer (1983),
N. Friedman (1982)(1983 )(l984 ),

Hetzel

(1984b), and

Poole (1982). Most of the writings by members of the Board of Governors
staff fall cleanly into neither category, as they usually support the notion
of monetary targeting in principle but argue against tight short-run

adherence to targets. However viewed, some significant items from the Board
staff include Axilrod (l98l)(1983) and Lindsey (1983 )(l984). In addition,
papers by Board members Wallich (1984) and Volcker (1983) are of
considerable interest.

3. A convenient and useful account of some of the complexities involving
reserve requirements appears in Tinsley et al (1982).

4. For most of the uses to which the model will be put, the assumption that
the disturbances are serially uncorrelated is not crucial. On this point,
see McCallum and }!oehn (1983, p. 100).

5. This well-known type of analysis originated with Bailey (1961) and
Poole (1970), and was first applied to a money-market model by Pierce and

Thomson (1972). An extension to a dynamic setting with rational expectations
is provided by McCallum and Hoehn (1983). Also see Hoehn (1984).

6. See, for example, charts in Bryant (1983, pp. 96-97), Hoehn (1983, pp. 2—3),
and Lindsey (1984, pp. 15-17).

7. The estimates (standard errors) are 0.0138 (0.0038) for October 1976September 1979 and 0.0709 (0.0180) for October 1979-September 1982.
8.

Some readers have pointed out that this argument is not convincing; it is

possible that the Fed was letting interest rates adjust more promptly to all

sorts of influences without any special commitment to monetary targets. In that
case Hoehn's regression would have many omitted variables and the coefficient

on m_m would accordingly be unreliable. It is therefore fortunate that the
conclusions that I draw in this section do not rely upon the validity of my
working hypothesis that the Fed was in fact more strongly committed than usual
to monetary targets during 1979-82.
9.

It is of course conceivable that the high interest rates and the recession

were not attributable to monetary policy at all, but I am not inclined to make

that argument. I am, however, inclined to emphasize that the period was one
of monetary stringency only in relation to the path that would have resulted

from an extrapolation of trends of the period prior to October 1979. By
absolute standards--e.g., the growth rate of the monetary base--the period does
not appear to be one of monetary stringency.

10. See, e.g., Coats (1976), Poole and Lieberman (1972), and McCallum-Hoehn (1983).

11. A qualification was pointed out to me by Alvin Marty: since e pertains
in part to fluctuations in the reserve requirement ratio, its variance may be

smaller under LRR than CRF. In that case, the stated absence of ambiguity does
not prevail.

12. The unplanned variance in r with the NRt instrument and LRR is

(1/b)2 (c +

), furthermore,

which will be larger than expression (9) for

a wide range of parameter values.

13. These are the two combinations most often proposed by Ml targeting
proponents.

14. Here I am conducting a "stylized argument;" in reality the debate does
not proceed in such an orderly fashion. Indeed, it is not in all cases possible
to determine whether an individual is a proponent or critic of monetary targeting.

15. During the period studied, October 1979-October 1980, NR was the operating
instrument so the base was not set in advance.

16. There I have limited attention to root-mean-square error measures and to
simulations for the period October 1979-October 1980 in order to increase

comparability with other results reported below. The Lindsey et al appendix
figures for a 1979-82 simulation period are qualitatively similar.

17. This indeterminacy would not obtain if an interest-sensitive demand for excess
reserves was included in the model.

18. The unpredictability under discussion is that pertaining to required reserves
given deposits, not the magnitude of deposits themselves.

19. See Tinsleyet al (1981, pp. 36-42) (1982, pp. 840-842).

20. See Levin and Meek (1981) and Goodfriend, Anderson, Kashyap, Moore, and

(1984) for clear descriptions of this logic and also for discussion of
the points that follow.

Porter

21. Indeed, Goodfriend et al (1984) have argued that
led

borrowings--and thus the funds rate

and the

the Fed's actual procedure

money stock--to evolve in a

fashion analogous to a random walk The point is that BR borrowed reserves in
week t, would be planned so that the expected value of BR would be BR1. Thus
if the stochastic discrepancy between actual and planned BRt values were white

noise, the BR process would be a random walk. This tendency is also mentioned
by Pierce (1984, p. 396).

22. in the words of Tinsley et al (1981, p. 53): "The annual' money stock
volatility performance .

. . is

measured by the standard deviation of

the

gap

in the tenth month of the policy horizon between he annual money stock
path .

23.

. . and the simulated outcome in the tenth month.

This one specific conclusion should not be interpreted as constituting

a general disagreement with the reservations expressed by Anderson and Rasche
(1982), in the final section of their useful paper, concerning the unreliability
for some purposes of existing money market models.

24. in this regard, it might be noted that Walsh (1984) has developed a
model in which the magnitudes of several parameters of the money demand
function are related to the variability of bond prices (interest rates).
Higher bond price variability shifts the money demand function in a
manner that "suggests that a shift toward a policy that allows for greater
fluctuations in the price of bonds, as, for example, occurs if the monetary

authority changes from an interest rate to a reserve aggregate operating
procedure, may result in a larger increase in bond price volatility than

would have been predicted under the assumption of a constant structure"
(1984, p. 148). It is a crucial feature of Walsh's analysis, however, that
the model includes no interest-bearing asset with the same risk characteristics

as money. In the presence of such an asset, the cited effect would not
obtain. (This has been noted by Hoehn (1984).)

Consequently, it is unlikely

that the effect featured in Walsh's analysis is of substantial importance
for the U.S. economy.

25. Most Federal Reserve analysts fall into this last category.
26. It should be clear from the logic of the example that constancy of
is not required; what the argument relies upon, rather, is exogeneity
of an achieved m target path.

Since real rather than nominal rates appear in the IS

27

this argument implicitly

relationship,

assumes relatively slow adjustment of inflationary

expectations

28. This point is also applicable, it will be noted, to the case considered
in the previous three paragraphs.

29. The example is reminiscent of the well-known Goldfeld specification
of the money demand function. Goodfriend (1985) has argued--persuasively,
in my opinion--that the sort of portfolio adjustment costs that are
relevant for money demand cannot plausibly explain the lags that are typically

found in the money demand literature. But there are other relationships
relevant to the argument at hand--the demand for fixed investment, for
example--for which adjustment costs are presumably quite important.

Goodfriend's analysis is, in any event, supportive of my main thesis.

30. It is not being argued that linearity is a consequence of adjustment
costs; our illustrative examples are taken to be linear for simplicity,

as that property is not at issue. The parameter X in (18) must satisfy
0 <

< 1, however, precisely because it stems from adjustment-cost

X

considerations.

31. It is being presumed tbat

the

policy authority controls m or rt, or

behaves so as to relate one to the other.

32. For example, suppose that the policy authority behaves according to

m =

im1 + 2r1,

that

is white noise, and that V2 =

Then the solution for r will be of the form

r

V3

=

... = 0.

+ i1m1 + 1'2ri +

and the expectational variable will be

Er÷1 =

If mi

+

i(imi + 2r1)

+

20

+

imi + 2r1 +

and Er1 are omitted from the right-hand side of (18), we then have

an expression in which ri enters from several sources.

33. An argument that is essentially the same as mine, but worked out more
thoroughly and in a more complete model, has recently been developed by Lane (1984)

That can be determined by inspection--as m1

34.

relevant

and

are the only

state variables in the system--and the r values can be found by using

(19) and (20) in (18) via the undetermined-coefficients procedure. Formally,
there

exist other solutions, of course, as is the case in most rational

expectations models of asset prices. The solution described in (20) is, however,
the unique solution that is free of bootstrap effects--ones that exist only

because they are arbitrarily expected to exist. For a lengthy discussion of this
point and a rationalization of the (standard) practice of focussing attention on
the bootstrap-free solution, see McCallum (1983).
35.

Useful

summaries have been provided by Cagan (1980) and Hester (1981),

among others.

36. See, for example, Brunner and Meltzer (1983).
37.

If

complete, the elimination of currency would lead to the existence

of a non-monetary economy, so difficulties with monetary control would

become unimportant. For a discussion of some recent literature involving
hypothetical economies with sophisticated accounting systems of exchange,
see McCallum (1985).

38. Thus Bryant (1982, p. 598) says that "It needs to be emphasized at the
outset that the issue discussed in this paper [i.e., the ability of the
Federal Reserve to control the money stock] is not of major importance."

39. The force of the position is also weakened, of course, by the existence
of political pressures of various sorts. While such pressures are
obviously of enormous actual importance, this paper is not the appropriate

place to attempt a systematic discussion. For one interesting recent
effort, see Hetzel (1984a).

40. A non-technical exposition of the

Kydland-Prescott

and Barro-Gordon

analysis is included in Appendix B.

41..

The crucial features of the models that lead to this result are (i)

an objective function that is increasing in output (or employment) over
the relevant range and decreasing (with increasing marginal cost) in
inflation measured relative to some optimal trend value; (ii) a positive
dependence of output (or employment) on the current inflation or money
growth surprise; and (iii) expectations that are correct on average over

many periods. These are not stringent requirements. Item (iii) is a
weaker condition than rational expectations, for example, and item (ii)
permits multi-period nominal contracts provided that they are not of a form
that is inconsistent with the natural-rate hypothesis.

42. The List is similar to that of the previous footnote. Rogoff's
particular version of the Phillips curve (item ii) is based on one-period

wage contracts that are incompletely indexed and his assumption is that

expectations are rational. The connection between the monetary instrument
and aggregate demand is provided by a standard IS-LM specification, which
is compatible with (but more general than) the comparable features in the
Kydland-Prescott and Barro-Cordon models.

43. I say "likely to" because there are some parameter configurations that
•

make the purely discretionary regime preferable in Rogoff's model. These
do not occupy a large subset of the parameter space.

44. Interesting

evidence, supportive of the view that better performance would

be available with a nominal GNP target, is provided by Tinsley and von zur Muehlen

(1983). Specifically, their simulations with the Board's quarterly econometric
model suggest that the volatility of inflation and unemployment would be lower than

with targets for Ml (or some other variables). These simulations, it should be
stressed, do not presume that the intermediate target variables can be accurately
controlled, but only that the Fed can control--use as an instrument--the federal
funds rate.

45.

Tobin's (1983, pp.

509-511)

arguments against "purely nominalist" targets do

not address the claim being made, namely, that adherence to nominal targets can
enhance social welfare as expressed in an objective function that includes real
variables among its arguments.

46. Thus Solomon (1984, p. 4) objects to nominal GNP targeting because
"it is simply not appropriate for the Federal Reserve to set broad economic

goals. That is the task of elected officials."

47. Voicker (1983, p. 620) fears "that attempts to target GNP within a
narrow range would, deliberately or not, provide an unwarranted sense of
omnipotence for monetary policy ...

ultimately

leading to a sense of

disappointment.,.. In addition, the impression conveyed that monetary
policy would be 'held responsible' for meeting targets would, I suspect,
only weaken the will of the Congress and the body politic to deal with
other difficult issues, such as the budget, essential to the success of

economic policy as a whole."

48. This is Tobin's (1983) term.

49. For

example, in an argument against rules, Volcker (1983, p. 619)

suggests that 'attempts to follow a preset and inflexible money growth rule
with Ml based on historical trends would have resulted over the past year,
in my judgement

.

. , in

a appreciably tighter' policy than intended ar the

start of the period.' An exception is provided by Lindsey (1984).
50. Lindsey (1984, p. 7) has objected to this proposal on the grounds that
"lags in the impact of policy actions would raise the potential problem of
dynamic instability, since money base growth would continue to rise even
during the early to middle phases of expansion in the business cycle, when

nominal GNP rapidly approaches its target from below." The precise pattern
of weights on various past target misses should, of course, be chosen with
such possibilities in mind.

51. Hall (1985) has analyzed the properties of his rule under the assumption
that a particular nominal-contracting model of John Taylor's provides a
reasonable description of the economy.

52. Carried Out by Lindsey and others (1981) and Tinsley et a]. (1981).

53. The current (1985) regulations do not, of course, feature full
contemporaneousness. Coodfriend (1984b) has discussed procedures under
which the two day lag could be damaging.

54. I recognize that this claim is disputed by many knowledgeable analysts.

