NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BORDERS, ETHNICITY AND TRADE
Jenny C. Aker
Michael W. Klein
Stephen A. O'Connell
Muzhe Yang
Working Paper 15960
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15960

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

This research was partially funded by the National Bureau of Economic Research Africa Project. We
would like to thank seminar participants at the Center for Global Development, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Northeast Universities Development Conference (NEUDC), Université de Clermont-Ferrand
and University of Gottingen for their helpful comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jenny C. Aker, Michael W. Klein, Stephen A. O'Connell, and Muzhe Yang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Borders, Ethnicity and Trade
Jenny C. Aker, Michael W. Klein, Stephen A. O'Connell, and Muzhe Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 15960
May 2010
JEL No. O1,Q1
ABSTRACT
Do national borders and ethnicity contribute to market segmentation between and within countries?
This paper uses unique and high-frequency data on narrowly-defined goods to gauge the extent to
which a national border impedes trade between developing countries (Niger and Nigeria). Using a
regression discontinuity approach, we find a significant price change at the national border, but one
that is lower in magnitude than that found for industrialized countries. Yet unlike that literature, and
in line with important characteristics of African economies, we investigate the role of ethnicity in mitigating
and exacerbating the border effect. We find that a common ethnicity is linked to lower price dispersion
across countries, yet ethnic diversity creates an internal border within Niger. The primary mechanism
behind the internal border effect appears to be related to the role of ethnicity in facilitating access to
credit in rural markets.

Jenny C. Aker
Fletcher School
Tufts University
160 Packard Avenue
Medford, MA 02155
Tel: (510) 219-1663
Fax: (510) 643-8911
Jenny.Aker@tufts.edu
Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu

Stephen A. O'Connell
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
Tel: (610) 328-8107
Fax: (610) 328-7352
soconne1@swarthmore.edu
Muzhe Yang
Department of Economics
Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015
Tel: (610) 758-4962
Fax: (610) 758-4677
muzheyang@lehigh.edu

1. Introduction
There is general agreement among economists that international trade promotes an efficient
allocation of resources and, therefore, factors impeding trade impose a deadweight loss.
Additionally, there is evidence that trade contributes to economic growth (Frankel and Romer 1999,
Feyrer 2008). These gains from trade are an important motivation for research that gauges the
extent to which borders hinder trade among industrialized countries, notably by considering the
differences in price dispersion between locations on opposite sides of a national border as compared
to between two markets within the same country (Engel and Rogers 1996, Parsley and Wei 2001,
Gopinath, Gourinchas, Hsieh and Lee 2009).1
Arguably, the allocative and growth effects of international trade are greater for low-income
countries, especially the landlocked countries of sub-Saharan Africa, than for high-income
economies. But, even with this greater motivation for estimating the border effects in low-income
countries, there has not been much research of the border effect on price dispersion, partly due to
the lack of high-frequency data on narrowly-defined goods. In this paper we use monthly price data
over an eight-year period for two commodities, millet and cowpea, to assess the degree of market
integration across the border of Niger and Nigeria. Niger is a landlocked former French colony, and
is ranked last on the human development index, whereas Nigeria is a former British colony and
Africa’s most populous country. We also consider the role of ethnicity in both mitigating the
international border effect between markets that share a common ethnic make-up, and in giving rise
to a border effect within Niger between markets that are located in different ethnic regions.
Our analysis addresses two central issues in African political economy. The first concerns
the economic salience of political boundaries in Africa and the degree to which these borders restrict
1

As discussed in more detail below, the magnitude of these estimates has been questioned by Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009) who
show that differences in underlying price volatility across countries contribute to the estimated border effect, and that this accounts
for a large upward bias in the Engel and Rogers (1996) result, and others that follow their research design.

1

cross-border trade. The second relates to the economic effects of ethno-linguistic fractionalization
within African countries.
Cross-border trade is extensive throughout West Africa, including along the Niger-Nigeria
border. The extent of trade between the two countries is partly due to the absence of any natural
impediments between Niger and Nigeria, such as rivers or mountains.2 Rather, the border between
the two countries, created by the United Kingdom and France in the wake of the 1884-85 Berlin
Conference, was drawn through a region within which the Hausa ethnic group had historically
supported an active trade in livestock, textiles, salt, kola nuts, and food staples (Anene 1970,
Hopkins 1973, Miles 1994).
The manner in which the Niger-Nigeria border divided an ethnically homogeneous region
between two countries is not unique in Africa (Asiwaju 1985). Nor is Niger unusual in its inclusion
of a number of ethnic groups whose people live in geographically distinct regions of the country.
An extensive literature explores the effects of ethno-linguistic fractionalization on a variety of
outcomes, showing that higher levels of ethnic diversity within a country are associated with lower
growth rates (Easterly and Levine 1997), more corruption (Mauro 1995), lower contributions to
local public goods (Alesina, Baqir and Easterly, 1999) and lower participation in groups and
associations (Alesina and La Ferrara 2000). We are not aware of any other studies of the effect of de
facto intra-national borders, arising from the presence of ethnic diversity, on market segmentation
within Africa.3
We contribute to these central topics of research by assessing the importance of national
borders for agricultural market integration and segmentation. We simultaneously consider the
2

The Niger River is the principal river of West Africa, extending 4,180 km. The river’s source starts in Guinea and empties into the
Niger Delta, in southern Nigeria. While the river traverses both Niger and Nigeria, it only forms a border between Niger and Benin,
rather than between Niger and Nigeria.
3
Studies of cross-border trade in West Africa have typically been restricted to a few locations and time periods (See Azam (2007) for
an overview). The paper closest to our own is Araujo-Bonjean et al. (2008), who estimate a vector autoregression in monthly marketlevel millet prices for national markets in Niger, Mali and Burkina Faso. Cross-sectional regressions on these estimated coefficients
uncover a statistically significant border effect within the Communauté Financière Africaine (CFA) zone.

2

impact of ethnicity on trade, both across international borders and across the de facto boundaries that
separate ethnic regions within a country. Our analysis focuses on two agricultural products, millet
and cowpea, which are produced and consumed in both countries and were traded freely during our
sample period. We use two primary datasets, both of which were collected by one of the authors
(Aker). The first consists of monthly prices of millet and cowpeas across forty-two markets in Niger
and Nigeria between 1999 and 2007. The second includes data on covariates that partially explain
price dispersion across markets, including road distances, transportation costs, mobile phone
coverage, rainfall, and the ethnicity of traders, farmers and transporters in local markets.
We use two empirical approaches to analyze the border effect. The first is a regressionbased method using market pairs, whereas the second is a regression discontinuity (RD) design. We
present evidence that the international border increases price dispersion across markets for millet
and cowpeas. The regression-based estimate of the effect of the Niger-Nigeria border on price
dispersion across markets, conditional on transport costs and other characteristics, is 2.5 to 3
percent for both millet and cowpeas. This represents a distance-equivalent effect of 2.2 kilometers,
which is quite modest as compared to results found for industrial countries. We find a much larger
effect for a single market (on either side of the border) using the RD design, with a border effect of
close to 20 percent of the price of millet, and a slightly larger effect for cowpeas. The identification
of a border effect in our empirical setting is bolstered by the absence of geographic features that
could impede trade, such as rivers or mountains, between Niger and Nigeria.
We also find evidence of an important role of ethnicity as a source of market integration and
segmentation in these two West African countries. Our estimates suggest that different ethnic
groups create an “internal barrier” to trade between the Hausa and the Zarma regions of Niger, as
compared to trade within either ethnic region. This “internal (ethnic) border effect” is statistically
significant and larger in magnitude than the international border effect. But ethnicity also facilitates
3

market integration, since the international border effect is significantly smaller between the Hausa
regions of Niger and Nigeria than between two cross-border markets that do not share a common
ethnic composition.
We provide suggestive evidence of the trader-level mechanisms behind the ethnic border
effect within Niger. The internal border effect does not appear to be explained by differential
investments in the Hausa and Zarma regions, nor by an absence of trade between these two regions.
Rather, the border effect appears to be associated with the role of gender in the two cultures, as well
as the importance of ethnic social networks in facilitating access to credit.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a context for our analysis
by discussing some relevant characteristics of Niger, including agricultural trade patterns, the
geographic nature of ethnic groupings and establishment of its international border with Nigeria.
Section 3 describes the data and provides descriptive statistics. Section 4 discusses the empirical
strategy, and Section 5 presents the results for the international border effect. Section 6 investigates
the role of ethnic diversity on creating internal barriers. Section 7 concludes.

2. Agricultural Trade in Niger
Niger is one of the poorest countries in the world, ranking last on the United Nations’
Human Development Index (UNDP 2009). The majority of the population consists of rural
subsistence farmers, who depend upon rain-fed agriculture as their main source of food and income.
As a landlocked country, Niger depends upon trade with its contiguous neighbors, primarily the
coastal countries of Benin and Nigeria, but also the landlocked countries of Burkina Faso and Mali.
Niger’s trade links with its coastal neighbors have a long and rich history. In the centuries
prior to the arrival of the colonial powers, the Hausa ethnic group in modern-day Northern Nigeria
and Niger was linked to the rest of the continent through a set of long-distance trading routes. One
4

of these was the northerly trans-Saharan trade route connecting Katsina and Kano (Nigeria) to
Tripoli (Libya) via Niger. Trade along this route was primarily in slaves, textiles, livestock, grains
and salt. A second route was the westward trade in kola nuts between Niger and Nigeria and what is
now Ghana (Hashim and Meager 1999).4
There were a number of significant changes in these circuits during the 1800s, when the
slave trade became less important in the export portfolio of West African states and European
imports became increasingly important (Hashim and Meager 1999). In addition, an eastward shift in
the trans-Saharan trade route coincided with a dramatic expansion of the economy of Sudan. As
Hausa trading networks became more dominant, Hausa became the lingua franca along the east-west
trading routes (Lovejoy 1980). Nevertheless, the direction and composition of the trade routes
during that time were still primarily based upon ecological specialization and comparative advantage.
At the end of the 19th century, in the wake of the 1884-85 Berlin Conference, the 1,500-km
border between the French colony of Niger and the British colony of Nigeria was established
(Figure 1). The border’s placement reflected the opposing territorial interests of the French and
British colonial administrations; the French government wanted access to Chad across southern
Niger, thus moving the border from the northern desert regions to a location within the arable zone
further south, while the British government insisted that the Hausa-Fulani kingdoms of northern
Nigeria be kept intact, in light of previous civil conflict between the groups. The border that
emerged in 1906 divided the Hausa, Fulani and Kanuri ethnic groups between the two countries.5 It
also created a Niger that included eight primary ethnic groups (Hausa, Songhai/Zarma, Toureg,

4

The kola nut is native to the tropical rainforests of Africa. It is chewed in many West African cultures to restore vitality and to ease
hunger pangs . In addition to these primary trading circuits, there was also an east-west route between Kano and Mecca, whereby
pilgrimage was combined with trade.
5
The Niger-Nigeria border created a ‘partitioned culture area’ among Hausa and Fulani populations, one of many such areas in
contemporary Africa (Asiwaju 1985). At the outset of the international demarcation, inhabitants with farmland straddling the
boundary had to choose one colonial side or the other, as French subjects were not supposed to farm on British territory, and vice
versa (Miles 2005).

5

Fulani, Kanuri, Arab, Toubou and Gourmantche) which were, for the most part, situated in
geographically distinct regions.6
At present, trade between Niger and Nigeria is dominated by trade in agro-pastoral products
(grains, legumes and livestock), and petroleum and farm-chemical products. Both countries are
members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), a customs union among
all West African states; trade in locally-produced food staples is largely free, so evidence of an
international border effect during most of our sample period (1999 – 2007) cannot be attributed to
official trade restrictions. One possible source of trade friction arises from currency exchange costs
between the Communauté Financière Africaine (CFA) franc of Niger and the Nigerian naira.
Furthermore, linguistic differences (between the official languages of Niger and Nigeria, French and
English, respectively) could also add to transaction costs. There could also be costs due to delays or
harassment at the border, or banditry in the border region.7 Few road networks were developed
linking Niger and Nigeria during the colonial period, and, for this reason, there were relatively few
official border crossing stations by the time of independence in 1960.8 Building more crossing
stations was a low priority for the newly independent and relatively poor states of Nigeria and Niger.
Consequently, borders remained porous, patrolling haphazard, and smuggling a major economic
activity for petroleum and taxed agricultural products (Charlick 1991).

3. Empirical Strategy
If borders impose costs that hinder trade, then, conditional on distance between markets and
other location-specific factors, price differences between markets located in different countries
A map of Nigeria in 1957-58 suggests that the geographic location of ethnic groups is similar to the ethnographic maps for 2008.
Despite a series of border closings between 1983 and 1986, often related to political instability in Nigeria, both the National
Boundary Commission of Nigeria and the Nigeria-Niger Joint Commission convened trans-border workshops to address issues of
cross-border trade.
8
The British completed a railway between Lagos (southern Nigeria) and Kano (northern Nigeria) in 1911, unifying Nigeria’s coast with
its north-eastern interior and undermining the long-distance trade between Kano and Tripoli (Hopkins 1973).
6

7

6

should be larger than those between markets in the same country. Similarly, for two proximate
markets on either side of the border, the price of a homogeneous good will differ between these
markets if the border imposes transaction costs. In this paper, we employ two different empirical
strategies to estimate the border effect: a regression-based analysis that examines price differences
across market pairs, and an RD design focused on the difference in cross-border prices for markets
that are close to the border.

Market-Pair Regression
Most market-pair regression analyses of the border effect regress a measure of price
dispersion between market pairs on a border indicator variable and other covariates (Engel and
Rogers 1996, Parsley and Wei 2001, Ceglowski 2003). For example, Engel and Rogers (1996)
compare price differences for 14 categories of goods among 228 pairs of cities in the United States
and Canada using a specification that regresses price dispersion between two cities on the log of
distance between those cities, a border indicator and a set of city-specific fixed effects. The
coefficient estimate of the border indicator represents the change in price dispersion between two
cities due to the fact that they are in different countries.9
Engel and Rogers (1996) find strikingly large effects of the international border on price
dispersion: one estimate puts the distance-equivalent effect at over 70,000 kilometers. Other
research reports similar magnitudes for border effects between industrial countries. However,
Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009) show that differences in underlying price volatility in two
countries can bias the estimate of the border effect upward since comparing cross-country pairs of
prices reflects not only the costs associated with crossing the border, but also any differences in
underlying price variability between the countries. They demonstrate that controlling for country-

9

Using this specification, the authors can calculate a distance-equivalent effect using the parameter estimates for the border effect and
distance.

7

specific volatility can result in very different estimates of the border effect.10 Using the Engel and
Rogers’ (1996) data, the estimated distance-equivalent border effect based on a specification that
includes a Canada-Canada fixed effect is 47 kilometers, whereas the distance-equivalent border
effect after controlling for a US-US fixed effect is 108 million kilometers.
The specification we use for our market-pair estimation is:
(1)

M

ln( p ijt p kti )   0   1 B jk  X jkt  2   Dm  m   t   jkt ,
m 1

where p ijt and p kti are the prices of a good i in markets j and k, respectively; Bjk is an indicator
variable equal to 1 if there is an international border between the two markets j and k; Xjkt is a
vector of variables that can affect price dispersion between the two markets, such as drought,
transport costs, mobile phone coverage and other time-varying factors; Dm is a vector of marketspecific dummy variables;  m represents the market-level fixed effect; and θt denotes monthly time
effects.11 This specification implies that on average there is a percentage change in the magnitude of
price differences exclusively attributable to the presence of the border, conditional on market-level
observables and common shocks across markets. However, for a pair of markets located far away
from the border and in different countries, the country-level unobserved heterogeneities can
confound the border effect. For this reason, we restrict our analysis to market pairs no more than
250 kilometers apart. Because equation (1) is a dyadic time series regression, we correct the standard
errors by including market-specific fixed effects and clustering at the monthly level, as well as by
employing dyadic standard errors (Fafchamps and Gubert 2007). Finally, mindful of the

10

Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009) control for country-specific variability by including indicator variables for Canada-Canada market
pairs in one specification, and US-US market pairs in another. As they discuss, it is not possible to control for both effects
simultaneously due to perfect multicollinearity with the border indicator variable.
11
A variable for distance between two markets is not included as an additional covariate because the transport cost between two
markets is a function of their distance between each other.

8

Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009) critique, we also examine the stability of the estimated border
effect by including indicator variables for country-specific pairs.

Regression Discontinuity Design
An advantage of regression discontinuity (RD) design in this context is its robustness to
confounding factors. By construction, the RD design focuses on subjects proximate to a treatment
threshold which, in our empirical setting, is the international border. Close to the border, crossborder markets are likely to share, on average, common unobservables. Therefore, any observed (or
detected) price differences between cross-border markets, conditional on their observable
characteristics, are likely to be due to the institutionalized border. This is particularly relevant in our
context, as the Niger-Nigeria border is not formed by natural features such as rivers, lakes or
mountains. An analysis of covariates for those markets close to the border helps assure us that price
differences in cross-border markets do not reflect discontinuities at the border in observable factors.
We use an RD design in which the assignment variable is a market’s distance to the border,
and the “treatment” status is whether the market is located in Niger or Nigeria, in the case of the
international border. This follows the work of Gopinath, Gourinchas, Hsieh, and Li (2009), who
estimate the effect of the US-Canada border on supermarket prices in each country. Our regression
discontinuity model is
(2)

ln p ijt   0  1 N j   2 D j   3 D j * N j  X jt  4   t   jt ,

where p ijt is the price of a good i in market j at time t; Nj is an indicator variable equal to 1 if market
j is in Niger and 0 if it is in Nigeria; Dj is the distance from market j to the international border (with
Dj < 0 for markets in Nigeria and Dj > 0 for markets in Niger); Xjt is a vector of variables that affect
prices in market j, such as drought or mobile phone coverage; and θt denotes monthly time effects.
We also include the latitude and longitude of market j as proxies for location-specific time-invariant

9

unobservable characteristics of market j in some specifications.12 The border effect is given by the
parameter δ1, which implies a price change by simply relocating a market across the border. For the
estimation, we restrict the sample to those markets that are located within a certain distance (in
kilometers) of the border; this approach is equivalent to a uniform kernel regression (Imbens and
Lemieux 2008).

4. Data and Measurement
This study constructs four datasets, based upon primary and secondary data collected by one
of the authors. The first includes monthly price data for millet and cowpea over an eight-year
period (1999 to 2007). These data were collected from Niger’s Agricultural Market Information
System (AMIS) and include prices from 42 markets in Niger and northern Nigeria. Millet is a staple
grain in both countries and is produced and consumed in almost all regions, with the exception of
the northern desert regions of Niger. Cowpea is similarly produced in most agro-climatic zones, but
primarily functions as a cash crop for rural households in Niger. Cowpea is highly sensitive to pest
infestations, and is consequently more perishable than millet. While region-specific differences exist
in the quality and size of both commodities, they are considered to be homogeneous goods to
farmers and traders.13 Both millet and cowpeas are heavily traded across the Niger-Nigeria border.
The second dataset includes information on the latitude and longitude of each market, the
location of the international border, and the road distances between market pairs. These data enable
us to calculate the Euclidean and road distances between market pairs, as well as the distance from
each market to the international border.
12

We interact the border term with distance to the border to show how the border effect changes with distance to the border, and
also to be consistent with Gopinath, Gourinchas, Hsieh, and Li’s (2009) approach. The latitude and longitude coordinates for each
market serve as control variables for time-invariant heterogeneities that vary continuously across geographical space..
13
Aker (2008) shows that there are no price premiums for millet or cowpea based upon color, grain size and quality.

10

The third dataset includes data on a variety of covariates that affect price dispersion across
agricultural markets in West Africa, including monthly gas prices, rainfall, road quality, district-level
population size, the date of initiation of mobile phone coverage and the Naira-CFA exchange rate.
These data were collected from a variety of primary and secondary sources, including the Direction de
la Meteo, the mobile phone companies and the Nigerien oil company (SONIDEP).
The fourth dataset is a unique panel survey of traders, transporters and market resource
persons collected by Aker between 2005 and 2007. These survey data draw on interviews with 415
traders and 205 farmers located in 35 markets and 40 villages across 6 geographic regions of Niger
and northern Nigeria. Traders and market resource persons who participated in the survey provided
detailed information about their demographic and socio-economic background and commercial
operations. These data also allow us to construct measures of the ethnic composition of each
market and village and to identify ethnic “borders.”
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the data from 1999 to 2007. Panel A includes data
for market pairs in Niger and Nigeria, whereas Panel B includes data for markets within in each
country that are located within 250 kilometers of the international border. The average price
(CFA/kg) for millet is higher in Niger than in Nigeria, with a statistically significant difference
between the two (Panel B). This is consistent with the direction of trade between the two countries,
as Niger is a net importer of millet from Nigeria. In contrast, average cowpea prices are lower in
Niger (although the difference is not statistically significant) and Niger exports cowpeas to Nigeria.
In Panel B, we do not reject the equality of means for most observable characteristics, with the
exception of the Zarma ethnic group and the frequency of urban centers. The Nigerian markets in
our sample are only composed of the Hausa and Kanuri ethnic groups.14

14

While members of the Zarma ethnic group live within Nigeria, the Zarma constitute a small percentage of the population
(approximately 88,000 people, or less than 0.0007 percent) and is geographically focused in the far northwestern region of the country
on the border with Benin and Niger (Birin n’Kebbi region).

11

5. The International Border Effect
5.1. Market Pair Regression Results

Table 2 shows the regression results for equation (1) for both millet and cowpea, for market
pairs that are within 250 kilometers of each other. Column 1 shows a statistically significant increase
in millet price dispersion of 2.1 percent due to the international border. The border effect increases
slightly when other covariates are included in the regression, such as the log of transport costs,
drought and mobile phone coverage (Column 2). The border effect is also robust to the inclusion of
country-pair fixed effects for Niger (Column 3) and Nigeria (Column 4). The coefficient does not
change when an indicator variable for intra-Niger pairs is included (Column 3 compared with
Column 2), and increases only slightly when the indicator variable for intra-Nigeria pairs is included
(Column 4 compared with Column 3). The small change in the magnitude of the border effect after
controlling for country-pair fixed effects contrasts starkly with Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009),
who found large differences when including country-pair fixed effects for the US and Canada. The
border effect also remains positive and statistically significant when market-specific fixed effects are
included (Column 5). These results are robust to using dyadic standard errors to adjust for the
spatial dependence generated by a commonly shared market for different market pairs.
While equation (1) does not include distance as a covariate because of its collinearity with
transport costs, it is instructive to calculate a km-equivalent border effect for millet to provide a
context for our results. A regression that includes the log of distance, rather than transport costs,
gives a kilometer-equivalent value of the border of 2.2 kilometers, which is far lower than the
estimates found in industrialized countries (Gorodnichenko and Tesar 2009).15 The regression
results for millet in Table 2 translate into an average transport-cost-equivalent effect of 1.65

15
The dependent variable used by Engels and Rogers (1996) is price volatility, measured as the standard deviation of the log of relative
prices between two locations. For this reason, the calculation and interpretation of the km-equivalent border effect is not strictly the
same between our model and theirs.

12

CFA/kg/km, compared with an average millet price of 124 CFA/kg in Niger and 113 CFA/kg in
Nigeria.
Columns 7 to 12 present the regression results for cowpeas. Controlling for the
international border, we find a statistically significant increase of 1.9 percent in price dispersion
across markets (Column 7). The effect is robust to the inclusion of other covariates (Column 8), but
its magnitude increases slightly. Unlike the results for millet, the magnitude of the border effect is
more sensitive to the inclusion of indicator variables for intra-Niger and intra-Nigeria market pairs,
suggesting that there could be underlying country-specific differences in price volatilities for
cowpeas (Columns 9 and 10). Nevertheless, the km-equivalent border effect is still only 2.8 km and
the transport-cost equivalent effect is 1.65 CFA/kg/km, similar to the effects for millet.
We extend the model in equation (1) to consider the potential role of ethnicity in trade and
cross-border price dispersion (Columns 6 and 12). The estimates in these columns include two
additional variables in the regression, an indicator variable for ethnicity (equal to 1 if both markets in
a pair are dominated by the same ethnic group, 0 otherwise), and an interaction term between
ethnicity and the border indicator. In this specification, the effect of the border on price dispersion
in villages with different ethnicities is represented by the coefficient on the border indicator. The
effect of the border across two markets with a common ethnicity is represented by the sum of the
coefficient on the border indicator and the coefficient on the interaction term. The effect of a
common ethnicity on price dispersion between two markets in the same country is captured by the
coefficient on the intra-ethnic dummy variable while the effect of ethnicity on prices in two markets
in different countries is represented by the sum of this coefficient and the coefficient on the
interaction variable.
The results presented in Column (6) show that millet price dispersion between intra-ethnic
market pairs within the same country is 1.4 percent lower than price dispersion between inter-ethnic
13

market pairs, although there is not a similar significant effect for cowpea (Column 12). For those
cross-border markets, having a common ethnicity lowers the price dispersion by 1.9 percent for
millet (Column 6) and 2.8 percent for cowpea (Column 12). Common ethnicity reduces price
dispersion by 3.3 percent for millet (Column 6) and 3.1 percent for cowpeas (Column 12). The
composite effect of the international border on raising the price dispersion is 2.5 percent for millet
(Column 6) and nearly zero for cowpea (Column 12), suggesting that the border effect could be
countervailed by the effect of having a common ethnicity across the border. We explore the role of
ethnicity in more detail in Section 6.
5.2. Regression Discontinuity Results

An alternative to controlling for distance explicitly is to focus on markets located close to the
international border that are likely to on average have similar observable and unobservable
characteristics. In Figures 2 and 3, we plot the time series of the average differences in the log of
prices of millet and cowpeas for those markets located within 5-km and 50-km of the international
border. The figures show that there is a wide seasonal variation in prices, with the average
differences in the log of prices range from -3 to 25 percent. Average prices are typically higher in
Niger, especially for millet.
The unconditional price differences in these figures can be analyzed in a more rigorous
manner using an RD design. The RD results for millet are presented in Table 3, and for cowpea in
Table 4. In the regressions underlying these tables, the key variable of interest is “Niger”, indicating
whether a market is in Niger (1) or Nigeria (0). A significant coefficient estimate on this variable
indicates a discontinuous change in prices between proximate markets in Niger and Nigeria,
conditional on the covariates included in the regression.
The estimates showing a higher price for millet in Niger than in proximate markets in
Nigeria presented in Table 3 are consistent with Figure 3. The results confirm a statistically
14

significant international border effect for millet, with millet prices increasing by about 22.5 percent
at the international border (Column 1) when the bandwidth is 5 kilometers. These findings are
robust to the inclusion of other covariates that could affect price changes (Column 2), including
monthly time effects and the latitude and longitude of the market (Column 3). Comparable
specifications that use all markets within 50-km of the border offer similar results (Columns 5 to 7),
although the magnitude of the border effect is diminished relative to the 5-km results. This suggests
that, as the set of markets expands to include those farther from the border, more of the price
variation of millet can be explained by the differences between Niger and Nigeria in addition to the
border alone. For the full sample estimation, we find that the border effect is indeed mitigated,
possibly due to the country-level heterogeneities (Columns 9 and 12).
The border effect for the price of millet is smaller between markets of common ethnicity
than between markets with different ethnicities. Columns 4 and 8 demonstrate this effect by
including two additional variables in the specifications, a Hausa indicator variable (equal to 1 if
traders operating in the market are primarily from the Hausa ethnic group, 0 otherwise) and an
interaction term between the Hausa and Niger indicator variables. The sum of the coefficient on the
Niger indicator variable and the interaction term shows the price difference when one crosses the
border from a Hausa market in Nigeria to a proximate Hausa market in Niger. The results in
Column 4 suggest that prices increase by 9.3 percent when crossing the border from one Hausa
market to another (and this is not statistically significant), rather than the 23.2 percent border effect
for cross-border markets which do not share the same ethnicity (and, in this case, the effect is
statistically significant). Thus, common ethnicity mitigates the international border effect. The effect
of ethnicity on the border is even more marked when considering markets within 50 km of the
international border. As shown in Column 8, the border effect for different ethnicities in this case is
20.8 percent, and for a common ethnicity is approximately 1.3 percent.
15

The RD results for cowpea (Table 4) are consistent with those for millet. Cowpea prices
change by about 27 percent at the border (Column 1), and the significance of this effect is robust to
the inclusion of other covariates (Column 2), monthly time effects, and the latitude and longitude of
the market (Column 3). As in the case of millet, common ethnicity mitigates the border effect. The
results in Column 4 show that the border effect is 40 percent bigger when cross-border markets are
comprised of different ethnic groups (with a border effect of 20.2 percent), as compared to when
they share a common ethnicity (in which case the border effect is 14.4 percent). With the wider
bandwidth, there is no evidence of a significant border effect when the cross-border markets are
both Hausa (Column 8).
5.3. Alternative Explanations for the Border Effect

We are concerned about attributing conditional price differences to a border effect when
they reflect sources other than purely the nation in which markets are located. In this subsection, we
conduct a variety of robustness checks.

Differences in Underlying Price Volatilities for Market Pairs
Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009) criticize the existing literature on border effects for being
underidentified, as it does not control for differences in underlying price volatility in each country.
We address concerns about differences in underlying price volatility in each country by considering
the kernel distributions of conditional price differences for market pairs. We estimate the regression
model:
(3)

|ln (

p ijt

pkti

)| = γ0 + X’jkt γ1+ θt + ajk + εjkt

where p ijt , pkti , Xjkt and θt are the same as those previously defined in equation (1). In some
specifications, we also include market-pair fixed effects, αjk. The two panels of Figure 4 plot the
kernel densities of the residuals from a regression model (equation 3) to examine relative conditional
16

deviations from the Law of One Price for millet and cowpea. Similar to the regression-based results,
visual inspection of the kernel densities of the residuals suggests that the underlying volatilities of
market-pair price differences are similar both across and within countries for millet and cowpea.

Differences in Market-Level Observables
A key identification assumption of the RD design is that neither observable nor
unobservable determinants of the outcome change discontinuously at the border. While it is
impossible to directly test for such an identification assumption for unobservable characteristics, we
can test whether the observed characteristics of those markets located near the border are similar, on
average. One possible reason for differences in determinants in a border analysis is the presence of
natural barriers such as rivers or mountains, but this is not the case for the border between Niger
and Nigeria. Table 5 tests for this more formally by comparing the equality of means for most
observables for markets located within 5 and 50 km of the border.16 We do not find a statistically
significant difference for most observables for these markets. The notable exception is mobile
phone coverage, as markets in northern Nigeria received coverage later than markets in Niger.
These results suggest that the border effect is not serving as a proxy for cross-border differences in
these other factors.

Market Segmentation
The presence of the international border could be a proxy for factors that limit trade
between two markets in neighboring countries. Although we do not have time series data on trade
volumes or trade flows between 1999 and 2007, we could identify certain barriers to trade that
operate on either side of the border from our trader-level data, if those barriers were present. These
data include purchase and sales markets of traders operating on the market, as well as the average
volume of agricultural products traded at different periods of the year. Table 6 shows that between
16

The equality of means for other covariates, such as market size, the market tax and the number of police controls were also tested,
with no statistically significant difference between the two groups.

17

2004 and 2007, 27 percent of traders in Nigerien markets located 50 kilometers from the
international border traded millet and cowpea with traders in northern Nigeria, whereas 55 percent
of Nigerian traders bought and sold agricultural products from Nigerien markets across the border.
While the quantities of agricultural products traded differ significantly by the period of year, there is
not a statistically significant difference in the average volume bought and sold by traders operating in
Niger and northern Nigeria during this time period. In addition, there was no statistically significant
difference in the number of traders operating on each market, nor on the number of police controls.
This suggests that market segmentation, as defined by the absence of trade between the cross-border
markets, is not the driving force behind the border effect.

6. The Internal Ethnic Border Effect
Our previous results show that a common ethnicity can diminish the effect of an
international border on price differences between countries. Does a converse result hold as well,
whereby there is a de facto border within a country, across its ethnic regions? Niger offers a good
setting for addressing this type of question since there is a strong geographic separation among
ethnic groups. However, in this way Niger is not atypical among countries in sub-Saharan Africa,
where countries are comprised of a diverse set of ethnic groups. Despite the prevalence of this
characteristic across countries, we know of no other studies on the effect of spatial ethnic diversity
on intra-national market segmentation.
We begin this section by using an RD design to estimate the impact of internal ethnic
borders on millet and cowpea prices across regions within Niger. We then offer some potential
explanations for this effect and attempt to reject alternative explanations.
6.1 Regression Discontinuity Analysis of the Internal Ethnic Border

18

We use both primary and secondary data on the ethnic composition of villages in Niger
during two periods to identify internal ethnic borders. Using census data, we first calculate the
ethnic composition of each market between 1999 and 2007, identifying those markets with both low
(i.e., purely Hausa or purely Zarma) and high degrees of ethnic diversity. The internal “ethnic”
border is identified by a set of geographic coordinates for markets with a high degree of ethnic
diversity and which separate two geographic regions with a low degree of diversity (that is, a strong
majority of Hausa or majority of Zarma).
Table 7 shows the equality of means for market-level observables on either side of this intraNiger ethnic border, at various distances from this border (<20km, <30km, >100km, or all markets).
We do not find a statistically significant difference in the means for most market-level observables,
including the frequency of drought, urban status, the number of police controls, market size and the
market tax.17 The notable exception is mobile phone coverage, with a statistical difference between
the two groups located within 20 km and 30 km from the internal border, although not at greater
distances.
Figures 5 and 6 plot the outcome of interest, the average difference in the log of prices for
millet and cowpea between markets located on either side of the Hausa-Zarma border. The average
difference in the log of prices in Zarma markets relative to prices in Hausa markets are almost
consistently higher, despite a strong seasonal variation, with prices in the Zarma region as much as
40 percent above those in Hausa regions. These plots suggest an unconditional border effect. Is
this still evident when controlling for market-level observables?
Table 8 presents the results based on the RD design for the internal border effect for millet.
Unlike the case for the Niger-Nigeria border, there are no markets located “arbitrarily close” to the
border. Consequently, any theoretically valid and optimal bandwidth proposed for a typical RD
17

Tests of the equality of means for the latter three covariates are presented in Table 10.

19

analysis is not feasible for our empirical setting. Nevertheless, for markets within 20 km and 30 km
(which, in our empirical setting, is practically close) to the ethnic border, we find statistically
significant border effects.18 Our results in Table 8 confirm the internal border effect for millet, with
millet prices increasing by about 21 percent if the market could be potentially relocated from Hausa
to Zarma areas (Column 1). The difference in ethnicity seems to create a substantial transaction cost
(or a barrier to trade) at the border. These results are robust to the inclusion of other covariates that
could affect price changes, as well as controlling for monthly time effects and the latitude and
longitude for the market’s location (Column 2). They are also robust to comparing markets located
within a 30-km radius on either side of the border, suggesting that prices change by 26 percent at the
internal border. As a falsification check, we find no evidence of an ethnic border effect when we
restrict attention to markets located at least 100 km away from the border, or when we use the full
sample.19
The results for cowpea (Table 9) are also consistent with those for millet; cowpea prices
change by 22 percent at the internal border (Column 1) and are robust to the inclusion of both timeinvariant and time-variant covariates and monthly time effects (Column 2). The effect is slightly
higher for markets located within 30 km of the internal border (Columns 3 and 4), but there is no
effect for markets located at least 100 km away from the border or for the full sample.
The internal border effect and the international border effect are similar in magnitude. The
barriers to market integration between the Hausa and Zarma regions of Niger therefore appear to be
18

In the case of markets within 20 and 30 km in Table 9, we were unable to include the “distance” or its interaction with the
“border” variable in the cowpea regressions due to numerical problems incurred in estimation, possibly due to rather limited variation
in this “distance” variable for cowpea markets.
19
Because there are no markets located arbitrarily close to the ethnic border in our empirical setting, using markets located within 20
or 30 kilometers could potentially bias the border effect. For markets located father away from the border, the border indicator is
likely to just become an indicator variable for ethnicity, representing the ethnic difference rather than the difference at the ethnic
border. As a falsification check, we deliberately select markets located more than 100 kilometers from the ethnic border and reestimate equation (2). If we find a statistically significant “border effect,” our previous results in Columns 1 to 4 could have alternative
explanations, such as ethnic differences instead of the differences at the ethnic border. Our results in Columns 5 and 6 confirm no
“border effect.” Furthermore, we re-estimate the model (equation 2) using the full sample, and do not find any “border effect” when
there should be none. As the border effect cannot be falsified by using markets father away from the border, this suggests that our
choice of markets near but not arbitrarily close to the ethnic border is not a source of bias.

20

at least as great as those imposed by the international border with Nigeria. The deadweight losses in
foregone internal trade may correspondingly be of a similar order of magnitude.
6.2 Potential Explanations of the Internal Ethnic Border Effect

The results in Section 5 show that ethnicity can mitigate the economic effects of national
boundaries and, at the same time, as shown in Section 6.1, create intra-national market segmentation
in Niger. What mechanisms account for these effects? Table 7 suggests that differences in observed
covariates at the market level are not driving the price change at the ethnic border. Nevertheless, it
may be the case that ethnic differences serve as a proxy for other effects. For example, although
French is the national language of Niger, it is not commonly spoken outside of urban areas;
therefore, we could imagine that linguistic differences could serve as a barrier to negotiation or
bargaining between the two groups. Alternatively, there could be institutional differences at the
village or market level that are vestiges of differences in colonial treatment of the Hausa and Zarma
regions or the provision of public services. Furthermore, underlying ethnic hostilities could reduce
traders’ willingness to trade with members of another ethnic group, even if they are geographically
close to one another. Finally, social networks based on trust may play an important role in
supporting intertemporal trade in credit and insurance, especially when formal institutions are weak
or absent. In this case, the barrier in question is not fundamental cultural differences across ethnic
groups, but rather a reflection in differences in trust associated with members of a similar group. We
provide suggestive evidence of each of these mechanisms below.
Differentials in Public Services, Taxes, and Trade Associations Between the Hausa and
Zarma Regions

Table 10 presents results for tests of the equality of means for market-level characteristics
along the ethnic border. All markets along the border impose market taxes, and there is no
statistically significantly difference between the tax levels across markets (0.17 CFA/kg). Similarly,

21

markets in both Hausa and Zarma regions have police controls surrounding the market, most
notably on the market day. While the number of police controls is slightly higher in Hausa markets
along the ethnic border, there is not a statistically significant difference between the two. Thus, it
does not appear as if trade-related transaction costs are driving the border effect.
Differential investments in Hausa and Zarma regions do not seem to explain the ethnic
border effect. There is not a statistically significant difference in road quality in markets near the
border, nor in the number of credit institutions located in border markets. There is also no
statistically significant difference in the traders’ membership in trade associations; approximately 1/3
of traders operating on markets in Zarma regions and 1/2 of traders operating in Hausa markets are
members of trade associations, without a statistically significant difference between the two. Finally,
traders operating on either side of the ethnic border have similar educational backgrounds, with less
than 3.5 years of schooling.
Complete Market Segmentation between Hausa and Zarma Markets

Pervasive market segmentation does not appear to be a major driving force of the internal
border effect. While time-series data on trade quantities are not available, over 50 percent of traders
operating on the border markets have similar marketing characteristics: both groups search in a
similar number of markets, have similar purchase and sales patterns, and a strong majority of traders
in both markets have never changed their principal market. When looking at the direction of trade
flows, a strong proportion of traders (over 85 percent) trade in markets located across the ethnic
border. This shows that trade in millet and cowpeas occurs between these two ethnic regions, and
that the absence of trade does not appear to be the reason for the border effect.
Linguistic differences across regions

At first glance, linguistic differences might be seen as an important contributing factor to the
border effect, as none of the Hausa traders in the border markets speak Zarma, whereas at least 20

22

percent of Zarma traders speak Hausa. Yet fluency in a common language is not required for trade
in these homogenous products. Interviews conducted by Aker with grain traders suggest that price
and quantity negotiations between Hausa and Zarma traders can be conducted with a very low level
of linguistic proficiency. A rudimentary knowledge of simple product terms and numbers in either
language is sufficient for conducting negotiations and finalizing a sale. This suggests that despite the
differences in the Hausa and Zarma languages, linguistic differences do not create a significant
transaction cost to trade, and are therefore not the major source of the ethnic border effect.
If these mechanisms do not seem to be able to account for the ethnic border effect, are
there other reasonable explanations? We next turn to two possible mechanisms that we feel are
important. These reflect the role of gender and the importance of social networks in agricultural
trade in Niger.
The Role of Culture: Gender and Trade

Males represent a majority of traders in agricultural trade in Niger, representing almost 90
percent of all traders. But there is a stark difference in the gender composition between the Hausa
and Zarma regions. In the restricted sample of markets located within 50 km of the Hausa-Zarma
border, 30 percent of traders operating on the market in Zarma are female, as compared with only 5
percent in the Hausa markets. This difference in gender composition remains when using the entire
sample, with the percentage of female traders increasing when moving farther west into Zarma
regions, and decreasing when moving farther east into Hausa regions.20
The cultural difference in gender roles, as reflected by the gender composition of Zarma and
Hausa markets, may be one source of the ethnic border effect if male Hausa traders are unwilling to

20

The difference in women’s market participation between the two ethnic groups does not suggest that women cannot have a
leadership role in Hausa culture. For example, there is a strong tradition of “Sarraounia” in the Hausa tradition – meaning “queen” or
“female chief” – which is female leadership. In the Bagagi region of Niger, the title Sarraounia refers to a lineage of women from
among whom was selected, through a specific ritual (Tarkama), a female leader who exercised both noncentralized political power and
religious authority (Tidjani Alou 2009).

23

trade with female traders in Zarma markets. This reticence could reduce the optimal quantity traded
between those markets – effectively segmenting the markets and creating a border effect.

Ethnicity in Social Networks and Access to Credit

The credit market in Niger for the formal and informal sector is far from perfect: Fewer
than 30 percent of households have access to formal financial services, with less than 15 percent
having any form of financial savings with banking institutions. While approximately 50 percent of
grain markets near the ethnic border have “credit institutions,” these are often informal in nature
and do not provide financing for grain-trading activities.
Traders often require financial services to pre-finance their purchases or to respond to
fluctuating supply and demand. According to the trader panel survey, 40 percent of grain traders
obtain loans for their business operations, with a higher percentage taking loans immediately after
the harvest period (Table 10). Similarly, over 30 percent buy or sell their commodity on credit.
When asked about the source of their trade-related loans, such as formal financial institutions,
friends, family or fellow traders, nearly 25 percent of traders stated that they borrow from other
traders. While our data do not provide detailed information on the ethnic composition of traders’
social networks, traders often borrow from other traders operating within the same market, and by
association the same ethnic group. The ethnic border within Niger may therefore reflect, at least in
part, the prevalence of credit market imperfections and the resulting reliance upon borrowing and
lending within ethnic groups.
Interpersonal networks, ethnicity and credit are closely linked within Niger. More broadly,
the interaction between trust, trade and ethnicity has long been recognized (Fafchamps 2000).
While sociologists have emphasized that African entrepreneurs prefer to do business with members
of their own ethnic group (Macharia 1988, Himbara 1994), economists have emphasized the role of

24

trust in creating an enabling environment for trade (Mitchell 1969, Coleman 1988, Greif 1993,
Platteau 1994). In particular, ethnicity may influence the allocation of credit in a number of ways,
including a preference for discrimination (Becker 1971, Akerlof 1985), erroneous expectations
(Yinger 1998), communication difficulties (Loury 1998), statistical discrimination (Arrow 1972,
Coate and Loury 1993) and network effects (Saloner, 1985, Montgomery, 1991, Taylor 2000). In the
context of imperfect credit markets, where firms and traders cannot assess the unobservable
characteristics of traders and clients, social networks can play an important role in circulating
information about credit histories and other attributes of relevance to potential trade partners.
Additionally, membership in the same ethnic group may offer a means of recourse for nonpayment
that does not exist for transactions between members of different ethnic groups.

7. Conclusion
An understanding of the sources of market segmentation and market integration are
particularly important for low income countries where efficiency gains from trade may have their
largest impacts. The results in this paper show that an international border effect exists between
Niger and Nigeria, although the magnitude of this effect is much smaller than what has been found
in industrialized countries. Furthermore, the evidence suggests greater international integration
between markets that share a common ethnicity. Results presented in this paper on the relatively
minimal international border effect (as compared to what has been found for industrial countries)
suggests that existing regional economic commissions may have been somewhat successful in
promoting cross-border trade, even across currency areas or, alternatively, that longstanding trade

25

routes– namely the one that links the Hausa of Northern Nigeria and Niger – continue to influence
current-day market integration.21
Results presented in this paper on the role of ethnicity and market integration work both
ways; not only does a common ethnicity promote international market integration between Niger
and Nigeria, but also distinct ethnicities segment markets within Niger. This appears to be driven by
social cleavages with respect to women’s roles in trade, as well as by social networks that have been
used to replace missing markets in Niger, namely in the area of credit and insurance. In such
situations, ethnic borders may map the geography of trade more effectively than international
borders do.

21
A third hypothesis figures prominently in African studies. Herbst (2000) argues that since the colonial period, the powers that
have ruled African capital cities have made mutual bargains not to threaten each other’s periphery, and that the international relations
regime has acquiesced by conferring de jure status on whomever controls the capital city. Thus weak states with porous and nondefended borders are a political equilibrium.

26

Bibliography
Akerlof, G.A. 1985. “Discriminatory, status-based wages among tradition-oriented, stochastically
trading coconut producers.” Journal of Political Economy 93(2): 265–276.
Alesina, Alberto, R. Baqir and William Easterly. 1999. “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1999,Vol. CXIV, Issue 4, pp. 1243-1284.
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara, 2000. “Participation In Heterogeneous Communities.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 115(3): 847-904.
Anene, J. C.. 1970. The International Boundaries of Nigeria 1885-1960 (New York: The Humanities
Press).
Araujo-Bonjean, Catherine, Magali Aubert, and Jonhy Egg. 2008. “Commerce du Mil en Afrique de
l’Ouest: Les Frontières Abolies?” Paper prepared for CERDI Conference on “Intégration
des Marchés et Sécurité Alimentaire dans les Pays en Développement, 3-4 November,
Université d’Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
Arrow, K.J. 1972. “Models of job discrimination.” In: Pascal, A.H. Ed., Racial Discrimination in
Economic Life. Heath, Lexington, MA.
Asiwaju, A. I., ed. (1985), Partitioned Africa : Ethnic Relations Across Africa’s International Boundaries,
1884-1984 (New York : St. Martin’s Press).
Azam, Jean-Paul. 2007. Trade, Exchange Rate and Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Becker, G.S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Ceglowski, Janet, 2003, “The Law of One Price: Intranational Evidence for Canada,” Canadian
Journal of Economics, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 373 – 400.
Charlick, Robert 1991, Niger: Personal Rule and Survival in the Sahel, Westview Press: Boulder, Colorado.
Coate, S. and G.C. Loury. 1993. “Will affirmative action policies eliminate negative
stereotypes?”American Economic Review 83(5): 1220–1240.
Coleman, J.S., 1988. “Social capital in the creation of human capital.” American Journal of Sociology
94: S95–S120.
Daubrée, C. 1995. Marchés Parallèles et Equilibres Economiques: Expériences Africaines. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Engel, Charles and John Rogers, “How Wide is the Border?” American Economic Review, Dec. 1996,
vol. 86, no. 5, pp. 1112 – 1125.

27

Easterly, William and Ross Levine (1997) “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. v112:4, p1203-50.
Fafchamps, Marcel. 2000. “Ethnicity and credit in African manufacturing.” Journal of Development
Economics. 61: 205–235
Fafchamps, Marcel and Flore Gubert. 2007. “The Formation of Risk Sharing Networks.” Journal of
Development Economics. 83(2): 326-50.
Feyrer, James, “Trade and Growth – Exploiting the Time Series Dimension,” mimeo, Dartmouth
College Economics Department, December 2008.
Frankel, Jeffrey and David Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review, vol. 89,
no. 3, 1999, pp. 379 – 399.
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nicholas Li, 2009, “Estimating
the Border Effect: Some New Evidence,” mimeo.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Linda Tesar, 2009, “Border Effect or Country Effect? Seattle May Not
Be So Far from Vancouver After All,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, no. 1,
January 2009, pp. 219 – 241.
Greif, A., 1993. Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade: the Maghribi
traders’ coalition. American Economic Review 83(3): 525–548.
Hashim, Yahaya and Kate Meagher. 1999. Cross-Border Trade and the Parallel Currency Market:
Trade and Finance in the Context of Structural Adjustment. A Case Study from Kano,
Nigeria, Nordiska Afrikainstitutet Research Report No. 113, Sweden.
Herbst, Jeffrey, 200. States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Power and Control, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Himbara, D., 1994. The failed Africanisation of commerce and industry in Kenya. World Development
22(3): 469–482.
Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux. (2008), “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice,” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 615–35.
Loury, G.C. 1998. “Discrimination in the post-civil rights era: beyond market interactions.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives. 12(2): 117–126.
Lovejoy, P. 1980. Caravans of Kola: The Hausa Kola Trade, 1700-1900. Zaria: Ahmadu Bello University
Press.
Macharia, K., 1988. “Social networks: ethnicity and the informal sector in Nairobi.” Institute for
Development Studies, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Working Paper No. 463.
Mauro, Paolo. 1995. “Corruption and Growth.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 110(3); 681-712.
28

Miles, William F. S. 1994. Hausaland Divided: Colonialism and Independence in Nigeria and Niger. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Miles, William F. S. 2005. “Development, not Division: Local versus External Perceptions of the
Niger-Nigeria.” The Journal of Modern African Studies. 43:2:297-320 Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, J. Clyde, ed., 1969. Social Networks in Urban Situations, Manchester University Press,
Manchester, U.K..
Montgomery, J.D., 1991. “Social networks and labor-market outcomes: toward an economic
analysis.” American Economic Review 81(5): 1408–1418.
Oyejide, A., O. Ogunkola and A. Bankole. 2005. “Import Prohibition as a Trade Policy Instrument:
The Nigerian Experience,” In P. Gallagher, P. Low and A. Stoler, eds, Managing the Challenges
of WTO Participation: 45 Case Studies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Parsley, David, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2001. “Explaining the Border Effect: The Role of Exchange
Rate Variability, Shipping Costs, and Geography,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 55, pp.
87 – 105.
Platteau, J., 1994. “Behind the market stage where real societies exist: Part II. The role of moral
norms.” Journal of Development Studies 30(4): 753–815.
Saloner, G., 1985. Old boy networks as screening mechanisms. Journal of Labor Economics 3(3):
pp. 255–267.
Taylor, C.R., 1997. “The old-boy network and the young-gun effect.” International Economic Review,
Vol. 41, no. 4, November.
Tidjani Alou, Antoinette. 2009. “Niger and Sarraounia: One Hundred Years of Forgetting Female
Leadership.” Research in African Literatures. 40(1): 1527-2044.
United Nations Development Program. 2009. Human Development Report 2007/2008: Fighting Climate
Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World. New York, NY: UNDP.
Yinger, John, 1998. Evidence on Discrimination in Consumer Markets, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 23-40

29

Figure 1. International Borders and Ethnic Groups in Niger and northern Nigeria

Notes: A map of the current ethnic and international borders for Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger and Nigeria, as
well as the geographic location of major grain markets in these countries. Each color reflects the geographic location
of different ethnic groups within Niger and surrounding countries. As currently drawn, the ethnic boundaries appear
to correspond to administrative (departmental) boundaries, which is not the case; in most cases the ethnic boundary
is located within a particular department. Nevertheless, the map shows the general geographic locations of each
group. Ethnic boundaries created from the authors’ household and trader-level data collected between 2005-2007.

30

m
20 10
00
m
20 1
00
m
20 4
00
20 m7
00
m
20 10
01
m
20 1
01
m
20 4
01
20 m7
01
m
20 10
02
m
20 1
02
m
20 4
02
m
20
02 7
m
20 10
03
m
20 1
03
m
20 4
03
20 m7
03
m
20 10
04
m
20 1
04
m
20 4
04
20 m7
04
m
20 10
05
m
20 1
05
m
20 4
05
m
20
05 7
m
20 10
06
m
20 1
06
m
20 4
06
20 m7
06
m
20 10
07
m
20 1
07
m
20 4
07
20 m7
07
m
10

19
99

-.1

Average difference in log of millet price
0
.1
.2
.3
99
m
20 10
00
m
20 1
00
m
20 4
00
20 m7
00
m
20 10
01
m
20 1
01
m
20 4
01
20 m7
01
m
20 10
02
m
20 1
02
m
20 4
02
20 m7
02
m
20 10
03
m
20 1
03
m
20 4
03
20 m7
03
m
20 10
04
m
20 1
04
m
20 4
04
20 m7
04
m
20 10
05
m
20 1
05
m
20 4
05
20 m7
05
m
20 10
06
m
20 1
06
m
20 4
06
20 m7
06
m
20 10
07
m
20 1
07
m
20 4
07
20 m7
07
m
10

19

-.1

Average difference in log of millet price
0
.1
.2
.3

Figure 2. Average Difference in the Log of Millet Prices: Difference=Niger-Nigeria

Difference in log of prices between Niger and Nigeria, within 5 km to the border
Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

Difference in log of prices between Niger and Nigeria, within 50 km to the borde
Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

31

m
1
20 0
00
m
20 1
00
m
20 4
00
20 m7
00
m
1
20 0
01
m
20 1
01
m
20 4
01
20 m7
01
m
1
20 0
02
m
20 1
02
m
20 4
02
20 m7
02
m
1
20 0
03
m
20 1
03
m
20 4
03
20 m7
03
m
1
20 0
04
m
20 1
04
m
20 4
04
20 m7
04
m
1
20 0
05
m
20 1
05
m
20 4
05
20 m7
05
m
1
20 0
06
m
20 1
06
m
20 4
06
20 m7
06
m
1
20 0
07
m
20 1
07
m
20 4
07
20 m7
07
m
10

19
99

Average difference in log of cowpea price
-.4
-.2
0
.2
.4
m
1
20 0
00
m
20 1
00
m
20 4
00
20 m7
00
m
1
20 0
01
m
20 1
01
m
20 4
01
20 m7
01
m
1
20 0
02
m
20 1
02
m
20 4
02
20 m7
02
m
1
20 0
03
m
20 1
03
m
20 4
03
20 m7
03
m
1
20 0
04
m
20 1
04
m
20 4
04
20 m7
04
m
1
20 0
05
m
20 1
05
m
20 4
05
20 m7
05
m
1
20 0
06
m
20 1
06
m
20 4
06
20 m7
06
m
1
20 0
07
m
20 1
07
m
20 4
07
20 m7
07
m
10

19
99

Average difference in log of cowpea price
-.4
-.2
0
.2
.4

Figure 3. Average Difference in the Log of Cowpea Prices: Difference=Niger-Nigeria

Difference in log of prices between Niger and Nigeria, within 5 km to the border
Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

Difference in log of prices between Niger and Nigeria, within 50 km to the borde
Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

32

Figure 4. Kernel Distributions for Millet and Cowpea Prices

Plot of Residuals: Millet

0

2

4

6

Prs < 150km

-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

x
Niger-Nigeria Pairs
Nigeria-Nigeria Pairs

Niger-Niger Pairs

Plot of Residuals: Cowpea

0

1

2

3

4

Prs < 150km

-.5

0

.5
x

Niger-Nigeria Pairs
Nigeria-Nigeria Pairs

33

1
Niger-Niger Pairs

1.5

34

Difference in log of prices between Hausa and Zarma, at least 100 km away from t
Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

20
05
m
7
20
05
m
10
20
06
m
1
20
06
m
4
20
06
m
7
20
06
m
10
20
07
m
1
20
07
m
4
20
07
m
7
20
07
m
10

20
06
m
1
20
06
m
4
20
06
m
7
20
06
m
10
20
07
m
1
20
07
m
4
20
07
m
7
20
07
m
10

20
05
m
1

20
04
m
7
20
04
m
10

20
04
m
4

20
04
m
1

20
03
m
7
20
03
m
10

20
03
m
4

20
03
m
1

20
02
m
7
20
02
m
10

20
02
m
4

20
02
m
1

20
01
m
7
20
01
m
10

20
01
m
4

20
01
m
1

20
00
m
7
20
00
m
10

20
00
m
4

20
00
m
1

19
99
m
10

20
05
m
4

Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

20
05
m
7
20
05
m
10

Average difference in log of millet price
0
.1
.2
.3
.4

Difference in log of prices between Hausa and Zarma, within 30 km to the border

20
05
m
4

20
05
m
1

20
04
m
7
20
04
m
10

20
04
m
4

20
04
m
1

20
03
m
7
20
03
m
10

20
03
m
4

20
03
m
1

20
02
m
7
20
02
m
10

20
02
m
4

20
02
m
1

20
01
m
7
20
01
m
10

20
01
m
4

20
01
m
1

20
00
m
7
20
00
m
10

20
00
m
4

20
00
m
1

19
99
m
10

-.2

Average difference in log of millet price
0
.2
.4
.6

20
07
m
7
20
07
m
10

20
07
m
4

20
07
m
1

20
06
m
7
20
06
m
10

20
06
m
4

20
06
m
1

20
05
m
7
20
05
m
10

20
05
m
4

20
05
m
1

20
04
m
7
20
04
m
10

20
04
m
4

20
04
m
1

20
03
m
7
20
03
m
10

20
03
m
4

20
03
m
1

20
02
m
7
20
02
m
10

20
02
m
4

20
02
m
1

20
01
m
7
20
01
m
10

20
01
m
4

20
01
m
1

20
00
m
7
20
00
m
10

20
00
m
4

20
00
m
1

19
99
m
10

-.2

Average difference in log of millet price
0
.2
.4
.6

Figure 5. Average Difference in the Log of Millet Prices: Difference=Zarma-Hausa

Difference in log of prices between Hausa and Zarma, within 20 km to the border

Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

35

Difference in log of prices between Hausa and Zarma, at least 100 km away from t
Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007
20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

07

07

07

07

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

06

06

06

06
20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

05

05

05

05

20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

04

04

04

20

20

20

20

04

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

03

03

03

03

20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

02

02

02

02

20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

01

01

01

01

20

20

20

20

7

4

10

m

m

m

00

00

00

20

20

20

20

1

10

m

m

00

99

20

19

Average difference in log of cow pea price
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

07

07

07

07

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

06

06

06

06
20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

05

05

05

05
20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

04

04

04
20

20

20

20

04

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

03

03

03

03

20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

02

02

02

02

20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

01

01

01

01

20

20

20

20

7

4

10

m

m

m

00

00

00

20

20

20

20

1

10

m

m

00

99

20

19

Average difference in log of cow pea price
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6

20

7

4

1

7

4

1

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

10

m

m

07

07

07

07

20

20

m
m

m

06

06

06

06
20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

05

05

05

05
20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

04

04

04
20

20

20

20

04

7

10

m

m

m

m

03

03

03

03
20

20

20

20

1
4

10

m

m

m

m

02

02

02

02
20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

m

01

01

01

01
20

20

20

20

7

4

1

10

m

m

m

00

00

00

20

20

20

20

10

m

m

00

99

20

19

Average difference in log of cow pea price
0
.2
.4
.6

Figure 6. Average Difference in the Log of Cowpea Prices: Difference=Zarma-Hausa

Difference in log of prices between Hausa and Zarma, within 20 km to the border

Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

Difference in log of prices between Hausa and Zarma, within 30 km to the border
Monthly data from Oct. 1999 to Sept. 2007

Table 1. Comparison of Observables by Country (Niger-Nigeria)

Observables

Unconditional Mean
Market Pairs
Market Pairs
within Northern
within Niger
Nigeria
Mean (s.d.)
Mean (s.d.)

Difference in
Means

Unconditional
s.e.

Panel A. Market Pair Level Data
Distance between markets (km)

375.29(207)

369(271)

5.38(65)

Road Quality between markets

.37(.49)

.6(.52)

-.22(.16)

Cell Phone Coverage (2007)
Transport Costs between Markets
(CFA/kg)

.89(.32)

.6(.52)

.29*(.16)

12.35(6.72)

12.19(6.67)

.16(.22)

Niger

Nigeria

124.33(33)

112.96(31)

11.60***(1.83)

173(56)

176 (56)

-3.21(3.36)

Hausa

.58(.51)

.8(.447)

'-.21(.21)

Zarma

.29(.464)

0

.29***(.096)

Kanuri

.08(.27)

.2 (.447)

-.12(.19)

.71(.46)

.75(.5)

.041(.25)

105.08(90)

176.75(149)

'-71.66(69)

Cell Phone Coverage (2007)

.95(.020)

.8(.447)

.158(.19)

Drought between 1999-2007

.027(.162)

.025(.156)

.002(.007)

.35(.49)

0.8 (.45)

.45*(.21)

Panel B. Market Level Data
Millet Price level (CFA/kg)
Cowpea Price Level (CFA/kg)
Ethnic composition of traders

Road Quality to Market
Market Size

Urban center(>=35,000)

Notes: Data from secondary sources and the the Niger trader survey collected by one of the authors. In
Panel B, "Niger" markets are those that are in Niger and within 250 km of the Nigerian border, and
"Nigeria" markets are those markets in Nigeria and within 250km of the border. Huber-White robust
standard errors clustered by market pair-month (Panel A) and by market-month (Panel B) are in
parentheses. * is significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
Prices are deflated by the Nigerien Consumer Price Index.

36

Table 2. International Border Effect using Market Pair Regressions

Millet
Dependent variable: |ln (Pit/Pjt)|

Niger-Nigeria border

Cowpea

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

.021***
(.003)

.025***
(.003)

.025***
(.003)

.032***
(.007)

.018***
(.002)

.044***
(.007)

.019**
(.009)

.024***
(.008)

.024***
(.008)

.047***
(.009)

.033***
(.008)

.027***
(.008)

.007
(.008)

Niger Market

.022*
(.012)
-.007
(.008)

Nigeria Market
0.05***
(.003)

ln (transport costs)

0.05***
(.003)

0.05***
(.003)

-.022*
(.012)
0.04***
(.003)

0.05***
(.002)

.066***
(.004)

.066***
(.004)

.066***
(.004)

.065***
(.004)

Intra-ethnic

-.014***
(.003)

-.003
(.003)

Intra-ethnic*border

-.019***
(.007)

-.028**
(.011)

.141***
(.005)

.095***
(.003)

.052***
(.006)

.095***
(.003)

.038***
(.006)

.097***
(.003)

.276***
(.000)

.192***
(.005)

.170***
(.011)

.192***
(.005)

.102***
(.013)

.191
(.005)

Other covariates

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Market-Specific Fixed Effects

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

Monthly time dummy

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

# of observations

23760

23760

23760

23760

23760

23760

22689

22689

22689

22689

22689

22689

Dyadic s.e.

0.005

0.005

0.005

0.005

0.006

0.006

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

R2

0.0109

0.0505

0.1609

0.0831

0.2956

0.086

0.0761

0.1064

0.1066

0.1066

0.2724

0.1069

Constant

-.033***
(.007)
.025***
(.003)

Joint effect (same) ethnicity
Joint effect border

-.031**
(.010)
-.001
(.009)

Notes: Data from the Niger trader survey and secondary sources collected by one of the authors. Additional covariates include the presence of drought, mobile phone coverage
and urban status. Intra-ethnic is equal to one if both markets in a pair have the same ethnic composition, 0 otherwise. All regressions are clustered by month to correct for spatial
dependence between markets over time. * is significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.

37

Table 3: RD Estimates of Niger-Nigeria Border Effect on Millet Price
Dependent variable:
Log of millet price
Niger

Within 5 km to the Niger-Nigeria Border
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Within 50 km to the Niger-Nigeria Border
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

(9)

Full Sample
(10)
(11)

(12)

0.225***

0.173*

0.238***

0.232***

0.168***

0.155**

0.183**

0.208***

0.089*

0.085*

0.068

0.138***

(0.035)

(0.076)

(0.041)

(0.020)

(0.048)

(0.069)

(0.083)

(0.028)

(0.045)

(0.046)

(0.061)

(0.040)

Distance to the
Border

0.013***

0.019**

-0.007

0.013

0.030***

0.027**

0.021

0.019***

-0.000

-0.000

-0.001*

-0.001**

(0.001)

(0.007)

(0.011)

(0.008)

(0.006)

(0.009)

(0.014)

(0.007)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.000)

Niger*Distance

-0.074***

-0.076***

-0.036*

-0.044*

-0.080***

-0.069**

-0.061**

-0.027*

0.001

0.001

0.002

0.001*

(0.008)

(0.011)

(0.018)

(0.019)

(0.019)

(0.026)

(0.024)

(0.015)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Hausa

-0.013

Hausa*Niger
Composite Niger
Effect
Composite Hausa
Effect
Constant
Time-variant
covariates
Time-invariant
covariates
Time effect
(monthly)
Sample size

0.007

-0.061***

(0.019)

(0.015)

(0.014)

-0.138

-0.195***

-0.116***

(0.077)

(0.032)

(0.034)

0.093

0.012

0.022

(0.078)

(0.037)

(0.028)

-0.151*

-0.188***

-0.177***

(0.072)

(0.030)

(0.030)

4.729***

4.755***

3.569***

4.751***

4.743***

4.745***

3.163***

4.741***

4.685***

4.682***

3.935***

4.729***

(0.007)

(0.014)

(0.760)

(0.011)

(0.014)

(0.016)

-0.632

(0.008)

(0.011)

(0.015)

(0.499)

(0.005)

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

625

625

625

625

1,304

1,304

1,304

1,304

4,017

4,017

4,017

4,017

Notes: Estimation is based on monthly market-level data. Columns (1) to (4) include markets located within 5 km to the Niger-Nigeria border; Columns (5) to (8) include markets located within 50
km to the Niger-Nigeria border; Columns (9) to (12) include all markets. The “Niger-Nigeria Border” is a binary variable: equal to 1 if a market is located in Niger; and equal to 0 if the market is
located in Nigeria. Distance is measured in kilometers. The “Hausa” is a binary variable: equal to 1 if a market is located in the Hausa ethnic region; and equal to 0 otherwise. Time-variant covariates
include having mobile phone coverage (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0) and having experienced drought (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0). Time-invariant covariates include the latitude and longitude of
a market location. Standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are robust to market level clustering in the conditional variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.1.

38

Table 4: RD Estimates of Niger-Nigeria Border Effect on Cowpea Price
Dependent variable:
Log of cowpea price
Niger-Nigeria Border
Distance to the Border
Border*Distance

Within 5 km to the Niger-Nigeria Border
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(9)

Full Sample
(10)
(11)

(12)

0.266***

0.195**

0.202***

0.202***

0.279***

0.268***

0.214**

0.278***

0.017

0.011

-0.016

0.149**

(0.048)

(0.080)

(0.051)

(0.045)

(0.048)

(0.063)

(0.092)

(0.054)

(0.070)

(0.068)

(0.069)

(0.058)

-0.020

-0.008

-0.032

-0.033

0.005

0.002

0.037**

-0.031

0.000

0.000

-0.001

0.000

(0.016)

(0.011)

(0.017)

(0.018)

(0.016)

(0.017)

(0.016)

(0.023)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.000)

-0.027

-0.039**

0.007

0.020

-0.082**

-0.068*

-0.116***

0.025

-0.001

-0.001

-0.000

-0.001

(0.019)

(0.014)

(0.025)

(0.018)

(0.028)

(0.033)

(0.034)

(0.031)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

Hausa
Hausa*Border
Composite Border Effect
Composite Hausa Effect
Constant

Within 50 km to the Niger-Nigeria Border
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

-0.117

-0.092

0.027

(0.072)

(0.071)

(0.029)

-0.057

-0.187*

-0.239***

(0.071)

(0.092)

(0.054)

0.144**

0.090

-0.090*

(0.057)

(0.098)

(0.046)

-0.175***

-0.279***

-0.213***

(0.005)

(0.064)

(0.045)

5.050***

5.104***

3.799***

5.111***

5.070***

5.086***

4.921***

5.089***

5.120***

5.123***

4.498***

5.099***

(0.025)

(0.034)

(0.757)

(0.021)

(0.028)

(0.027)

(0.949)

(0.015)

(0.038)

(0.026)

(0.639)

(0.009)

Time-variant covariates
Time-invariant covariates
Time effect (monthly)

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sample size

563

563

563

563

1,247

1,247

1,247

1,247

3,862

3,862

3,862

3,862

Notes: Estimation is based on monthly market-level data. Columns (1) to (4) include markets located within 5 km to the Niger-Nigeria border; Columns (5) to (8) include markets
located within 50 km to the Niger-Nigeria border; Columns (9) to (12) include all markets. The “Niger-Nigeria Border” is a binary dummy variable: equal to 1 if a market is
located in Niger; and equal to 0 if the market is located in Nigeria. Distance is measured in kilometers. The “Hausa” is a binary dummy variable: equal to 1 if a market is located
in the Hausa ethnic region; and equal to 0 otherwise. Time-variant covariates include having mobile phone coverage (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0) and having experienced
drought (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0). Time-invariant covariates include the latitude and longitude of a market location. Standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are
robust to market level clustering in the conditional variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

39

Table 5: Equality of Means for Market-Level Characteristics and the Niger-Nigeria Border
Dependent variable: Niger-Nigeria border dummy
(=1 in Niger; =0 in Nigeria)

(1)

Having mobile phone coverage (1) or not (0)

0.487*
(0.247)
0.002
(0.078)
-0.524
(0.295)
0.636**
(0.265)
768

Having experienced drought (1) or not (0)
Being an urban center (1) or not (0)
Constant
Sample size

(2)

0.409**
(0.148)
0.055
(0.060)
-0.311
(0.200)
0.781***
(0.141)
1,536

(3)

0.176*
(0.103)
0.049
(0.030)
-0.263**
(0.119)
0.927***
(0.046)
4,512

Notes: Estimation is based on monthly market-level data including monthly time effects. Column (1) includes markets
located within 5 km to the Niger-Nigeria border; Column (2) includes markets located within 50 km to the NigerNigeria border; Column (3) includes all markets. The mobile phone coverage is measured at market level in each
month. The drought variable for a market in a month equals 1: 1) if the market receives rainfall less than or equal to 2
standard deviations below its average rainfall level during the rainy season, or 2) if there are 15 consecutive days
without rainfall during the rainy season; and equals 0 otherwise. The urban variable for a market equals 1 if the market
is located in an urban center with at least 35,000 people; and equals 0 otherwise. Standard errors are robust to market
level clustering in the conditional variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

40

Table 6: Difference in Trader-Level Characteristics between Niger and northern Nigeria

Trading Behavior
Number of markets followed
Number of market contacts
Number of purchase and sales markets
Trade in cross-border markets within a 50-km radius
Quantity traded in 2005/2006 (kg)
Number of police controls
Market Size

Niger
Mean
s.d.

Nigeria
Mean
s.d.

4.35
4.24
4.36
0.27
12936
3.80
97.3

5.29
5.00
5.38
0.55
10025
4.00
176.75

3.90
3.89
2.85
0.22
59696
0.90
80.7

2.21
5.59
1.92
0.07
14106
1.00
149

Coefficient

-0.93
-0.76
-1.01
-0.28**
-2911
-0.17
-79.42

S.e.

0.84
2.12
0.68
0.05
36096
0.69
73.02

Notes: Data from the Niger trader survey and secondary sources collected by Aker. N=415 traders, 37 markets. Huber-White
robust standard errors are in parentheses. * is significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at
the 1% level.

41

Table 7: Equality of Means for Market-Level Characteristics and the Hausa-Zarma Border
Dependent variable: Hausa-Zarma border dummy
(=1 in Zarma; =0 in Hausa)
Having mobile phone coverage (1) or not (0)
Having experienced drought (1) or not (0)
Being an urban center (1) or not (0)
Constant
Sample size

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.524*
(0.192)
0.065
(0.073)
-0.003
(0.558)
0.280
(0.287)
480

0.604***
(0.119)
0.060
(0.058)
-0.176
(0.493)
0.419
(0.256)
576

-0.101
(0.131)
-0.043
(0.066)
0.067
(0.202)
0.276**
(0.112)
2,592

-0.028
(0.109)
-0.005
(0.060)
0.026
(0.179)
0.353***
(0.100)
3,552

Notes: Estimation is based on monthly market-level data including monthly time effects. Column (1) includes markets
located within 20 km to the Hausa-Zarma border; Column (2) includes markets located within 30 km to the HausaZarma border; Column (3) includes markets located at least 100 km away from the Hausa-Zarma border; Column (4)
includes all markets. The mobile phone coverage is measured at market level in each month. The drought variable for
a market in a month equals 1: 1) if the market receives rainfall less than or equal to 2 standard deviations below its
average rainfall level during the rainy season, or 2) if there are 15 consecutive days without rainfall during the rainy
season; and equals 0 otherwise. The urban variable for a market equals 1 if the market is located in an urban center
with at least 35,000 people; and equals 0 otherwise. Standard errors are robust to market level clustering in the
conditional variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

42

Table 8: RD Estimates of Hausa-Zarma Border Effect on Millet Price

Dependent variable:
Log of millet price
Hausa-Zarma Border
Distance to the Border
Border*Distance
Constant
Distance-squared
Distance-cubic
Time-variant covariates
Time-invariant covariates
Time effect (monthly)
Sample size

Within 20 km to the
border
(1)
(2)
0.212***
(0.011)
-0.005***
(0.001)
-0.002*
(0.001)
4.791***
(0.011)
No
No
No
No
No
333

0.278***
(0.053)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.005)
4.401***
(0.406)
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
333

Within 30 km to the
border
(3)
(4)
0.173***
(0.016)
-0.007***
(0.001)
0.005*
(0.002)
4.808***
(0.008)
Yes
No
No
No
No
420

0.264***
(0.036)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.005)
4.351***
(0.068)
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
420

At least 100 km away from the
border
(5)
(6)
-0.126
(0.155)
0.000
(0.003)
0.000
(0.006)
4.972***
(0.333)
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
2,408

0.070
(0.151)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.003)
4.058***
(0.633)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,408

Full Sample
(7)
(8)
0.035
(0.054)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)
4.817***
(0.040)
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
3,206

0.057
(0.051)
-0.001**
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
4.337***
(0.375)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,206

Notes: Estimation is based on monthly market-level data. Columns (1) and (2) include markets located within 20 km to the Hausa-Zarma border; Columns (3) and (4)
include markets located within 30 km to the Hausa-Zarma border; Columns (5) and (6) include markets located at least 100 km away from the Hausa-Zarma border.
Columns (7) and (8) include all markets. The “Hausa-Zarma Border” is a binary dummy variable: equal to 1 if a market is located in Zarma; and equal to 0 if the market
is located in Hausa. Distance is measured in kilometers. Time-variant covariates include having mobile phone coverage (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0) and having
experienced drought (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0). Time-invariant covariates include the latitude and longitude of a market location. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Standard errors are robust to market level clustering in the conditional variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

43

Table 9: RD Estimates of Hausa-Zarma Border Effect on Cowpea Price

Dependent variable:
Log of cowpea price
Hausa-Zarma Border

Within 20 km to the
border
(1)
(2)

Within 30 km to the
border
(3)
(4)

0.215**
(0.037)

0.222***
(0.004)

0.256***
(0.029)
-0.012**
(0.002)

0.295***
(0.003)
-0.015***
(0.001)

4.966***
(0.000)
No
No
No
No
No
267

5.721***
(0.195)
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
267

5.047***
(0.015)
No
No
No
No
No
355

3.184***
(0.290)
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
355

Distance to the Border
Border*Distance
Constant
Distance-squared
Distance-cubic
Time-variant covariates
Time-invariant covariates
Time effect (monthly)
Sample size

At least 100 km away from the
border
(5)
(6)
0.151
(0.136)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.008
(0.006)
4.777***
(0.310)
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
2,362

-0.008
(0.192)
-0.003*
(0.002)
0.003
(0.004)
6.032***
(1.019)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,362

Full Sample
(7)
(8)
0.064
(0.063)
-0.002**
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.001)
4.981***
(0.035)
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
3,094

-0.071
(0.088)
-0.003***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.001)
6.105***
(0.618)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3,094

Notes: Estimation is based on monthly market-level data. Columns (1) and (2) include markets located within 20 km to the Hausa-Zarma border; Columns (3) and (4)
include markets located within 30 km to the Hausa-Zarma border; Columns (5) and (6) include markets located at least 100 km away from the Hausa-Zarma border.
Columns (7) and (8) include all markets. The “Hausa-Zarma Border” is a binary dummy variable: equal to 1 if a market is located in Zarma; and equal to 0 if the market is
located in Hausa. Distance is measured in kilometers. Time-variant covariates include having mobile phone coverage (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0) and having
experienced drought (equal to 1) or not (equal to 0). Time-invariant covariates include the latitude and longitude of a market location. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Standard errors are robust to market level clustering in the conditional variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

44

Table 10: Difference in Trader-Level Characteristics between Hausa and Zarma Regions
Zarma
Mean
s.d.

Hausa
Mean
s.d.

Coefficient

S.e.

Demographic Characteristics
Years of Education
Age
Speak Hausa Language
Speak Zarma Language
Gender

2.18
43.20
0.20
0.70
0.29

2.70
13.40
0.40
0.48
0.46

3.05
44.10
1.00
0.00
0.05

2.56
11.05
0.00
0.00
0.23

-0.88
-0.91
-0.80***
0.70***
0.24***

0.60
2.78
0.06
0.08
0.08

Firm Characteristics
Association Membership
Years of Experience
Number of employees
Have partners
Change original market
Retailer
Have financial account

0.33
11.48
3.44
0.29
0.08
0.59
0.11

0.48
8.22
5.10
0.46
0.27
0.50
0.32

0.47
15.20
4.00
0.24
0.11
0.55
0.24

0.51
9.38
3.11
0.49
0.31
0.50
0.44

-0.14
-3.78*
-0.56
0.06
-0.03
0.03
-0.13

0.11
1.99
0.94
0.11
0.07
0.11
0.09

Trading Behavior
Number of markets followed
Use mobile phone for trading
Number of market contacts
Number of purchase and sales markets
Trade in markets within a 50-km radius
Take a loan
Take a loan from a fellow trader
Number of credit institutions
Number of police controls
Market tax (CFA/kg)
Road quality (1=paved, 0=unpaved)

2.82
0.44
2.53
3.51
0.85
0.36
0.21
0.50
1.00
0.75
1.00

1.92
0.50
2.47
1.96
0.24
0.48
0.42
0.70
1.38
0.25
0.00

3.50
0.38
2.93
4.53
0.94
0.38
0.23
0.67
1.83
0.92
1.00

3.96
0.49
4.09
2.88
0.14
0.49
0.42
0.67
1.20
0.14
0.00

-0.68
0.06
-0.40
-1.01*
-0.09*
-0.02
-0.01
-0.02
-0.83
0.17
0.00

0.71
0.08
0.88
0.56
0.05
0.10
0.09
0.10
1.35
0.17
0.71

Notes: Data from the Niger trader survey and secondary sources collected by Aker. N=415 traders, 35
markets. Huber-White robust standard errors are in parentheses. * is significant at the 10% level, **
significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.

45

