                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ONLINE LABORATORY:
               CONDUCTING EXPERIMENTS IN A REAL LABOR MARKET

                                          John J. Horton
                                          David G. Rand
                                       Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                        Working Paper 15961
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15961


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




This research has been supported by the NSF-IGERT program "Multidisciplinary Program in Inequality
and Social Policy" at Harvard University (Grant No. 0333403). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by John J. Horton, David G. Rand, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Online Laboratory: Conducting Experiments in a Real Labor Market
John J. Horton, David G. Rand, and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 15961
May 2010
JEL No. C70,C91,C92,C93,J2

                                             ABSTRACT

Online labor markets have great potential as platforms for conducting experiments, as they provide
immediate access to a large and diverse subject pool and allow researchers to conduct randomized
controlled trials. We argue that online experiments can be just as valid – both internally and externally
– as laboratory and field experiments, while requiring far less money and time to design and to conduct.
In this paper, we first describe the benefits of conducting experiments in online labor markets; we
then use one such market to replicate three classic experiments and confirm their results. We confirm
that subjects (1) reverse decisions in response to how a decision-problem is framed, (2) have pro-social
preferences (value payoffs to others positively), and (3) respond to priming by altering their choices.
We also conduct a labor supply field experiment in which we confirm that workers have upward sloping
labor supply curves. In addition to reporting these results, we discuss the unique threats to validity
in an online setting and propose methods for coping with these threats. We also discuss the external
validity of results from online domains and explain why online results can have external validity equal
to or even better than that of traditional methods, depending on the research question. We conclude
with our views on the potential role that online experiments can play within the social sciences, and
then recommend software development priorities and best practices.


John J. Horton                                      Richard J. Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government                John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University                                  Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street                           79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
john_horton@ksgphd.harvard.edu                      and NBER
                                                    richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
David G. Rand
Program for Evolutionary Dynamics
Harvard University
1 Brattle Square, Ste. 6
Cambridge MA 02138
drand@fas.harvard.edu
                       The Online Laboratory:
            Conducting Experiments in a Real Labor Market∗
             John J. Horton†             David G. Rand‡             Richard J. Zeckhauser§


                                                   Abstract
            Online labor markets have great potential as platforms for conducting experiments, as
        they provide immediate access to a large and diverse subject pool and allow researchers to
        conduct randomized controlled trials. We argue that online experiments can be just as valid—
        both internally and externally—as laboratory and field experiments, while requiring far less
        money and time to design and to conduct. In this paper, we first describe the benefits of
        conducting experiments in online labor markets; we then use one such market to replicate three
        classic experiments and confirm their results. We confirm that subjects (1) reverse decisions
        in response to how a decision-problem is framed, (2) have pro-social preferences (value payoffs
        to others positively), and (3) respond to priming by altering their choices. We also conduct
        a labor supply field experiment in which we confirm that workers have upward sloping labor
        supply curves. In addition to reporting these results, we discuss the unique threats to validity
        in an online setting and propose methods for coping with these threats. We also discuss
        the external validity of results from online domains and explain why online results can have
        external validity equal to or even better than that of traditional methods, depending on the
        research question. We conclude with our views on the potential role that online experiments
        can play within the social sciences, and then recommend software development priorities and
        best practices.
JEL: J2, C93, C91, C92, C70
Keywords: Experimentation, Online Labor Markets, Internet



1       Introduction

Some of the first experiments in economics were conducted in the late 1940s to test predictions
from the emerging field of game theory. While the research questions were complex, the tools were
    ∗
     Thanks to Alex Breinin and Xiaoqi Zhu for excellent research assistance. Thanks to Samuel Arbesman, Dana
Chandler, Anna Dreber, Rezwan Haque, Robin Yerkes Horton, and Stephanie Hurder for helpful comments, as well
as to participants in the Online Experimentation Workshop hosted by Harvard’s Berkman Center for Internet and
Society. This research has been supported by the NSF-IGERT program “Multidisciplinary Program in Inequality
and Social Policy” at Harvard University (Grant No. 0333403).
   †
     Harvard University.http://sites.google.com/site/johnjosephhorton.
   ‡
     Harvard University.http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/˜drand.
   §
     Harvard University.http://www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/rzeckhau.

                                                       1
simple; paper, pencils, blackboards and marbles were sufficient instruments to present stimuli and

capture subjects’ choices and actions.1 By the early 1990s, researchers had developed tools for
conducting experiments over local computer networks, with subjects receiving stimuli and making

decisions via computer terminal (Fischbacher, 2007). This development made it easier to carry out
game play and collect data, easing the burden placed on experimenters. However, the advantages of
computer-mediation were not merely logistical; experimenters also gained greater control over the

flow of information and thereby reduced the relevance of potentially confounding factors. Computer-

mediation quickly became the primary means for conducting laboratory experiments. Nevertheless,
even today, human subjects are still brought into physical labs to participate in experiments that
could, at least in principle, be conducted over the Internet with less inconvenience to the subjects

and less cost in time and money to the experimenters. Why have we not built the online laboratory?
      The case for online experimentation is strong; the clearest advantage of the online laboratory is

that there is no need to physically aggregate subjects and compensate them for their travel. This
advantage is so obvious that social scientists recognized it more than a decade ago. In 1997, the

National Science Foundation sponsored a workshop called NetLab to investigate the potential of
online experimentation (Bainbridge, 2007). That workshop’s report identified the major advantages
of online experimentation, including larger sample sizes, greater subject diversity, and lengthier

experiments. NetLab’s participants optimistically concluded:

        If the nascent laboratory experimental approach is encouraged and is coupled with new

        technological innovations, then the SBE [social, behavioral, and economic sciences] dis-

        ciplines will be primed for major scientific advances.

      The “if” in that conclusion hinged on some rather mundane obstacles: funding, particularly for
software development, and technical training. Thirteen years have passed; and yet, despite an ex-
plosion in the size, usage, and capabilities of the Internet, online experiments are still relatively rare,
particularly in economics. During the same period, both field and traditional laboratory experiments

have become far more common (Levitt and List, 2009). We believe that the practical problems of
  1
      For an historical perspective on early experimentation in economics, see Kagel et al. (1995).


                                                           2
(1) recruiting subjects and paying them securely and (2) assuring internal validity—and not those

of funding or training constraints—have limited the development of online experimentation.
   In this paper, we argue that a recent development, the emergence of online labor markets, ef-

fectively and efficiently addresses both the recruitment/payment problem and the internal validity
problem. Online labor markets also possess distinct advantages over both laboratory and tradi-
tional field experiments. These markets allow workers from around the world to perform tasks

amenable to remote completion, such as data entry, computer programming, graphic design and

clerical work (Frei, 2009). These markets, although designed for other purposes, make it possible
to recruit large numbers of subjects who are ready and able to participate in experiments. The
subjects themselves are much more diverse and much less experiment-savvy than subjects in tra-

ditional laboratories. Even better, online labor markets are ideal for “experimenter-as-employer”
experiments, which overcome some of the artificiality critiques of conventional laboratory experi-

ments, which have the subjects work at contrived tasks and with full knowledge of the experimental
nature of their “jobs.”

   While greater subject diversity and market context are attractive features, the prime advantage
of online labor markets is that they permit the level of control needed for causal inference. The
creators of these online labor markets—for their own, unrelated purposes—have made it easy to

make individual-specific payments, screen out users who do not have valid accounts with the market
and prevent workers/subjects from communicating with each other. Researchers can use these
features to conduct internally valid experiments online. Furthermore, for certain kinds of research

questions in economics, field experiments conducted in online labor markets can have a very high
level of external validity—a point we will discuss in depth.

   Despite the benefits they offer, online experiments raise issues not frequently encountered in
either the laboratory or the field. Just as television shows are not filmed plays, online experiments
are not simply laboratory experiments conducted online. This paper discusses these differences and
pays close attention to the unique challenges of online experimentation. Despite the caveats and

pitfalls, the proof of the value of online experiments is in our replications; we quickly, cheaply, and


                                                  3
easily reproduce a handful of experimental results known to have external validity. Although we

will discuss why online experiments work, the key point is that they do work, at least in the cases
we have selected for replication.

        In Section 2 we elaborate on our claim that online experiments overcome the classic challenges to
causal inference. To back up these claims, we successfully reproduce a series of classic experimental
results in Section 3. While these confirmations support our argument, they are not sufficient to

establish the validity of online methods. For this reason, in Section 4 we highlight the classic

threats to valid causal inference and discuss how they can be overcome in an online setting. In
Section 5 we then discuss the external validity of online experimental results. That examination
leads naturally to Section 6, in which we discuss the pros and cons of different experimental designs,

such as the experimenter-as-employer and traditional laboratory economic games. In addition to
creating exciting opportunities for research, online experiments also pose some ethical challenges,

which we address in Section 7. We conclude in Section 8 with our thoughts on the future of the
online laboratory.



2         Online Labor Markets and Experimentation

At present, the most useful online labor markets, from an experimentation standpoint, are “all-

purpose” labor markets where buyers contract with individual sellers (Horton, 2010b). Some of
the larger markets in this category include oDesk, Elance, Guru and Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(MTurk).2 Each of these sites is potentially amenable to experimentation, but MTurk currently

offers the best venue due to its robust application programming interface (API) and pricing struc-

ture. Even better, experimenters can tap the deep knowledge and experience of web developers to
create practically any interface or environment imaginable. All of the experiments discussed in this

paper were conducted on MTurk.
        Amazon claims that the MTurk workforce is larger than 100, 000, but provides no details about
    2
     There are other online labor markets, structured more like tournaments or prize-based contests, that are less
relevant for experimental purposes.



                                                        4
its exact size or composition. In conducting our own experiments, we have had no difficulty in

rapidly recruiting very large samples. If one were to try to build a site for online experimentation
“from scratch,” assuming that the technical hurdles could be overcome, the biggest challenge—as

anyone who has started a lab knows—would be the familiar chicken-and-egg problem of attracting
users. Few subjects would register unless many potential experiments were already available, and,
absent many subjects, few experimenters would register their experiments. Online labor markets

solve the chicken-and-egg problem.


2.1       The advantages of recruiting from labor markets

Online labor markets offer the benefits associated with recruiting subjects from an active labor
market. In addition to allowing for truly massive samples, online labor markets provide diverse

samples of both high- and low-skilled individuals, from a wide range of countries. One especially

useful dimension of subject diversity is inexperience with economic games.3 Further, by using

subjects from less-developed countries, experimenters can create relatively high-stakes games for
far less money than would be needed if using subjects from developed countries.

       Experimenters are not required to tell subjects hired from online labor markets that they are
participating in an experiment. For experiments that use classic economic games, subjects might

guess they are in a study of some kind; but for real-effort, market-appropriate tasks, workers are
unlikely to suspect the academic nature of their work. This advantage is enormous, as one of the
sharpest critiques of the experimental method in economics is the inherent artificiality of randomized

controlled trials in which subjects are aware of the experiment.

       The subjects’ lack of knowledge rules out experimenter effects in which the subjects try to
produce the effect they believe the experimenters expect. It also rules out “John Henry” effects, in

which subjects exert great effort because they treat the experiment game like a competitive contest.
For economics in particular, the fact that subjects recruited from online labor markets are already
   3
    Participants are probably less experiment-savvy than subjects recruited online, at large and specifically for
participation in economic experiments. They are certainly less savvy than typical subjects at university research
laboratories.



                                                       5
in work environments is a tremendous advantage, as subjects are already making consequential

economic decisions. As a result, they are likely to view any task or game from an economic frame
of mind.

   Experimenter and John Henry effects arise because the subjects know that the setting is ex-
perimental. Related problems arise when the subjects know about other experimental situations.
Subjects in a less desirable treatment might be upset by their bad luck, which might affect their

behaviors. Cook and Campbell (1979) call this “demoralization.” Furthermore, even if subjects

remain unaware of an experiment and of the nature of the treatment, agents of the experimenter
might affect outcomes by, on their own initiative, trying to equalize outcomes, such as by imita-
tion of other treatments or by compensatory equalization (Cook and Campbell, 1979). In online

experiments in which subjects have no knowledge of the treatments received by others, the threat of
demoralization is minimal. Additionally, in online settings, the experimenter requires no agents, so

the comparisons between treatment and control groups yield untainted and more accurate results.


2.2    Obtaining control and promoting trust

Most of the concerns of online market creators mirror those of would-be experimenters. Employers
worry that workers with multiple accounts might place phony bids or manipulate the reputation

system by leaving phony feedback. Similarly, experimenters worry that a subject with multiple
accounts might participate in an experiment multiple times. The creators of online labor markets do
not want workers to communicate with each other, as it could lead to collusion. Experimenters also

worry about workers discussing the details of experiments with each other and possibly colluding.

Finally, both employers and experimenters need ways to pay individuals precise amounts of money
as rewards for their actions and decisions.

   It is now easy to hire and pay workers within the context of online labor markets, yet still quite
difficult to do the same online, but outside of these markets. The problem is not technological.
The type and quality of communication—email, instant messenger services, voice-over-IP—do not
depend on whether the buyer and seller are working inside or outside the online market, and banks


                                                 6
have been electronically transferring funds for decades. The problem is that it is difficult to create

trust among strangers. Trust is an issue not only for would-be trading partners, but also for would-
be experimenters. The validity of economics experiments depends heavily upon trust, particularly

subjects’ trust that the promulgated rules will be followed and that all stated facts about payment,
the identities of other subjects, etc., are true. This need for trust is a good reason to embed
experiments in online labor markets, because the creators of these markets have already taken a

number of steps to foster trust. These efforts make both commerce and valid experimentation

possible.
       All online labor markets use reputation systems to create lasting, publicly-available reputations—
reputations that are sacrificed if either buyers or workers behave unfairly (Resnick et al., 2000). The

market creators proactively screen out undesired participants by taking steps, such as requiring a
bank account or valid credit card, before either buyer or seller is allowed to join. With persons who

have been accepted, the market creators actively manage memberships and suspend bad actors,
creating a form of virtuous selection not found in traditional markets. One kind of bad actor is the

non-human, that is, automated scripts that fraudulently perform “work.” To combat this potential
problem, all sites require would-be members to pass a CAPTCHA, or “completely automated public
Turing test to tell computers and humans apart” (von Ahn et al., 2003).4 With proper precautions,

it is unlikely that computers would show up as subjects, or that any worker/subject would believe
they were playing against a computer.
       While the “Turing test” form of trust is important, the mundane but perhaps more critical

requirement is that workers/subjects trust that buyers/experimenters will actually follow the rules
that they propose. To encourage this form of trust, many of the online labor markets require

buyers to place funds in escrow, which prevents buyers from opportunistically refusing to pay after
taking delivery of the worker’s output (which is often an easy-to-steal informational good). In many
   4
     At least on MTurk, there is some danger of malicious users writing scripts that automatically accept and com-
plete “Human Intelligence Tasks,” or HITs. However, these attempts are trivially easy to detect for anything more
complicated than a single yes/no question. Further, in our experience, jobs that allow workers to only complete one
unit of work (which is almost always the case with experiments) do not attract the attention of scammers writing
scripts.



                                                        7
markets, there is some form of dispute arbitration, which encourages the belief that all parties are

acting in the shadows of an institution that could hold them accountable for their actions, further
promoting trust. Perhaps unsurprisingly, survey evidence suggests that workers in MTurk believe

that their online bosses are as fair as employers in their home countries (Horton, 2010a).


2.3    Experiments in MTurk

Online experiments in MTurk are quite simple to run. An advertisement is placed for the experiment

via the same framework used to advertise jobs in the online labor market. Depending on Institutional

Review Board (IRB) requirements and the nature of the experiment, the advertisement may or may

not explicitly state that the task is part of an academic study. In MTurk, subjects may begin
work on a job without prior approval from the employer. To make this possible, the experimenter

needs to create a website that gives the subjects instructions, records their choices, provides them

with information as the game progresses and determines their payoffs. Websites can incorporate

a range, from simple surveys made with off-the-shelf software to custom-built, elaborate interfaces
with designs limited only by time and resources. Currently, there are a number of projects under

development to build a set of tools for common experimental tasks, such as assigning subjects to
treatment and control groups.



3     Experiments in the Online Laboratory

This section discusses research conducted in the online laboratory—both our own work and that of

others. For this paper, we conducted three experiments similar to those normally run in physical
laboratories, experiments which have well-known and widely reproduced results. We also conducted

a natural field experiment in the sense of the taxonomy proposed by Harrison and List (2004), which
looked at labor supply response to manipulations in the offered wage. Our first experiment replicated

a classic result in framing shown by Tversky and Kahneman (1981). In accordance with numerous
duplications in the laboratory, we found that individuals are risk-averse in the domain of gains, and


                                                 8
risk-seeking in the domain of losses. Subjects were paid a fixed rate for participating.

   Our second experiment had subjects play a traditional prisoner’s dilemma game. Consistent
with previous work, we found a non-zero level of cooperation, indicating the existence of other-

regarding preferences, in which subjects do not act solely out of self-interest. Our third experiment
had subjects play the same prisoner’s dilemma game, after having been randomly assigned to
read different “priming” passages of religious or non-religious text. Here we demonstrated the well-

established fact that stimuli unrelated to monetary payoffs can nonetheless affect subjects’ decisions.

In both the second and third experiments, subjects earned individualized payments based on their
choices and the choices of other workers with whom they were randomly matched retroactively.
   In our final experiment, we placed ourselves in the role of the employer. This experimentalist-

as-employer research design is perhaps the most exciting development made possible by online labor
markets. We recruited subjects to perform a simple transcription of a paragraph-sized piece of text.

After performing this initial task, subjects were offered the opportunity to perform an additional
transcription task in exchange for a randomly determined wage. As expected, we found that workers’

labor supply curves slope upwards.


3.1     Existing research

Several studies using online subject pools have recently appeared, with computer scientists lead-
ing the way. They have all used MTurk, primarily as a way to conduct user studies and col-
lect data suitable for training machine learning algorithms (Sheng et al., 2008; Kittur et al., 2008;

Sorokin and Forsyth, 2008). In a paper that bridged computer science and economics, Mason and Watts

(2009) showed that, although quality is not affected by price, output declines when wages are low-
ered.

   In economics, Fong and Luttmer (2009) conducted an online experiment to investigate racial
bias in charitable donations, using Knowledge Networks instead of an online labor market. Among
the several economics papers that used online labor markets, Chen and Horton (2010) measured
how MTurk workers respond to wage cuts. They found that unexplained wage cuts decrease out-


                                                  9
put, but that when the cuts are justified to workers, the former levels of output are maintained.5

In a separate paper using MTurk, Horton and Chilton (2010) explored whether a simple rational
model can explain worker output. While they found strong evidence that at least some workers

are price-sensitive, they also found that a non-trivial fraction are target earners, that is, peo-
ple who work to achieve certain income targets rather than responding solely to the offered wage.
Chandler and Kapelner (2010) have also conducted a natural field experiment on MTurk. They sub-

tly manipulated the meaning of the task and measured whether that meaning affected uptake and

work quality, both overall and conditional upon a worker’s home country. Although the results are
still preliminary, the paper is inherently interesting in that it demonstrates the kinds of experiments
that would be difficult or impossible to do in other settings. In addition to conventional academic

papers, a number of researchers are conducting experiments on MTurk and posting results on their
blogs. Gabriele Paolacci at the University of Venice writes a blog called “Experimental Turk” which

focuses on reproducing results from experimental psychology.6


3.2     Replication: Framing

Traditional economic models assume that individuals are fully rational in making decisions—that
people will always choose the option that maximizes their utility, which is wholly-defined in terms

of outcomes. Therefore, decision-making should be consistent, and an individual should make the
same choice when faced with equivalent decision problems. However, as the watershed experiment
of Tversky and Kahneman (1981) (hereafter “TK”) demonstrated, this is not, in fact, the case. TK

introduced the concept of “framing”: that presenting two numerically equivalent situations with

different language can lead to dramatic differences in stated preferences. In our current experiment,
   5
     There are a number of papers that have used the Internet as a test bed for field experimentation, primarily as a
way to study auctions (Resnick et al., 2006; Lucking-Reiley, 2000).
   6
     Although blogs are certainly not equivalent to peer-reviewed journals, they do allow academics to quickly com-
municate results and receive feedback. For example, Rob Miller and Greg Little at the MIT Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) host a blog called “Deneme” that reports the results of experiments using
TurKit—a Java library developed by Little and others to perform iterative, complex tasks on MTurk (Little et al.,
2009).




                                                         10
we replicated the framing effect demonstrated by TK on MTurk.7

      In TK’s canonical example, subjects read one of two hypothetical scenarios. Half of the subjects
were given the following Problem 1:

        Imagine that the United States is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual Asian disease,

        which is expected to kill 600 people. Two alternative programs to combat the disease

        have been proposed. Assume that the exact scientific estimates of the consequences
        of the programs are as follows: If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.
                                               1                                                        2
        If Program B is adopted, there is      3
                                                   probability that 600 people will be saved and        3

        probability that no people will be saved.

        Which of the two programs would you favor?

The other half were given Problem 2 in which the setup (the first three sentences) was identical but
the programs were framed differently:

                                                                                                        1
        If Program A is adopted, 400 people will die. If Program B is adopted, there is                 3
                                                   2
        probability that nobody will die, and      3
                                                       probability that 600 people will die.

      The two scenarios are numerically identical, but the subjects responded very differently. TK
found that in Problem 1, where the scenario was framed in terms of gains, subjects were risk-averse:

72% chose the certain Program A over the risky Program B. However, in Problem 2, where the
scenario was framed in terms of losses, 78% of subjects preferred Program B.
      Using these same prompts, we recruited 213 subjects to see whether they would reproduce this
preference reversal on MTurk. We offered a participation fee of US$0.40. We randomly assigned

subjects to a treatment upon arrival. Consistent with TK’s results, we found that the majority of
subjects preferred Program A in the domain of gains (N=95: 69% A, 31% B), while the opposite

was true in the domain of losses (N=118: 41% A, 59% B). The framing significantly affected, and
in fact reversed, the pattern of preferences stated by the subjects (χ2 test, p < 0.001). Thus, we
successfully replicated the principle of framing on MTurk.
  7
    This is the second replication of this result on MTurk. Gabriele Paolacci also performed this experiment and
reported the results on his blog, http://experimentalturk.wordpress.com/2009/11/06/asian-disease.

                                                         11
3.3    Replication: Social preferences

Another central theme in experimental economics is the existence of social (or “other-regarding”)
preferences (Andreoni, 1990; Fehr and Schmidt, 1999). Countless laboratory experiments have
demonstrated that many people’s behaviors are inconsistent with caring only about their own mone-

tary payoffs. (For a review, see Camerer (2003).) Here we replicated the existence of other-regarding
preferences on MTurk.

   To assess pro-social behavior on MTurk, 113 subjects were recruited to play an incentivized pris-

oner’s dilemma (“PD”), the canonical game for studying altruistic cooperation (Axelrod and Hamilton,

1981). Each subject was informed that he or she had been randomly assigned to interact with an-

other MTurk worker and that they both would have a choice between two options, A or B. In
addition to a $.20 “show-up fee,” subjects were further informed of the following payoff structure

(in units of cents):

                                              A (cooperate)    B (not)

                             A (cooperate)       120, 120      40, 160

                                 B (not)          160, 40       80, 80

   Here, A represents cooperation, B represents defection, and, regardless of the action of one’s

partner, playing B maximizes one’s payoff. Rational self-interested players should therefore always
select B. Given previous evidence from experiments in the laboratory (Camerer, 2003), however, we

predicted that MTurk subjects would demonstrate a level of cooperation significantly greater than

0 in a one-shot PD. Consistent with this prediction, we observe a level of cooperation significantly
greater than zero (55% C: sign-rank test, p < 0.001) and successfully replicated with MTurk the
existence of other-regarding preferences on MTurk.


3.4    Replication: Priming

Priming is a third behavioral phenomenon which we demonstrated with MTurk. In priming stud-
ies, stimuli unrelated to the decision task (and which do not affect the monetary outcomes) can


                                                 12
nonetheless significantly alter subjects’ behaviors. Priming has attracted a great deal of attention

in psychology, and, more recently, in experimental economics (Benjamin et al., 2010a).
   To employ MTurk to explore the effects of priming, we recruited 189 subjects to play the same

PD game described in the previous section. Subjects were randomly assigned to either the religious
prime group (N = 90) or a neutral prime group (N = 99). The religious prime group read a
Christian religious passage about the importance of charity (Mark 10:17-23) before playing the PD.

The neutral prime group instead read a passage of equal length describing three species of fish before

playing the PD. Following the PD, each subject completed a demographic questionnaire reporting
age, gender, country of residence, and religious affiliation. The subjects also indicated whether
they had ever had an experience which convinced them of the existence of God. Based on previous

results using implicit primes with a non-student subject pool (Shariff and Norenzayan, 2007), we
hypothesized that the religious prime would increase cooperation, but only among subjects who

believed in God.
   The results are portrayed in Figure 1. We analyzed the data using logistic regression with robust

standard errors, with PD decision as the dependent variable (0=defect, 1=cooperate), and prime
(0=neutral, 1=religion) and believer (0=does not believe in God, 1=believes in God) as independent
variables, along with a prime × believer interaction term. We also included age, gender (0=female,

1=male), country of residence (0=non-U.S., 1=U.S.), and religion (0=non-Christian, 1=Christian)
as control variables. Consistent with our prediction, we found no significant main effect of prime
(p = 0.169) or believer (p = 0.12), but a significant positive interaction between the two (coeff= 2.15,

p = 0.001). We also found a significant main effect of gender (coeff= 0.70, p = 0.044), indicating
that women are more likely to cooperate, but no significant effect of age (p = 0.52), country of

residence (p = 0.657) or religion (p = 0.54). We demonstrated that the religious prime significantly
increases cooperation in the PD, but only among those who believe in God. These findings are of
particular note given the mixed results of previous studies regarding the effectiveness of implicit
religious primes for promoting cooperation (Benjamin et al., 2010b). We demonstrate that the

principle of priming can be observed with MTurk and that the effectiveness of the prime can vary


                                                  13
Figure 1: Reading a religious passage significantly increases prisoner’s dilemma cooperation among
those who believe in God, but not among non-believers.


systematically, depending on the characteristics of the reader.


3.5       Replication: Labor supply on the extensive margin

Economic theory predicts that, under most circumstances, increasing the price paid for labor will
increase the supply of labor.8 In this experiment, we exogenously manipulated the payment offered

to different workers and then observed their labor supply. Because the sums involved were so small,
we are confident that income effects, at least as traditionally conceived, were inconsequential in this

context. We found strong evidence that subjects are more likely to work when wages are high.
       When subjects “arrived” at the experiment, we explained that they would answer a series of

demographic questions and then perform one paragraph-sized text transcription for a total of 30

cents. They were also told that they would have the opportunity to perform another transcription
after the original transcription was completed.

       In addition to asking their age, gender and hours per week spent online doing tasks for money,
we asked workers to identify their home countries and their primary reasons for participation on
MTurk. Because economic opportunities differ by country, we might expect that motivation and
   8
   The exception is when the increased price changes total wealth to such an extent that changed tastes under the
new scenario (i.e., income effects) might be more important than the pure substitution effect.



                                                       14
behavior would also differ by country (Chandler and Kapelner, 2010). Figure 2 presents a mosaic

plot showing the cross-tabulation results. We can see that most subjects, regardless of nationality,
claimed to be motivated primarily by money. Among those claiming some other motivation, those

from India claimed to want to learn new skills, while those from the United States claimed to want
to have fun.
   For the actual real-effort task, we asked subjects to copy verbatim the text displayed in a scanned

image into a separate text box. The text appeared as an image in order to prevent subjects from

simply copying and pasting the text into the text box. The advantages of a text transcription task
are that it (a) is tedious, (b) requires effort and attention, and (c) has a clearly defined quality
measure—namely, the number of errors made by subjects (if the true text is known). We have

found it useful to machine-translate the text into some language that is unlikely to be familiar, yet
has no characters unavailable on the standard keyboards. Translating increases the error rate by

ruling out the use of automated spell-checking, and it prevents subjects from finding the true text
somewhere on the web. For this experiment, our text passages were paragraph-sized chunks from

Adam Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments, machine translated into Tagalog, a language of the
Philippines.
   In our experiment, after completing the survey and the first task, subjects were randomly as-

signed to one of four treatment groups and offered the chance to perform another transcription for
p cents, where p was equal to 1, 5, 15 or 25 cents.
   As expected, workers receiving higher offers were more likely to accept. Table 1 shows that as

the offered price increased, the fraction of subjects accepting the offer rose.
                                                                 2
                                    | {z } ·∆pi + |0.6051
   The regression results are Ȳi = 0.0164           {z }, with R = 0.13 and sample size N = 302,
                                     0.0024           0.0418
with ∆pi = pi − 1. This offsetting transformation makes the regression intercept interpretable as
the predicted mean offer uptake when p = 1. Of course, a linear probability model is false, as it
will predict uptake rates greater than 1. While we could use a general linear model, it makes more

sense to tie the problem more closely to our theoretical model of how workers make decisions.
   Presumably workers’ reservation wages—the minimum amount they are willing to accept to per-


                                                  15
                                          A country in Europe            India   Some other country   United States




                                             Learn new skills Have fun
                             motivation

                                            Make money




                                                                                 country




Figure 2: Self-reported motivation for working on Amazon Mechanical Turk (row) cross-tabulated
with self-reported country (column) for 302 workers/subjects.


              Table 1: Acceptance of paragraph transcription task by offer amount
                          Amount      Offers     Offers    Percentage
                          (cents)    Accepted Rejected Accepted
                          1             34        37          0.48
                          5             57        18          0.76
                          15            74         5          0.94
                          25            71         6          0.92



form some task—have some uknown distribution with cumulative density function cdf F . Workers
will choose to accept offers to do more work if the offered wages exceed their individual reservation
wages. For a task taking t seconds and paying pi cents, then yi = 1 · {pi /t > ωi }, where ωi is the
reservation wage. If we assume that F is the log-normal distribution, the distribution parameters

that maximize the likelihood of observing our data are µ = 0.113 and σ = 1.981. Given the average
completion time on the first paragraph, the median reservation wage is US $0.14/hour.




                                                                                 16
3.6    Summary

Each of these replication studies was completed on MTurk in less than 48 hours with little effort
on our part. The cost was also far less than that of standard lab experiments, at an average cost of
less than $1 per subject. However, even this low marginal cost vastly understates the comparative

efficiency of online experiments. We entirely avoided both the costs associated with hiring full-time
assistants and the costs of maintaining a laboratory. We also did not bear the high initial costs of

setting up a laboratory.

    Low costs would be irrelevant if the results were not informative; yet, despite the low stakes

and extreme anonymity of MTurk, the subjects’ behavior was qualitatively consistent with findings

from the standard laboratory. Our studies demonstrate the power of MTurk to quickly and cheaply
give insights into human behavior using both traditional laboratory-style experiments and field

experiments.



4     Internal Validity

It is reassuring that our experiments achieved results consistent with those of physical laboratories,
but we make an independent case for the internal validity of online experiments. Internal validity

requires that subjects be appropriately assigned to groups, that selective attrition be ruled out,
and that subjects be unable either to interact with or influence one another. These concerns could

present challenges in an online setting, where subjects can enter over time and easily drop out of
an experiment. If the level of attrition depends on factors such as the nature of the treatment or
communications from other subjects, internal validity is jeopardized. Fortunately, proper measures
can be taken to overcome, or at least mitigate, these challenges.


4.1    Unique and independent observations

MTurk and other online labor markets provide unique observations without much effort on the part
of the experimenter, because it is difficult for workers/subjects to have multiple user accounts.


                                                 17
       However, if a worker had multiple accounts, in principle, multiple plays of the experiment would

be possible, which could in turn impair the results. At a minimum, the estimated standard errors
would be too small. The estimated treatment effect may be biased or even meaningless, since

a repeat participant experiences a “treatment” unlike any other and has no obvious control. In
contrast, in physical laboratory experiments, multiple plays are easily avoided. If an experiment is
conducted in a single session, a person obviously cannot be in two places at once; if the experiment

is conducted over multiple sessions, it would be hard for a person both to use a fake ID and not be

recognized.
       The threat of multiple plays is surely greater online. The anonymity of the Internet rules out the
ID approach used in the physical laboratory, and for many experiments, subjects have an incentive to

play multiple times.9 Fortunately, online labor market creators have strong financial incentives and
ample resources to address the problem of multiple accounts and its undesired offspring, multiple

plays. Online markets differ in their approaches to the problem of multiple accounts, but all use
some combination of terms-of-use agreements and technical approaches.10 The important question

from the experimental perspective is whether multiple accounts and plays are used sufficiently often
in online experiments to threaten their internal validity?
       While we admit that multiple accounts are both possible and more probable online, our view is

analogous to the view one must take about possible but highly unlikely behaviors that could occur
in laboratory or field experiments. For example, some subjects could return with fake IDs or could
explain the experiment to others who participate on a different days or at later times. Such behavior

is possible, yet it may actually be less likely in the online laboratory because (1) as online labor
markets draw on remote and diverse pools, their members are less likely to interact or communicate

and (2) the existence of a formal reputation system makes detectably dishonest play costly.
   9
     Although their per-trial payment would be constant, the marginal cost of completing an experiment would
probably decrease (e.g., instructions only have to be read once). If skill were rewarded, then participants would
benefit from experience. Even leaving aside declining costs, doing an experiment would buy participants an option:
when they found a good deal, they would repeat it.
  10
     Some sites require workers to install custom software; presumably this software can detect whether multiple
copies of the software are being run on the same computer. Other sites charge membership fees or flat fees for fund
transfers, both of which raise the costs of keeping multiple accounts.



                                                        18
      Ultimately, the issue of multiple accounts is an empirical question. In our experience to date, we

have detected very low numbers of people with multiple accounts, but we have heard anecdotes of
a few technically savvy users defeating the system.11 Our view is that although multiple accounts

surely exist, they are a negligible threat in most online labor markets and are likely to remain so.
As in any well-designed regulatory scheme, the steps taken by those who run the sites in online
labor markets—and hence in online laboratories—raise the price of prohibited behavior. The goal

is to make undesired behavior unlikely, not impossible. Rendering undesired behavior impossible is

an unrealistic aspiration.


4.2       Appropriate assignment

To be certain that a treatment is having a causal effect on some outcome, we need to assign subjects

to treatment and control groups in a way that does not depend on how they will react to a treatment.

Randomization accomplishes this goal, but even randomization can, by chance, lead to experimental

groups that differ systematically, particularly if there are many explanatory variables. To correct
for this problem after randomization we may include pre-treatment variables as regressors. Even

better, if we have complete control over assignment, as we do in the online laboratory, we can
preemptively avoid the pre-treatment differences problem by employing a blocking design. Such a

design identifies the key nuisance factors, creates similar groups on the basis of that factor, and
then applies the treatments within each group.
      One worker/subject characteristic is arrival time to the experiment. We might expect early and

late arrivals to an experiment to differ in systematic ways. For example, immediate respondents are

more likely to be heavy users compared to late respondents, and they may respond more immediately
to an experiment’s advertisement. Time zones introduce a second difference: if an experiment is

launched at 1 a.m. PST, experience shows that most of the early respondents (typically in the first
12 hours) will be from Asia and most of the late respondents (in the next 12 hours) will be from
the Western hemisphere.
 11
      We identify them by finding two accounts associated the the same IP address.



                                                        19
   In all of our experiments, we stratify according to arrival time. This pairs subjects according to

arrival time as closely as possible. Thus even if arrival behavior is related to relevant characteristics,
as is likely, this relationship will not bias the composition of the different treatment groups. It is

important that subjects be unaware of either the stratification or the randomization; they cannot
know what treatment is “next,” lest it influence their participation or behavior.


4.3    Coping with attrition

Subjects might drop out of the different treatments in an experiment at different rates due to the

nature of the treatments. For instance, a video prime that is unpleasant might prompt dropouts

that a neutral video would not. Selective attrition leads to selection bias and poses a threat to
valid inference in online experiments. The problem is especially acute online because subjects

can potentially inspect a treatment before deciding whether to participate. Note that this type

of balking is different from potential subjects viewing a description of the overall experiment and

deciding not to participate. That is not a concern, as those people are exactly analogous to a those
who view an announcement for an experiment but ignore it.

   Experiments in a physical laboratory are also subject to attrition disparities, since the partici-
pants can get up and leave if they wish. However, it is much easier to quit an experiment on the

Internet. Moreover, the time investments required to “try out” an experiment are much lower on
the Internet. Thus, if the burden of one treatment is greater than that of another, MTurk subjects
are more likely to drop out selectively than their physical laboratory counterparts. The online

laboratory has two ways to deal with selective attrition.

   The solutions are to collect data on all “arrivals” to an experiment and either, using Method
1, show that attrition is consistent with a random process and assume that attrition is in fact

random, or, using Method 2, show that attrition is minimal (that is, close to zero). It is important
to note that Method 1 requires the experimenter to establish an empirical fact which is that there
is an approximate balance in collected covariates across the groups and to establish an untestable
assumption, which is that there is no unobserved sorting that could be driving the results (that is,


                                                   20
different kinds of subjects are dropping out of the two groups, but by chance the total amount of

attrition is the same). When the plausibility of Method 1 is doubtful, Method 2 is superior, though
it requires a more elaborate experimental design.

       The best way to eliminate attrition is to give subjects strong incentives to continue participating
in the experiment after receiving their treatment assignments. In the physical lab, subjects can
forfeit their show-up fee by leaving prematurely. Online experiments can do something similar if they

employ an initial phase—identical across treatments—that “hooks” subjects into the experiment and

ensures that there is no attrition after the hook phase. For example, all subjects might be asked
to perform a rather tedious but well-paid transcription task first, before being randomized to the
relatively easy treatment and control group tasks. The fee for the transcription task is forfeited if

the whole experiment is not completed.
       The experimenter then restricts the sample to subjects that persevere through the tedious first

phase ex ante. This increases confidence that these subjects will remain for the following phase.
In short, this approach has subjects invest themselves in the study in a manner that does not

differ across treatment groups. We then raise the price of attrition so that any differences between
treatments that might drive non-random attrition are overcome by the incentives to comply.12

       To use this “hook” strategy ethically, it is important to let subjects know initially some of the
details of the experiment. Subjects should always know approximately what they will be doing
(with estimates of the time required) and the minimum payment they will receive for doing it. We

have found that by providing plenty of information at the outset and by using appropriate hooking

tasks, we can consistently drive attrition to zero.


4.4       Stable unit treatment value assumption

The stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA) requires that any individual’s outcome depend
only upon his or her treatment assignment, and not upon the treatment assignment or outcome of

any other subject (Rubin, 1974). This assumption is violated when subjects can communicate with
  12
   Physical laboratory experiments essentially create the same pattern of costs, implying incentives not to quit.
Much of the effort for participation comes from arranging a schedule and traveling to the lab.

                                                       21
each other about their treatments, choices, or experiences.

   Physical laboratory experiments can avoid SUTVA problems by conducting the full experiment
in one large session and prohibiting talk during the experiment. In practice, experiments often need

to be conducted over several days to get a sufficient sample. Subjects are told not to talk to future
prospective subjects, but the extent of compliance with that request is not clear.
   The SUTVA problem is both more and less challenging online than in physical laboratories. On

the downside, the accumulation of subjects over time is inevitable online. The counterbalancing

pluses are that the subjects are widely geographically scattered and less likely to know each other.
Furthermore, unlike in laboratory or field experiments, the natural mode of conversations about
goings-on in the market take place in publicly viewable discussion forums instead of in private

encounters.
   While market-specific chat rooms and forums do exist, the creators of online labor markets

make it difficult for workers to converse directly with other workers directly in order to prevent
“disintermediation” (moving their work offsite to escape fees). In MTurk, workers do not have

profiles; in larger markets where workers do have profiles, these do not contain contact information
(e.g., name, email, phone number, etc.). In MTurk, “disintermediation” is presumably not as much
of a concern, but Amazon is worried that if workers could easily contact each other, they might

collude in any number of ways, such as by agreeing to approve fraudulently the work output of
their co-conspirators. We recognize, as do the operators of online markets, that some collusion is
inevitable. Individuals in a community, including an online community, for example, can choose to

participate in the work task and communicate outside the market. But it seems reasonable to expect
much less collusion in the online setting than is found among the subjects in lab-based experiments,

where many repeat participants are drawn from a concentrated pool of individuals.
   On the MTurk discussion boards, workers can and do highlight HITs that they have found
particularly interesting or rewarding. Sometimes they discuss the content of the tasks. This could
skew the results of an experiment. Fortunately, as an experimentalist, it is easy to monitor these

boards and periodically search for mentions of relevant user names or details from the experiment.


                                                 22
       We have been running experiments for over a year, and occasionally search the chat rooms for

mention of our user name. So far, it has not appeared in any of these forums. As a practical matter,
we advise running experiments quickly, keeping them unremarkable, and periodically checking any

associated message boards for discussions of any experimental particulars.13 Warning or threatening
subjects is not recommended, as this would probably do little to deter collusion; it might instead
pique curiosity and prompt discussion.



5        External Validity

At least two factors affect the external validity of experimental results: (1) its representativeness:

how representative the experimental sample is of the population of interest, and (2) its realism: how
similar the experimental set-up is to the real world context in which the phenomenon arises. Any

experiment, whether in a physical laboratory or online, falls at least a bit short on either factor.
External validity is thus a matter of degree, not an absolute.

       On the first point, people who choose to participate in social science experiments (or work online)
represent a small segment of the population. Subjects in online experiments are also highly selective
compared to the U.S. population, though much less selective than the students who make up the

subjects in most physical laboratory experiments.
       In MTurk, workers from the U.S. are younger, more international, and more likely to be female
than the U.S. population, according to self-reported demographics (Ipeirotis, 2010). However, even
if subjects “look like” some population of interest in terms of observable characteristics, the self-

selection of participation is unavoidable.

       On the second point, the decisions made in experiments are usually weak imitations of the real
decisions in which we are interested. Real decisions almost always involve higher stakes, greater

complexity, and greater decision time, among other differences.
       The use of highly selected “convenience samples” is so commonplace in experimental economics
  13
     It might also be possible to “piggy-back” experiments by working with existing market participants with estab-
lished, commercial reputations—a attractive option suggested to us by Dana Chandler.



                                                        23
and psychology that it is rarely remarked upon within those fields. However, social scientists from

nonexperimental fields, or at least fields with less of an experimental tradition, often object to the
use of convenience samples and critique experiments according to both the representativeness of the

samples and the realism of the experiments. Their critiques are worth discussing because they are
central to the argument that online experiments offer significant value.
   We should first consider that the factors of representativeness and realism are relative standards—

how similar are the recruited subjects and the experimental contexts to the real phenomena? In

any particular experiment, theory determines similiarity. For theories that aspire to be general de-
scriptions of how people make decisions or react to stimuli, any reasonable sample of the population
is appropriate. However, theories that cover the behavior of a selected group (for example, young

mothers) or behavior in some specialized context (for example, after a disaster) require the sample
and the context to match for validity. Because theories in psychology and economics strive for

generality, the behavior of a modestly broad group of thinking human beings is usually a reliable
guide. For example, if college students homogenize probabilities when making decisions, it is likely

that the whole population does so.
   To make the point even more sharply, consider the phases of clinical drug trials.           In the
early stages, for toxicity tests, unselected healthy humans—indeed, in the very early stages, other

mammals—make fine subjects. In later stages, for efficacy tests, subjects must suffer from the
targeted condition. Toxicity may differ across the population, and it is possible that the target
population for some drug might react differently from a random sample, and yet we still feel fairly

confident using a convenience sample for toxicity but not for efficacy. The reason is that the ques-
tions to be answered—respectively, “Is it safe?” and “Does it work?”—largely determine what kind

of sample is needed.




                                                 24
5.1       Estimates of changes are reliable:, estimates of levels are much less

          so

Quantitative research in the social sciences generally takes one of two forms: it is either trying to
estimate a level or a change. For “levels” research (for example, What is the infant mortality in the

United States? Did the economy expand last quarter? How many people support candidate X?),

only a representative sample can guarantee a credible answer. For example, if we disproportionately

surveyed young people, we could not assess X’s overall popularity. For “changes” research (for
example, Does mercury cause autism? Do angry individuals take more risks? Do wage reductions

reduce output?), the critical concern is the sign of the change’s effect. Estimating the magnitude of
its effect is secondary. Magnitudes are often assessed in specific populations once a phenomenon has
been identified. These two kinds of empirical research often use similar methods and even the same

data sources, but one suffers greatly when subject pools are unrepresentative, while the other much
less so. Experiments are much more reliable for the analysis of “changes” than for the assessment

of “levels.”
       Laboratory investigations are particularly helpful in “changes” research that seeks to identify

phenomena or to elucidate causal mechanisms. Before we even have a well-formed theory to test,
we may want to run experiments simply to collect more data on phenomena such as the tendency

to confuse nominal and real wages. This kind of research requires an iterative process of generating
hypotheses, testing them, examining the data and then honing or discarding hypotheses, followed
by more tests, and so on. Because the search space is often large, numerous cycles are needed, which
gives the online laboratory an advantage due to its low costs and speedy accretion of subjects.14
  14
    It also increases the danger of “hypothesis mining”—trying out many hypotheses and reporting those that work,
quite likely only by chance.




                                                       25
5.2       Interpreting differences between results from online and physical

          laboratories

We have found good agreement between our results and those obtained through traditional means.
Nonetheless, there are likely to be measurable differences between results in online and physical lab-

oratory experiments (Eckel and Wilson, 2006). How should one interpret cross-domain differences,

assuming they appear to be systematic and reproducible?

       First, systematic differences would create puzzles, which can lead to progress. In this sense,
the online laboratory can complement the conventional laboratory and conventional laboratory—a

point emphasized by Harrison and List (2004). Second, it is not clear that systematic differences
should be interpreted as a mark against online experiments. When the Internet was small and
few people spent much time online, perhaps it made sense to treat cross-medium differences as an

argument against utilizing evidence from online domains. Today, however, people spend a great
deal of their time online.15 Internet-mediated social interactions are no longer a strange experience

familiar only to a tiny fraction of the population.
       Suppose that future experiments find that subjects donate less in an online dictator game than

in person.16 This would tell us something interesting and add to our knowledge: it would not
mean that the Internet result is “wrong,” assuming that the game is set up properly. The situation

is analogous to finding cross-cultural differences in game play (Bohnet et al., 2008; Gneezy et al.,
2009). Such results increase our knowledge of the social world; they are not cautionary tales about
the need to restrict experimenters to undergraduates at U.S. research universities.
  15
     A recent New York Times article, “If Your Kids Are Awake, They’re Probably Online,” reported that American
kids spend an average of seven to eight hours per day online.
  16
     The dictator game is perhaps the simplest game design to measure social preferences: player 1 is given some
endowment of money and must decide how much of that money to keep for herself and how much to give to player 2.




                                                      26
6        Experimental Designs

Certain kinds of research designs work well online and are as good as, if not better than, what can

be achieved offline. The best example is the experimenter-as-employer natural field experiments,

where the experiment in which the interaction is completely unremarkable from the perspective of

the workers, who have no idea they are involved in an experiment. Certain kinds of surveys work
well online, as we will discuss below. Laboratory-type games are certainly possible, but there are
still a number of limitations, some of which will likely be overcome by better software, while others

are obviously intractable due to the inherent nature of the Internet.17


6.1       Experimenter-as-employer

In many field experiments, the researcher participates in the market as an employer, either by
creating a new “firm” or by piggy-backing on an existing firm and directing its policies. Worker-

subjects perform a real-effort task, such as stuffing envelopes, picking fruit, planting trees, etc. The
manipulation is usually of such elements as the payment scheme, team composition, or framing.

The online environment makes it easy to conduct these kinds of experiments; subjects are simply
recruited from the market to perform a task and are randomly assigned to groups. The objective

might be to test the role of alternative incentive schemes or to determine how payment affects

quality of performance, both central concerns in economics. Depending upon institutional review
board requirements, the subjects might not need to be notified that the task is an experiment.
       For the actual onine task, it is obviously impossible to have workers perform something physical,

yet certain real-effort tasks are well-suited to online completion. One advantage of online work is
that it generates remarkably fine details about what workers do at any moment and time, as well
as the prevailing context when they made their chices. This kind of very high-frequency data can
yield unexpected new insights, as in Bandiera et al. (2009) and Mas and Moretti (2009).

       We have found two to be particularly useful: text transcription and the “dot-guessing game”
  17
    For example, recording physiological responses like eye movement, the galvanic skin response or blood flows to
the brain are clearly not possible.



                                                       27
described below. Both provide good-quality metrics and lead to heterogeneous quality, in addition

to being culturally neutral. It is also easy to generate new instances of the task (unlike having
subjects solve puzzles). At least in the case of text transcription, the task is very similar to the kinds

of tasks workers are frequently asked to perform on MTurk, which makes workers less suspicious
that they are involved in an experiment.
   In the dot-guessing game, subjects examine an image consisting of a very large number of dots,

far too many to count feasibly, and are asked to guess the number of dots. This task has a clear error

metric, in that it is fully objective (that is, there is a right answer); yet it is similar to a subjective
task in that there will be disagreement among subjects in that some subjects will presumably be
better estimators than others. Unlike some other tasks used in judgment experiments (for example,

estimating the length of the Nile, the grain harvest in Ukraine, etc.), subjects cannot simply look
up an answer online, which is an obvious critical difference.

   A variant of the experimenter-as-employer paradigm is the paired survey, which is used when
one wants to know how some feature of the way a question is posed affects responses. While this

kind of experiment is very simple, it can yield powerful conclusions. For example, some of Tversky
and Kahneman’s classic work, which we replicated, used the paired-survey method to show that
people viewed objectively identical scenarios differently depending upon whether an outcome was

perceived as a gain or a loss. This simple survey design yielded an insight that has subsequently
been shown to be widespread and important. MTurk is ideal for this kind of research.


6.2    Laboratory-type games online

Some of the most successful examples of experimental social science use simple interactive games,
such as the trust game, the prisoners’ dilemma, and market games. Subject interactions are easy

to arrange in physical laboratory experiments because all the subjects play at once. In online labor
markets, subjects often arrive at the experiment over the course of several hours or days, making
subject interactions difficult. There are several solutions to the difficulty presently available and
many more under development.


                                                    28
      When subjects are asynchronous, the widely used strategy method (Selten, 1967)—players report

what they would do in various hypothetical situations—can identify outcomes in interactive situa-
tions. This was the method we employed when performing our own trust-game and ultimatum-game

experiments (not yet published). There is some evidence that subjects play “hot” games (those that
do not use the strategy method) differently (Brandts and Charness, 2000). Ideally, new software
developments will allow for hot interactive games.

      If the reliability of the strategy method is accepted, implementation of online experiments is

simple. The experimenter needs only to simulate play once all responses have been received. This
method also has the advantage of giving more data points. For example, in contrast to a “hot”
ultimatum game where we can only observe “accept” or “reject” responses from the second player,

in a the “cold” strategy-method game, we can see the subjects’ responses to several offers because
they must answer the question “Would you accept X?” for several X values.

      The online laboratory can allow for “hot” play if there are sufficiently large numbers of respon-
dents who can be matched up as they arrive. Experiments have shown that it is possible to get

MTurk workers to wait around for another player.18 This kind of approach does require that the
experimenter establish some rules for payment if a match cannot be found in a suitable amount of
time. Another approach is to pay workers to come back to a website at a certain time to play the

game. The great advantage of this method is that it can be used to exactly replicate exactly the
current laboratory experience. This method requires web-based interfaces for games. Work at MIT
to develop “Seaweed,” a web-based experimental platform, represents a strong step in this direction

(Chilton et al., 2009). Building such platforms should be a top priority for the experimental social
science community.



7       Ethics and Community

The online laboratory raises new ethical issues. However, it also creates opportunities for setting
higher standards of evidence and for fostering greater collaboration among social scientists, both in
 18
      See this blog post report of the experiment by Lydia Chilton: http://groups.csail.mit.edu/uid/deneme/?p=483.

                                                        29
terms of sharing materials and in the adversarial “collaboration” of replication studies, which are

now far easier to perform.


7.1    Ethical implications of moving towards a bench science

Online experiments can initially propel certain subfields in the social sciences substantially toward

“bench science.” It is now remarkably easy to design, launch and analyze the results of an exper-
iment. Conducting multiple experiments per week for relatively small amounts of money is now

feasible. This is an exciting and welcome development, however, in such an environment, a re-
searcher could turn out a stream of spuriously significant results by burying all that are negative.

Even honest researchers can convince themselves of the flaws in their “pilots” and of the legitimacy
of the subsequent experiments that happened to yield good results.

   Another advantage of online experiments is that they can be run with little assistance from

others. This is coupled with the disadvantage of reducing critiques by others of procedures and

results. Since there are no lab technicians, no subjects who can be contacted, and no logs on
university-run servers, the temptation to cheat may be high. While few researchers would knowingly

falsify results, certain professional norms could raise the cost of bad behavior, with the effect of
both fostering honesty and dampening skepticism.

   The first norm should be machine-readable sharing of experimental materials, as well as detailed
instructions on set-up and process. Perhaps some institution, such as a professional organization or
the National Science Foundation, could set up a library or clearinghouse for such materials. While

most results would probably not be checked by new experiments, requiring all experimenters to

make replication very easy would make all results “contestable.” This should help make cheating
an unprofitable and unpopular strategy. Another advantage of such a norm is that it would re-

duce costly duplication of programming effort and design. As a current example, the open-source
survey software Limesurvey allows researchers to export their survey designs as stand-alone files.
Researchers can simply download other people’s experimental materials and then deploy their own
working versions of surveys/experiments.


                                                 30
       There is a consensus developing in economics to make all data and code publicly available. To

adhere to and support this norm is easy in online contexts, but online experimenters should go
a step further. Datasets should be publicly available in the rawest form possible (that is, in the

format in which the experimental software collected the data), as should the associated code that
turned the raw data into the data set.19 The Internet makes such sharing a low-cost chore, since
the data are invariably generated in machine-readable form.


7.2       Deception

There is a well-established ethic in experimental economics against deceiving subjects, an ethic

that yields significant positive externalities. Many experiments rely critically on subjects accepting
instructions from experimenters at face value. Moreover, deception in money-staked economics

experiments could approach and even constitute fraud. The arguments for maintaining this “no-

deception” policy in online experiments are even stronger.

       Workers in online labor markets are a common resource shared by researchers around the globe.
Once experiments reach a significant scale, practicing deception in these markets could pollute

this shared resource by creating distrust. In the online world, reputations will be hard to build
and maintain, since the experimenter’s user name will be the only thing the subject knows about

the experimenter. Of course, economists will share the experimental space with psychologists,
sociologists and other social scientists who may not share the “no deception” norm. Probably little
can be done to police other disciplines, but economists can take steps to highlight to their subjects

their adherence to the no-deception rule and to present arguments to others that deception is a

threat to the usefulness of these markets. If online experiments become truly widespread, we would
expect some sites to prohibit deception, in part because their non-experimenting employers would

also be hurt by distrust. Additional forms of certification or enforcement processes are also likely
  19
     Often it is necessary to clean this data in different ways, such as by dropping bad inputs, or adjusting them to
reflect the subject’s obvious intent (e.g., if a subject is asked to report in cents and reports .50, it might reasonable
to infer they meant 50 cents, not a half-cent). By making all trimming, dropping, reshaping, etc., programmatic, it
is easier for other researchers to identify why a replication failed, or what seemingly innocuous steps taken by the
original researcher drove the results.



                                                           31
to arise.


7.3     Software development

The most helpful development in the short term would be better (and better-documented) tools.

There are a number of software tools under active development that should make online experi-

mentation far easier. The first goal should probably be to port some variant of zTree to run on the
Internet. The MIT initiative “Seaweed” is a nascent attempt at this goal, but it needs much more

development.
    The research community should, as much as possible, leverage existing open-source tools. For

example, many experiments simply require some kind of survey tool. The previously mentioned
open-source project “Limesurvey” already offers an excellent interface, sophisticated tools, and per-

haps most importantly, a team of experienced and dedicated developers and a large, non-academic

user base. Obviously some tools, such as those for complex games, will have to be custom-built for

experiments. Advances in software are required for games calling for simultaneous participation by
two or more subjects. Such software is being developed in multiple locales.



8     Conclusion

In this paper, we have argued that experiments conducted in online labor markets can be just as valid
as other kinds of experiments with the added benefit of greatly reduced cost and inconvenience. In
our replication of well-known experiments, we relied on MTurk, as MTurk is currently the best online

labor market for experimentation. However, as other online labor markets mature and add their own
application programming interfaces, it should be easier to conduct experiments in other domains.

It might even be possible to recruit a panel of subjects to participate in a series of experiments.
Many other markets have the advantage ove MTurk, whose workers remain anonymous, of offering

greater ease in learning about the subjects/workers.
    In this paper, we have shown that it is possible to replicate, quickly and inexpensively, findings


                                                  32
from traditional, physical laboratory experiments in the online laboratory. We have also argued that

experiments conducted in the context of online labor markets have internal validity, and that the
issue of external validity is theory-dependent as opposed to domain-dependent. The domains where

results will and will not have external validity are arbitrary and require judgement by researchers.
Lastly, we have proposed a number of new and desirable norms and practices that could enhance
the usefulness and credibility of online experimentation. We believe that the future is bright for the

online laboratory and predict that, as the NetLab workshop quotation in our introduction suggested,

the social sciences are indeed primed for major scientific advances.



References

Andreoni, J., “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-glow Giving,”

  The Economic Journal, 1990, pp. 464–477.

Axelrod, R. and WD Hamilton, “The Evolution of Cooperation,” Science, 1981, 211 (4489),

  1390.

Bainbridge, W.S., “The Scientific Research Potential of Virtual Worlds,” Science, 2007, 317

  (5837), 472.

Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul, “Social Connections and Incentives in the Workplace:
  Evidence from Personnel Data,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (4), 1047–1094.

Benjamin, D.J., J.J. Choi, and A. Strickland, “Social Identity and Preferences,” American
  Economic Review (forthcoming), 2010.

  ,   , and G. Fisher, “Religious Identity and Economic Behavior,” Cornell University Mimeo,

  2010.




                                                 33
Bohnet, I., F. Greig, B. Herrmann, and R. Zeckhauser, “Betrayal Aversion: Evidence from

  Brazil, China, Oman, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United States,” American Economic Review,
  2008, 98 (1), 294–310.

Brandts, J. and G. Charness, “Hot vs. Cold: Sequential Responses and Preference Stability in
  Experimental Games,” Experimental Economics, 2000, 2 (3), 227–238.

Camerer, C., Behavioral game theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction, Princeton University

  Press Princeton, NJ, 2003.

Chandler, D. and A. Kapelner, “Breaking Monotony with Meaning: Motivation in Crowdsourc-

  ing Markets,” University of Chicago mimeo, 2010.

Chen, D. and J. Horton, “The Wages of Pay Cuts: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Harvard

  University Mimeo, 2010.

Chilton, L.B., C.T. Sims, M. Goldman, G. Little, and R.C. Miller, “Seaweed: A Web

  Application for Designing Economic Games,” in “Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop
  on Human Computation” ACM 2009, pp. 34–35.

Cook, T.D. and D.T. Campbell, Quasi-Experimentation, Houghton Mifflin Boston, 1979.

Eckel, C.C. and R.K. Wilson, “Internet Cautions: Experimental Games with Internet Partners,”

  Experimental Economics, 2006, 9 (1), 53–66.

Fehr, E. and K.M. Schmidt, “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation,” Quarterly

  Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (3), 817–868.

Fischbacher, U., “z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-Made Economic Experiments,” Experimental

  Economics, 2007, 10 (2), 171–178.

Fong, C.M. and E.F.P. Luttmer, “What Determines Giving to Hurricane Katrina Victims? Ex-

  perimental Evidence on Racial Group Loyalty,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2009, 1 (2), 64–87.

                                                34
Frei, Brent, “Paid Crowdsourcing: Current State & Progress toward Mainstream Business Use,”

  Produced by Smartsheet.com, 2009.

Gneezy, Uri, K.L. Leonard, and J.A. List, “Gender Differences In Competition: Evidence

  From A Matrilineal And A Patriarchal Society,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1637–1664.

Harrison, G.W. and J.A. List, “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42
  (4), 1009–1055.

Horton, J., “The Condition of the Turking class: Are Online Employers Fair and Honest?,” Arxiv

  preprint arXiv:1001.1172, 2010.

  , “Online Labor Markets,” Working paper, Harvard University, 2010.

  and L. Chilton, “The Labor Economics of Paid Crowdsourcing,” Proceedings of the 11th ACM

  Conference on Electronic Commerce (forthcoming), 2010.

Ipeirotis, P., “Demographics of Mechanical Turk,” New York University Working Paper, 2010.

Kagel, J.H., A.E. Roth, and J.D. Hey, The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton
  University Press Princeton, NJ, 1995.

Kittur, A., E.H. Chi, and B. Suh, “Crowdsourcing User Studies with Mechanical Turk,” 2008.

Levitt, S.D. and J.A. List, “Field Experiments in Economics: The Past, the Present, and the
  Future,” European Economic Review, 2009, 53 (1), 1–18.

Little, G., L.B. Chilton, M. Goldman, and R.C. Miller, “TurKit: Tools for Iterative Tasks

  on Mechanical Turk,” in “Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation”

  ACM 2009.

Lucking-Reiley, D., “Auctions on the Internet: What’s Being Auctioned, and How?,” The Journal
  of Industrial Economics, 2000, 48 (3), 227–252.

Mas, A. and E. Moretti, “Peers at work,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 112–145.

                                               35
Mason, W. and D.J. Watts, “Financial Incentives and the Performance of Crowds,” in “Pro-

  ceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation” ACM 2009, pp. 77–85.

Resnick, P., K. Kuwabara, R. Zeckhauser, and E. Friedman, “Reputation Systems,” Com-

  munications of the ACM, 2000, 43 (12), 45—48.

  , R. Zeckhauser, J. Swanson, and K. Lockwood, “The Value of Reputation on eBay: A

  Controlled Experiment,” Experimental Economics, 2006, 9 (2), 79–101.

Rubin, D.B., “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized Stud-

  ies,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 1974, 66 (5), 688–701.

Selten, R., “Die Strategiemethode zur Erforschung des eingeschrankt rationalen Verhaltens im
  Rahmen eines Oligopolexperiments,” Beitrage zur experimentellen Wirtschaftsforschung, 1967, 1,
  136–168.

Shariff, A.F. and A. Norenzayan, “God is Watching You,” Psychological Science, 2007, 18 (9),

  803–809.

Sheng, V.S., F. Provost, and P.G. Ipeirotis, “Get another label? Improving Data Quality

  and Data Mining using Multiple, Noisy Labelers,” in “Proceeding of the 14th ACM SIGKDD
  international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining” ACM 2008, pp. 614–622.

Sorokin, A. and D. Forsyth, “Utility Data Annotation with Amazon Mechanical Turk,” Univer-

  sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Mimeo, 2008, 51, 61820.

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman, “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice,”
  Science, 1981, 211 (4481), 453.

von Ahn, L., M. Blum, N.J. Hopper, and J. Langford, “CAPTCHA: Using Hard AI Problems

  for Security,” Lecture notes in computer science, 2003, pp. 294–311.




                                                36
