                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ON THE FORMATION OF COALITIONS TO PROVIDE PUBLIC GOODS - EXPERIMENTAL
                       EVIDENCE FROM THE LAB

                                       Astrid Dannenberg
                                        Andreas Lange
                                          Bodo Sturm

                                       Working Paper 15967
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15967


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2010




Seminar participants at several universities provided excellent comments. Andreas Lange gratefully
acknowledges funding of a research visit at the University of Hamburg by CliSAP (www.clisap.de)
during which part of this work was written. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Astrid Dannenberg, Andreas Lange, and Bodo Sturm. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Formation of Coalitions to Provide Public Goods - Experimental Evidence from the
Lab
Astrid Dannenberg, Andreas Lange, and Bodo Sturm
NBER Working Paper No. 15967
May 2010
JEL No. C72,C92,D71,H41

                                               ABSTRACT

The provision of public goods often relies on voluntary contributions and cooperation. While most
of the experimental literature focuses on individual contributions, many real-world problems involve
the formation of institutions among subgroups (coalitions) of players. International agreements serve
as one example. This paper experimentally tests theory on the formation of coalitions in different institutions
and compares those to a voluntary contribution mechanism. The experiment confirms the rather pessimistic
conclusions from the theory: only few players form a coalition when the institution prescribes the full
internalization of mutual benefits of members. Contrary to theory, coalitions that try to reduce the
free-riding incentives by requiring less provision from their members, do not attract additional members.
Substantial efficiency gains occur, however, both along the extensive and intensive margin when coalition
members can each suggest a minimum contribution level with the smallest common denominator being
binding. The experiment thereby shows that the acceptance of institutions depends on how terms of
coalitions are reached.


Astrid Dannenberg                                      Bodo Sturm
Centre for European Economic Research                  Leipzig University of Applied Science
L7,1                                                   P.O.Box 301166
68161 Mannheim                                         04251 Leipzig
Germany                                                Germany
dannenberg@zew.de                                      bodo.sturm@wiwi.htwk-leipzig.de

Andreas Lange
University of Maryland
2200 Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
alange@arec.umd.edu
1. Introduction

When countries got together in Copenhagen 2009 to negotiate a new climate agreement,
diverging interest and strong free-riding incentives made it impossible to reach a
meaningful way to address the challenge of providing the global public good greenhouse
gas abatement. Countries struggled to debate the right way to move forward: to have
negotiations involving all countries, to establish smaller clubs or coalitions that formulate
their own agreements or just lower the requirements to achieve unanimous decisions. 1

The problem of improving institutions to provide public goods is obviously more general.
A large literature has evolved that considers donations and the private provision of public
goods by individuals. 2 Common to this literature is the lack of enforcement mechanisms
to internalize the external effects by public intervention. Instead agents (i.e. individuals or
countries) have to voluntarily commit to contribute to the public good or to implement a
specific institution. While most of the literature considers mechanisms that include all
affected agents, many real-world examples hereby involve situations in which subgroups
(coalitions) implement an institution to address the public good problem.

International agreements serve as one example: some countries may form a coalition to
cooperate while others may free-ride on the coalition's efforts. Forming a coalition
thereby involves (at least) two challenges: on the one hand, the institutional arrangements
needs to attract members to the coalition (extensive margin). On the other hand, any
given coalition should be able to internalize the mutual benefits among its members, i.e.
increase the provision of the public good (intensive margin). In this paper, we compare
the ability of different institutions to address these two issues. We thereby experimentally
test theory on the formation of coalitions and compare the resulting provision level of the



1
  The Economist.com commented: “Though there was a fair bit of mess involved, and their achievement
was far from monumental, the leaders who turned up in Copenhagen seem to have made a difference by
finding their way to a suboptimal deal rather than none at all.” (from: “Copenhagen climate talks: Better
than nothing”, Economist.com, December 19th,
http://www.economist.com/world/international/displaystory.cfm?story_id=15124802). Aldy and Stavins
(2009) lay out different ways to implement future climate agreements.
2
  Following early work as summarized in Ledyard (1995), a large literature studies voluntary contributions
to charities and explores mechanisms like rebates and matching (Eckel and Grossman, 2003), seed money
(Andreoni 1998 and List and Lucking-Reiley 2002), auctions (Goeree et al. 2005) or raffles and lotteries
(Morgan and Sefton 2000, Landry et al. 2006).


                                                  -1-
public good with those achieved by institutions that do not allow for the formation of
subgroups, like a voluntary contribution mechanism.

Our experimental treatment is guided by a series of theoretical papers on coalition
formation (Hoel 1992, Barrett 1994, Carraro and Siniscalco 1993) that were inspired by
theories on cartel formation (d’Aspremont et al. 1983). These authors derive rather
pessimistic predictions: as individual players (countries) have a strong incentive to free-
ride on the provision of public goods by others, only a few countries are predicted to
form a coalition. Consequently, no substantial efficiency gains compared to a voluntary
contributions mechanism are predicted. Finus and Maus (2008) suggest that a coalition
can attract more members by lowering the public good provision levels required from its
members. That is, an institution that only partially internalizes the mutual benefits among
its members, may be acceptable to more players and thereby generate efficiency gains.
This leads to a trade-off between the extensive and intensive margin, i.e. between the
number of players agreeing to the institution and the degree to which they internalize
their benefits and provide the public good. We provide a first experimental test of this
literature.

The extent to which different institutions are able to generate gains in the provision of the
public good along the intensive and extensive margins has so far not received much
attention in the experimental literature. McEvoy et al. (2008) experimentally evaluate the
performance of coalitions in which members have the opportunity to violate their
commitments and fund a third-party enforcer to maintain compliance. Contrary to
theoretical predictions they find that member-financed enforcement decreases the average
provision of the public good. Kosfeld et al. (2009) recently addressed the endogenous
institution formation and show that agents are potentially able to voluntarily establish
sanctioning institutions that improve the provision of the public goods, but are less likely
to do so if subsets of players attempt to free-ride. Burger and Kolstad (2009) study the
emergence of coalitions when agents have a discrete choice between contributing or not
contributing to a public good and thereby cannot address the role of the intensive margin.

In our paper, we address the ability of three different institutions to attract members.
They all involve an initial decision of players to join or abstain from the coalition. They



                                            -2-
differ in the way public good provision is required from members of the coalition: first,
we consider a setting where coalition members are exogenously bound to fully internalize
their mutual benefits. This treatment directly tests the coalition formation literature (e.g.
Barrett 1994). Second, we consider if lowering the institutional requirements from
coalition members, e.g. reducing the required public good provision level, can attract
more members and thereby lead to efficiency gains (thereby testing Finus and Maus
2008). Third, we consider an institution in which members can each suggest a minimum
public good provision level. The smallest suggested level is then binding for all members.
This idea of players agreeing on the smallest common denominator closely follows many
real world institutional arrangements. International agreements often codify uniform
obligations among countries (Barrett 2003) and, since each participating country needs to
sign and ratify the agreement, the player with the smallest proposal is pivotal. Any
country can, however, voluntarily go beyond its obligations.

We compare these different institutions on coalition formation with institutions that
involve all players: a voluntary contribution mechanism (VCM) and a mechanism in
which all players are subject to the minimum proposal institution, i.e. participation is
exogenous. Orzen (2008) studies the latter institution in a repeated four-person public
good game and finds that it is very effective, often reaching full efficiency in the final
period. All our treatments consider a payoff structure that is linear in the total public good
provision, but non-linear in the individual contributions. This specification allows a direct
test of the above mentioned coalition formation literature. At the individual level, it
reflects increasing marginal provision costs to the public good which may arise from
budget constraints, i.e. decreasing marginal utility from numeraire consumption.

Our experiment confirms the rather pessimistic conclusions from the coalition formation
theory: only few players form a coalition and only minor efficiency gains relative to the
VCM result when members are required to fully internalize their mutual benefits.
Contrary to theory, coalitions that try to reduce the free-riding incentives by requiring
less provision from their members, cannot attract additional members. That is, the
predicted trade-off between intensive and extensive margin generally fails. However,
substantial efficiency gains occur from larger coalition sizes when coalition members can
each suggest a minimum contribution level with the smallest common denominator being


                                            -3-
binding. The experiment thereby shows that the way how terms of coalitions are reached
matters for the acceptance of such institutions. That is, when agents have a possibility to
influence the public good provisions requirements in a coalition, more agents are willing
to enter the coalition. Our results are thereby in line with previous findings in the
literature (e.g. Sutter et al. 2010, Tyran and Feld 2006) that show that endogenizing
institutional features improves upon public good provision compared to exogenously
implemented institutions.

However, not all players participate in the coalition. The coalition structure therefore
suffers from manifesting inequality between insiders and outsiders and thereby lowers the
willingness of coalition members to provide the public good. In contrast, the “smallest
common denominator” structure frequently achieves close to efficient public good
provision levels when it involves all players.

Our results have implications for public policy. Forming clubs or coalitions to provide
public goods can be beneficial compared to just relying on voluntary contributions from
everybody. However, the terms of institutionalizing the provision requirements from
coalition or club members are crucial for the capacity to attract members: following an
exogenous rule that specifies the required contribution levels from members (full or
partial internalization of benefits) is less effective in inducing players to join the coalition
than an institution that allows potential cooperators to endogenously determine the rules.
If agents are only bound to the smallest common denominator, more players are willing
to accept the coalition. While these institutions with partial coverage can thereby generate
large efficiency gains, it appears worthwhile to explore an institutional setting in which
all agents participate in making minimum proposals. 3

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a short theory of coalition
formation and public goods provision which generates the predictions for our experiment.
We then report the experimental design in section 3, before we discuss our results in
section 4. Section 5 finally concludes.

3
  The institution could formally be made incentive-compatible by requiring players to deposit a bond
covering the level of their own minimum proposal. When the smallest common denominator is determined
the difference between this bond and the binding minimum can be returned. Agents have an incentive to
carry out their obligations in order to regain their deposit. For a possible implementation of such a deposit
mechanism, see Gerber and Wichard (2009).


                                                   -4-
2. Theory and Predictions

We consider an economy that is populated by agents, i = 1,..., n , with utility functions of
the form

                                                   ui = yi + γ Q                                      (1)

where yi is a numeraire, and Q = ∑ j =1 q j represents the total provision level of the
                                               n



public good and γ denotes the (constant) marginal utility from the public good. Subjects
can allocate their initial income w to personal consumption or public good provision qi
with the budget constraint given by

                                                   yi + qi 2 ≤ w                                      (2)

The utility function given by (1) and (2) is standard in the coalition formation literature
(Carraro and Siniscalco 1993, Barrett 1994). 4 We use this payoff structure to derive
analytic predictions for our experiment. Throughout, we assume interior solutions which
requires w ≥ nγ / 2 .



Voluntary contribution mechanism and social optimum

Individual utility maximization immediately yields the individual Nash provision level
qiNE = γ 2 with the total contributions given by Q NE = nγ 2 . It should be noted that the
Nash equilibrium involves dominant strategy such that each individual’s actions do not
depend on the provision levels chosen by the remaining players. The social optimum
maximizes total payoff and is given by qiSO = nγ 2 and Q SO = n 2 γ 2 .

We now derive the equilibrium under the different coalition formation institutions. The
standard coalition formation model (Carraro and Siniscalco 1993) involves two stages. In


4
  This specification deviates from a large part of the literature on voluntary public good provision which
largely considers linear provision costs and implies a dominant strategy of giving zero in the Nash
equilibrium such that any variance in the data could mistakenly be interpreted as altruism (Ledyard 1995).
Differently, our non-linear structure generates positive Nash contributions.


                                                   -5-
the first stage, each subject decides about membership in the coalition. Let S be the set
of players who are members of the coalition with k ( 1 ≤ k ≤ n ) denoting its size. In the
second stage, public good provision is chosen. Non-members are free to choose their
public good provision level. Due to the assumed linearity of the public good, their payoff-
maximizing decision does not depend on the coalition efforts and is again given by
qiNC = γ 2 . For the choice of public good provision by the members of the coalition, we
compare different institutions.



Payoff maximizing coalition (COALfull)

If members of the coalition fully internalize their mutual benefits, the payoff-maximizing
individual provision level given coalition size k is qiC (k ) = γk / 2 for all members of the
coalition.



Partial internalization of benefits inside the coalition (COALpartial)

We consider a setting where members of the coalition are not able to fully internalize
their mutual benefits, but only internalize at a ratio of α ≤ 1 . That is, the provision level
given coalition size k is qiC (k ,α ) = αγk / 2 for all members of the coalition. This
institution has been suggested by Finus and Maus (2008).



Smallest common denominator inside the coalition (COALmin)

We finally consider an institution for negotiations inside the coalition where members of
the coalition are requested to suggest a minimum public good provision level. After these
minimum proposals qimin are received from all participating parties, the agreement will
require all agents in the coalition to provide at least the smallest suggested level
min j∈S q min
          j . That is, agents are bound to provide qi ≥ q min = min j∈S q min
                                                                          j   . The

individually payoff-maximizing provision level at this last stage is hence given by
qi = max ⎡⎣ q min , γ / 2 ⎤⎦ . Note that this implies that it is weakly dominant to suggest a


                                            -6-
minimum provision level of qimin = k γ / 2 : this maximizes payoff if other players in the

coalition suggest q min
                    j   ≥ k γ / 2 , suggesting a smaller level would potentially lower the

binding minimum and hence negatively affect all profits. However, there are other
equilibria in weakly dominated strategies: any binding minimum q min < k γ / 2 is
established as equilibrium if at least two players suggest that level while other players
suggest a larger minimum.

This logic immediately implies that the minimum stage played for all players, i.e. in
combination with a public good provision game, generates the efficient outcome in
weakly dominant strategies. Thus, the following proposition holds:



Proposition 1

If all players are requested to suggest a minimum provision level and negotiations
implement the smallest minimum level as a binding provision level, the social optimum is
obtained in weakly dominant strategies.



In general, however, it is doubtful that all players participate in negotiations, we therefore
compare the above institutions for negotiations with respect to the coalition size that they
generate.



Membership game

All these institutions for deciding the provision level inside the coalition lead to specific
incentives of agents to join the coalition. Consequently, different coalition sizes may
result. Specifically, we can denote the total payoff to members of the coalition given a
coalition size of k and institution I by Π C (k , I ) , the payoffs to non-members by

Π NC (k , I ) . Using the terminology from cartel and coalition formation literature
(d’Aspremont et al. 1983, Carraro and Siniscalco 1993, Barrett 1994), a coalition of size
k is externally stable if no player outside the coalition has an incentive to join, i.e. if



                                            -7-
Π NC (k , I ) > Π C (k + 1, I ) . 5   The coalition is internally stable if no member has an

incentive to leave, i.e. if Π C (k , I ) ≥ Π NC (k − 1, I ) .

For the institutions COALfull and COALpartial we can restate known results from the
literature:



Proposition 2

                                                                                        2 + 3 − 2α
A coalition that is internally and externally stable satisfies k ≤                                        but
                                                                                              α
         2 + 3 − 2α
k +1 >                    .
                α

The proof involves straightforward comparison of payoffs which follow from (1) and (2).



For the standard coalition game (COALfull) in which the coalition fully internalizes their
mutual benefits ( α = 1 ), this implies that only 3 agents form the coalition ( k = 3 ).
Figure 1 shows how the predicted size of stable coalitions depends on α . The decreasing
relation corresponds to a trade-off between intensive and extensive margins: For
example, coalitions of k = 6 players could be stabilized for α = 0.5 while only 3 players
form a coalition when mutual benefits are fully internalized. The increased coalition size
can thereby also generate efficiency gains, i.e. increases in total payoff to all agents and
in the payoff to the average coalition member. The example of k = 6 and α = 0.5
illustrates this result: compared to the k = 3 solution when α = 1 , the same total
provision level results while the provision efforts are being distributed across more
players. Due to the increasing marginal provision costs, gains in total payoffs result.

We now consider the institution in which members can make their minimum suggestion
(COALmin). Since the weakly dominant strategy in the subgame following the
membership decision involves full internalization of mutual benefits, the only subgame


5
 We assume that a player would join the coalition if he or she is indifferent as this increases payoffs to all
other agents.


                                                    -8-
perfect equilibrium in weakly dominant strategies equals the k = 3 result in COALfull.
However, it is not clear that agents choose the weakly dominant strategies in the
minimum stage. Therefore, less than full internalization could result. As a result, different
coalition sizes could be stabilized. For example, the grand coalition is stabilized when
players choose the following subgame-perfect strategies: (i) all agents coordinate on the
full internalization in the grand coalition, while (ii) in all smaller coalitions players
suggest the minimum contribution at the Nash level ( q min = γ / 2 ). 6



Proposition 3

In the coalition game in which negotiating parties agree to implement provision
obligations at the smallest minimum level suggested by a member of the coalition, the
social optimum in a grand coalition (as well as any other coalition size) can be stabilized
in a subgame perfect equilibrium. The only equilibrium in weakly dominant strategies
corresponds to the standard coalition game in which three members fully internalize their
mutual benefits.



3. Experimental Design

We designed an experiment to test the different institutions on coalition formation to
provide public goods. The treatments involved different institutions to implement a ten-
person public good game. The payoff function for each player was given by

π i = −qi2 + γ Q = −qi2 + γ ∑ j =1 q j with γ = 10 , n = 10 and qi ∈ [0,...,100] and was
                                n



common knowledge.We begin with the traditional VCM as a control treatment. Three
coalition formation treatments introduced a first “coalition stage” in which subjects
needed to decide on participating in the institution. Decisions to join a coalition were
made simultaneously and independently. Following this coalition stage, subjects played
their contribution game. In treatment COALfull, the members’ contributions to the public
good were exogenously fixed at the level that internalized their respective mutual benefits

6
 Coalitions that do not include all players may complicate coordination. This could for example be caused
by inequality concerns (e.g., Fehr and Schmidt 1999, Lange and Vogt 2003).


                                                  -9-
onto each other, while in treatment COALpartial they only internalized 50% of their
mutual benefits, i.e. α = 0.5 . Non-members in both treatments were free to set their
contributions at any level. Treatment COALmin introduced an intermediate stage: after
being told the number of subjects in the coalition, all members of the coalition negotiate
about the minimum contribution that each member should contribute to the public good
(minimum stage). Negotiations take the form that all participants simultaneously and
independently proposed a minimum amount between 0 and 100. The smallest proposed
amount then became the binding lower limit for the contributions of all coalition
members. Members were informed about all proposed minimum amounts (arranged in
descending order). Non-members did not make any decision in this stage and were only
informed about the coalition size. In the contribution stage, members and non-members
chose the amount of their contributions to the public good. While non-members could
freely choose their contributions, members’ contributions were bound to provide at least
the binding minimum. Finally, we implemented a treatment VCMmin in which all
subjects took part in the negotiation about a minimum contribution. Players first
simultaneously and independently proposed a minimum amount between 0 and 100. The
smallest proposed amount then became the binding lower limit for the contributions of all
players. Players were informed about all proposed minimum amounts (arranged in
descending order). In the contribution stage, all players simultaneously and independently
determined the amount of their contribution to the public good which had to be equal or
greater than the binding minimum. Table 1 summarizes the key features of our
experimental design and the number of participants in each session. The experiment was
run in May and July 2009 at the MaxLab laboratory at the University of Magdeburg,
Germany. In total, 500 students participated in the experiment, whereby 100 subjects
took part in each treatment. No subject participated in more than one treatment. Sessions
lasted between 60 and 90 minutes. For each session, we recruited 20 subjects. Each
subject was seated at linked computer terminals that were used to transmit all decision
and payoff information. We used z-tree (Fischbacher 2007) for programming. Once the
individuals were seated and logged into the terminals, a set of instructions and a record
sheet were handed out. Experimental instructions included several numerical examples
and control questions in order to ensure that all subjects understood the games. The



                                          - 10 -
sessions each consisted of 12 rounds, the first two being practice. The subjects were
instructed that the practice rounds would not affect earnings. At the beginning of the
experiment subjects were randomly assigned to groups of ten. The subjects were not
aware of whom they were grouped with, but they did know that they remained within the
same group of players throughout the rounds (partner matching). At the end of the
experiment, one of non-practice rounds was chosen at random as the round that would
determine earnings with an exchange rate between Euro and token of 1:100. On average,
a subject earned €10.68 in the games. Additionally, all subjects received €1.00 as show-
up fee. 7



4. Experimental Results

Our experimental design enables us to test our theoretical predictions regarding public
good contribution levels across different institutions. We craft the results summary by
both pooling the data across all periods and reporting treatment differences in the first
five and last five periods. We later explore the effects of time on contribution schedules
in more detail.

Table 2 provides mean contribution and payoff levels for each of our treatments and
Figure 2 provide a graphical depiction of the data. The first panel presents the average
contribution levels across treatments and the second reports the resulting payoff average
levels. As can be seen from the table and figures, contribution levels in the standard
coalition game COALfull do not exceed those in the VCM (12.1 vs. 12.3). Average
contributions in the COALpartial treatment are smaller (8.5) such that the hypothesized
efficiency gains did not materialize. Combining the coalition formation framework or the
VCM with a minimum stage, however, increases average contributions (14.8 and 22.1).

These differences are confirmed by a series of Mann-Whitney tests with the average
contribution by one group across all periods is taken as the unit of observation: VCM
gives larger contributions than COALpartial (1% significance), less than the COALmin
(10% significance), and less than VCMmin (10% significance). The standard coalition

7
 Overall, 9 out of 500 subjects earned negative payoffs in the games. In these cases, payoffs were cut off at
zero and the subjects only received the show-up fee.


                                                   - 11 -
model COALfull performs worse than COALmin and VCMmin (5% and 10% significance,
respectively). Identical comparisons follow for the average payoff, i.e. the efficiency
level of the respective institutions (see also Table 2). We can therefore formulate the
following result:

       Result 1: Average contribution and payoff levels in coalition formation
       game do not exceed those in the voluntary contribution mechanism (VCM)
       if the coalition fully internalizes their mutual benefits. If the coalition
       partially internalizes the mutual benefits, average contributions and
       payoffs are even lower than those in the VCM. If negotiations among
       coalition members are facilitated through a smallest common denominator
       rule, average contributions to the public good increase. The smallest
       common denominator rule best facilitates public good provision when
       involving all agents.

Further evidence for Result 1 can be found through a series of linear regression models as
illustrated in Table 3. Averaged across all periods, the minimum institutions (VCMmin
and COALmin) perform significantly better than the VCM (1% significance), while the
partial internalization in the coalition formation structure leads to less contributions (1%
significance).

Figure 3 indicates that the contributions in the VCM are decreasing over time, they are
smaller in the last 5 periods than in the initial 5 periods (see also Table 2). This
downward trend which has been observed in many other experimental settings primarily
for linear public goods is, however, significantly less pronounced for all coalition
structures. In VCMmin, contributions increase over time. This effect is due an increase in
the proposed minimum contribution levels. As suggested by the theory, some (but not all)
groups are able to coordinate on the optimal contribution level (see Figure 4).

Furthermore, when concentrating on the last 5 periods, the coalition structure COALfull
performs better than the VCM. A Mann-Whitney test confirms that COALfull leads to
larger contributions than VCM in the last 5 periods (10% significance). This suggests that
predictions from the theory hold: the coalition formation structure which internalizes all
the coalition members’ benefits provides small benefits compared to the voluntary


                                           - 12 -
contribution mechanism. However, the partial internalization of benefits in COALpartial
does not provide any positive effect. Exactly the same comparisons result for the payoff
levels. These findings are confirmed by regression results depicted in Tables 3 and 4.

In the following, we will have a closer look at the cause of the differences. For this, we
consider the number of agents who join the coalition. Figure 5 indicates the crucial
differences. While the coalition in the standard coalition formation treatment (COALfull)
include on average close to the predicted three members (3.50), this number is even
slightly less in COALpartial (3.22). Formulating less strict provision levels in the
coalition therefore does not reduce free-riding incentives in a way that more agents join.
This result directly puts into question the empirical relevance of the theoretical result by
Finus and Maus (2008). A reduced requirement along the intensive margin therefore does
not trigger the predicted gains along the extensive margin. The average coalition size
increases, however, when agents are allowed to make their own proposals for the
minimum provision in the coalition: in COALmin we obtain an average coalition size of
5.07 which is significantly larger than the one for the other two treatments (Mann
Whitney, 1% significance; further evidence in Table 5).

        Result 2: The number of agents in the coalition is close to the theoretical
        prediction in the standard coalition formation game. An exogenous
        reduction in the provision levels required when joining the coalition does
        not enlarge the coalition. An institution in which coalition members can
        suggest their own minimum with the smallest suggested level being
        binding triggers the entry of more agents.

Result 2 potentially provides an interesting feature of the acceptance of institutional
requirements. In the COALmin treatment, agents can impact the coalitions’ provision
efforts after observing the number of coalition members, i.e. the number of potential
cooperators. This implies that they are not bound to a specific provision level just by
showing their intent to join the coalition. 8 As a consequence, the “costs” of joining are
smaller such that we should expect more agents to join. Result 2 is consistent with recent


8
  For example, this can be relevant if players are inequality-averse and want to avoid large payoff
inequalities between free-riders and coalition members (see e.g. Fehr and Schmidt 1999).


                                              - 13 -
findings in the literature that endogenously determined institutions are better accepted
than exogenous rules (Sutter et al. 2006, Tyran and Feld 2006). The important question
is, however, what level such coalition can agree upon.

A sensible measure to assess the provision level in the coalition is the internalization
ratio, i.e. the ratio of chosen provision effort of the coalition compared with the level that
fully internalizes the mutual benefits of coalition members ( ∑i∈S qi /( k 2γ / 2) ). On
average the ratio is given by 83% for the COALmin treatment and thereby lies in between
levels in COALfull and COALpartial as illustrated in Figure 6. 9 The internalization ratio
does depend, however, on the size of the coalition. We depict this internalization ratio in
Figure 7 for the different coalition sizes in COALmin. Figure 7 shows that the ratio based
on the average suggested minimum, the binding minimum, as well as the eventually
chosen level are decreasing in the coalition size k . This is confirmed by a linear
regression model as reported in Table 6.

           Result 3: When negotiations in the coalition are institutionalized by each
           coalition member making a minimum proposal with the smallest suggested
           level being binding, the extent to which mutual benefits are internalized is
           decreasing in the size of the coalition.

Result 3 shows a trade-off between intensive and extensive margin for the endogenously
formed coalition. We can furthermore compare the internalization ratio given by the
binding minimum with the ratio needed to stabilize a given coalition size as derived in
section 2 (dashed line in Figure 7, see also Figure 1). Interestingly and surprisingly, the
binding minimum ratio (int_min) follows closely the levels that are necessary to stabilize
coalitions of the respective size.

In particular, the internalization ratios for coalitions that comprise more than 3 players are
smaller than 1 (t-test, 1% significance). That is, the coalitions do not fully internalize the
benefits of their members. We can only speculate about the reasons: on the one hand, if
agents are inequality-averse, they may want to avoid unfavorable payoff differences to
free-riders and therefore suggest a lower minimum. On the other hand, it may be more


9
    Note that the internalization ratio is exogenously fixed at 1 in COALfull and 0.5 in COALpartial.


                                                     - 14 -
complicated for larger coalitions to coordinate onto the optimal provision level as they
are more susceptible to single players suggesting a small binding minimum. 10



Decision to enter the coalition

We now have a closer look at the determinants of individual decisions to enter a
coalition. One of the most important theoretical results is that the incentives to leave the
coalition are the larger, the larger the coalition size is. In Table 5 we show results from a
probit estimation model which explains the decision to join the coalition by the
individual’s decision in the previous period as well as by the lagged coalition size. We
see that the individual’s decision is largely driven by his or her behavior in the previous
period (1% significance). The likelihood of joining the coalition is not significantly
influenced by the coalition size in the previous period. Additionally, players in the
COALmin treatment are more likely to join the coalition (1% significance).

For players in COALmin, the internalization ratio based on the binding minimum is also
decisive: the larger this internalization ratio in the past period, the smaller is the
likelihood of an agent joining the coalition (5% significance).

        Result 4: In COALmin, subjects are the less likely to join a coalition, the
        stricter the provision requirements, i.e. the larger the internalization ratio
        based on the binding minimum in the previous period.



Decision on minimum levels

We have shown the benefits of institutions that allow agents to first submit a minimum
suggestion, before the smallest one will be binding for all agents. In the VCMmin
treatment this allows agents to step by step coordinate to larger provision levels of the
public good. In the COALmin treatment this allows agents to condition the coalition
efforts on the information on how many agents stay outside the coalition. The implied


10
  This is similar to the effects in VCMmin where only some groups are able to coordinate (see Figure 4)
while others do not achieve larger provision levels as some players consistently make suboptimal
minimum suggestions, i.e. do not play the weakly dominant strategy.


                                                - 15 -
reduction in the “risk” of being exploited by free-riders when joining the coalition allows
larger coalitions to build which generate larger provision levels of the public good.

A distinct prediction from the theory is that agents in both minimum treatments have a
weakly dominant strategy to suggest the minimum which fully internalize the mutual
benefits. We have already seen that this full internalization does not occur in our
experimental results. We therefore finally address the question how agents’ minimum
suggestions evolve over time. Theory would predict that agents’ minimum suggestions
should move upward: those who propose a larger level than others have no effect on the
binding level. By adjusting downwards, they only can bring down the binding minimum
which would hurt their and other players’ payoffs. Those who suggested the binding level
would have incentives to increase their suggestion since this can only benefit them and
others. To test these adjustments over time, we define a variable “change_qimin” which
reflects the difference between a player’s minimum suggestion in the current and in the
previous period. Table 7 presents the results from a linear regression model. We regress
the change in the suggested minimum on the individuals’ minimum suggestion in the
previous period, the previously binding minimum, and a dummy variably which takes the
value one if and only if the agent was a pivotal player in the previous period, i.e. if his or
her minimum suggestion was binding. For both treatments, agents adjust their proposals
upwards (constant is positive, 1% significance). This adjustment is smaller for subjects
who already have submitted larger proposals in the previous periods. In the COALmin
treatment we see that in particular pivotal players adjust their proposal upwards.

       Result 5: On average, subjects are adjusting the minimum proposals
       upwards over time.

This effect is particularly important since agents’ provision levels of the public good are
(as predicted) highly sensitive to the required minimum. In fact, 40% of contribution
decisions in VCMmin and 65% of decisions in COALmin are exactly at the binding
minimum level. It is therefore evident that those players whose suggestion forms the
binding minimum have a large effect on the total provision level of the public good.




                                            - 16 -
5. Conclusions

Not just the failure of climate negotiations in Copenhagen has revealed that forming
institutions to secure the provision of global public goods is a complicated endeavor. The
success of an institution to overcome free-riding incentives depends on two interlinked
challenges: on the one hand, the institutional arrangements need to attract signatories, i.e.
coalition members (extensive margin). On the other hand, any given coalition should be
able to internalize the mutual benefits from the public good among its members (intensive
margin).

In this paper, we tested different institutions with respect to their ability to succeed along
these two dimensions. Our experimental results show, one the one hand, that institutions
that exogenously force members to fully internalize their mutual benefits generate a
rather low participation rate, just as theoretically predicted. The resulting provision levels
of the public good do hardly go beyond the ones achieved by a purely voluntary
contribution mechanism. On the other hand, lowering the degree of internalization of
benefits within the coalition does not attract more members and, accordingly, cannot
generate efficiency gains.

We further showed that institutions that allow members to endogenously determine the
terms of the agreement may attract more members. We thereby add to the recent
literature on beneficial endogenous choices of rules in social dilemma situations (e.g.
Sutter et al. 2010, Tyran and Feld 2006). In particular, we show the success of a very
simple negotiation rule: each coalition member can suggest a provision level, knowing
that the smallest suggested level is binding for all coalition members: this rule generates
larger coalition sizes and average contributions. Efficiency gains therefore result along
the extensive margin. This generates a clear tradeoff between extensive and intensive
margin: the larger the (endogenously determined) requirements from coalition members
were in the previous period, the less willing subjects are to enter the coalition, i.e. the
negotiations.

The principle of the smallest common denominator reflects many real world institutional
arrangements which often implement uniform obligations. Coordination on large




                                            - 17 -
provision levels, however, does not always happen and also requires time: the largest
benefits from coordinating on larger minimum proposals occur in the last periods.

However, despite the relative success of the smallest common denominator rule in our
experiment, experience from the field (e.g. Barrett 2003) shows that such rules may not
necessarily imply strong agreements. Reasons may involve the heterogeneity of countries
with respect to wealth as well as to costs and benefits from the public good which may
aggravate the coordination on a uniform binding minimum. The experimental
investigation of the impact of such heterogeneities on coalition formation and on the
performance of the different institutions and their possible adjustments are fruitful areas
of further research.




                                          - 18 -
References

d’Aspremont, C., Gabszeweiz, J.J., and Weymark, J.A. (1983): On the stability of
  collusive price leadership, Canadian Journal of Economics 16: 17-25.
Aldy, J.E., and Stavins, R.N. (Eds.) (2009): Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy:
  Implementing Architectures for Agreement, Oxford University Press.
Andreoni, J. (1998): Toward a Theory of Charitable Fundraising, Journal of Political
  Economy 106: 1186-1213.
Barrett, S. (1994): Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements, Oxford
  Economic Papers 46: 878-894.
Barrett, S. (2003): Environment And Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental Treaty-
  making, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Burger, N. and Kolstad, C.D. (2009): Voluntary Public Goods Provision, Coalition
  Formation, and Uncertainty, NBER Working Papers 15543.
Carraro, C. and Siniscalco, D. (1993): Strategies for the International Protection of the
  Environment, Journal of Public Economics 52: 309-328.
Eckel, C. and Grossman, P. (2003): Rebate versus matching: does how we subsidize
  charitable contributions matter? Journal of Public Economics 87: 681-701.
Fehr, E. and Schmidt, K. (1999): A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 817-868.
Fischbacher, U. (2007): Z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experiments,
   Experimental Economics 10: 171-178.
Finus, M. and Maus, S. (2008): Modesty May Pay, Journal of Public Economic Theory
   10: 801-826.
Gerber, A. and Wichard, P. (2009): Providing Public Goods in the Absence of Strong
  Institutions, Journal of Public Economics 93: 429-439.
Goeree, J., Maasland, E., Onderstal, S., and Turner, J. (2005): How (Not) to Raise
  Money, Journal of Political Economy 113: 897-918.
Hoel, M. (1992): International Environmental Conventions: The Case of Uniform
  Reductions of Emissions, Environmental and Resource Economics 2: 41-59.
Kosfeld, M., Okada, A., and Riedl, A. (2009): Institution Formation in Public Goods
  Games, American Economic Review 99: 1335-1355.
Landry, C., Lange, A., List, J. A., Price, M., and Rupp, N. (2006): Toward and
  Understanding of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field Experiment,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2): 747-782.
Lange, A. and Vogt, C. (2003): Cooperation in International Environmental Negotiations
  due to a Preference for Equity, Journal of Public Economics 87: 2049-2067.
Ledyard, J.O. (1995): Public Goods. A Survey of Experimental Research, in: Kagel, J.H.
  and Roth, A.E. (Eds.), The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton, 111-194.


                                           - 19 -
List, J.A. and Lucking-Reiley, D. (2002): Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on
   Charitable Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign,
   Journal of Political Economy 110: 215-233.
McEvoy, D.M., Murphy, J.J., Spraggon, J.M., and Stranlund, J.K. (2008): The Problem
  of Maintaining Compliance within Stable Coalitions: Experimental Evidence,
  Working Paper No. 2008-2, University of Massachusetts Amherst.
Morgan, J. and Sefton, M. (2000): Funding Public Goods with Lotteries: Experimental
  Evidence, Review of Economic Studies, 67: 785-810.
Orzen, H. (2008): Fundraising through Competition: Evidence from the Lab, CeDEx
  Discussion Paper No. 2008-11, University of Nottingham.
Sutter, M., Haigner, S., and Kocher, M.G. (2010): Choosing the stick or the carrot? –
  Endogenous institutional choice in social dilemma situations. Review of Economic
  Studies, forthcoming.
Tyran, J.-R. and Feld, L.P. (2006): Achieving compliance when legal sanctions are
  nondeterrent, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 108: 135-156.




                                          - 20 -
Table 1: Summary of experimental design
Treatment     Stages           Coalition   n        γ        α     No. of
                               structure                           subjects
VCM           contribution        no       10       10             100

COALfull      membership         yes       10       10       1      100
              contribution

COALpartial   membership         yes       10       10       0.5    100
              contribution

COALmin       membership         yes       10       10              100
              minimum
              contribution

VCMmin        minimum            no        10       10              100
              contribution




Table 2: Summary statistics for all treatments
Treatment               q          π            k          eff
                                         Total
VCM                     12.3       905.2                   0.21
COALfull                12.1       959.3         3.5       0.24
COALpartial             8.5        727.1         3.2       0.12
COALmin                 14.8       1060.1        5.1       0.29
VCMmin                  22.1       1418.6                  0.47
                                    First 5 periods
VCM                    15.7        1098.4                  0.31
COALfull               13.3        1030.1        3.7       0.27
COALpartial            9.0         766.1         3.1       0.14
COALmin                16.3        1160.1        5.3       0.34
VCMmin                 16.8        1187.9                  0.35
                                    Last 5 periods
VCM                    8.9         711.9                   0.12
COALfull               10.9        888.5         3.2       0.20
COALpartial            7.9         688.1         3.3       0.11
COALmin                13.4        960.1         4.8       0.24
VCMmin                 27.5        1649.2                  0.58
Notes: q = average contributions, π = average payoffs, k   = average coalition size,
eff = average efficiency defined as (π − π NE ) /(π SO − π NE ) with π    =475 and π =2500
                                                                       NE           SO




                                                - 21 -
Table 3: Linear regression of public good contributions for all treatments
                                    All per.        All per.    Last 5 per.
VARIABLES                              qi              qi           qi

COALfull                              -0.202       -2.420***    2.016***
                                     (0.578)         (0.796)     (0.780)
COALpartial                        -3.826***       -6.702***      -0.950
                                     (0.578)         (0.796)     (0.780)
COALmin                             2.551***          0.582     4.520***
                                     (0.578)         (0.796)     (0.780)
VCMmin                              9.833***          1.046     18.62***
                                     (0.578)         (0.796)     (0.780)
per6_10                                            -6.880***
                                                     (0.796)
per6_10_COALfull                                    4.436***
                                                     (1.126)
per6_10_COALpartial                                 5.752***
                                                     (1.126)
per6_10_COALmin                                     3.938***
                                                     (1.126)
per6_10_VCMmin                                      17.57***
                                                     (1.126)
Constant                           12.30***         15.74***    8.858***
                                    (0.409)          (0.563)     (0.551)

Observations                            5000             5000        2500
R-squared                              0.111             0.158       0.252
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, significance *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Definition of variables:
qi = subject’s contribution,
COALfull = 1 if subject played in the COALfull treatment, 0 otherwise,
COALpartial = 1 if subject played in the COALpartial treatment, 0 otherwise,
COALmin = 1 if subject played in the COALmin treatment, 0 otherwise,
VCMmin = 1 if subject played in the VCMmin treatment, 0 otherwise,
per6_10 = 1 for the last five periods, 0 for the first five periods,
per6_10_*treatment* = interaction term of time dummy and treatment dummy.




                                          - 22 -
Table 4: Linear regression of payoff levels for all treatments
                                     All per.       All per.     Last 5 per.
VARIABLES                             pay            pay            pay

COALfull                              54.16           -68.28     176.6***
                                     (34.06)         (47.30)      (46.48)
COALpartial                        -178.1***       -332.3***       -23.77
                                     (34.06)         (47.30)      (46.48)
COALmin                             154.9***          61.70      248.2***
                                     (34.06)         (47.30)      (46.48)
VCMmin                             513.4***          89.52*      937.3***
                                     (34.06)         (47.30)      (46.48)
per6_10                                            -386.5***
                                                     (47.30)
per6_10_COALfull                                    244.9***
                                                     (66.89)
per6_10_COALpartial                                308.6***
                                                     (66.89)
per6_10_COALmin                                    186.5***
                                                     (66.89)
per6_10_VCMmin                                     847.8***
                                                     (66.89)
Constant                            905.2***       1,098***      711.9***
                                     (24.09)         (33.44)      (32.87)

Observations                            5000             5000        2500
R-squared                              0.083             0.117       0.185
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, significance *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Definition of variables:
pay = subject’s payoff level,
COALfull = 1 if subject played in the COALfull treatment, 0 otherwise,
COALpartial = 1 if subject played in the COALpartial treatment, 0 otherwise,
COALmin = 1 if subject played in the COALmin treatment, 0 otherwise,
VCMmin = 1 if subject played in the VCMmin treatment, 0 otherwise,
per6_10 = 1 for the last five periods, 0 for the first five periods,
per6_10_*treatment* = interaction term of time dummy and treatment dummy.




                                          - 23 -
Table 5: Probit estimation of decision to join the coalition for all coalition treatments
                         All coal      COALmin
VARIABLES                   ci            ci

ci_lag                  1.169***        1.381***
                         (0.0565)       (0.0979)
k_lag                     0.0249         -0.0167
                         (0.0213)       (0.0286)
meanqi_lag               -0.00658
                        (0.00627)
COALpartial               -0.0391
                         (0.0685)
COALmin                 0.241***
                         (0.0687)
int_ratio_min_lag                       -0.236**
                                         (0.103)
Constant                -0.875***      -0.480***
                         (0.0842)        (0.170)

Observations                2700             900
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, significance *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Definition of variables:
ci = 1 if subject joined the coalition, 0 otherwise,
ci_lag = 1 if subject joined the coalition in the previous period, 0 otherwise,
k_lag = coalition size in the previous period,
meanqi_lag = mean group contribution in the previous period,
COALpartial = 1 if subject played in the COALpartial treatment, 0 otherwise,
COALmin = 1 if subject played in the COALmin treatment, 0 otherwise,
int_ratio_min_lag = previous period internalization ratio based on the binding minimum.




                                           - 24 -
Table 6: Linear regression of internalization ratios for COALmin
                       COALmin
VARIABLES            int_ratio_min

k                     -0.0725***
                       (0.00901)
period                -0.0166***
                       (0.00544)
Constant               1.115***
                        (0.0615)

Observations              1000
R-squared                 0.063
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, significance *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Definition of variables:
int_ratio_min = internalization ratio based on the binding minimum,
k = coalition size,
period = period.



Table 7: Linear regression of the adjustment in the individual minimum proposal qimin

over time ( qimin in current period minus qimin in previous period) for COALmin and
VCMmin
                       COALmin             VCMmin
VARIABLES             change_qimin       change_qimin

qi_min_lag             -0.349***           -0.363***
                        (0.0625)            (0.0283)
q_min_lag               -0.236**             0.0118
                        (0.0949)            (0.0317)
pivot_lag                5.174*               -0.477
                         (2.785)             (1.515)
Constant               15.86***            18.28***
                         (2.915)             (1.405)

Observations                344                 900
R-squared                  0.237               0.201
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, significance *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Definition of variables:
change_qimin = subject’s minimum proposal minus proposal in the previous period,
qi_min_lag = subject’s minimum proposal in the previous period,
q_min_lag = binding minimum in the previous period,
pivot_lag = 1 if subject suggested binding minimum in the previous period, 0 otherwise.


                                         - 25 -
Figure 1: Internalization factor α needed to stabilize a given coalition size




Figure 2: Average contribution and payoff levels for all treatments

 25                                            1600
         VCMbase
                                               1400
         COALfull
 20
         COALpartial                           1200
         COALmin
                                               1000
 15      VCMmin

                                                800

 10                                             600                             VCMbase
                                                                                COALfull
                                                400
                                                                                COALpartial
  5
                                                200                             COALmin
                                                                                VCMmin
  0                                                0
                       mean(qi)                                   mean(pay)




                                          - 26 -
Figure 3: Average contribution for all treatments over time


   35
                       VCMbase
   30                  Coalpartial
                       Coalfull
   25                  CoalMin
                       VCMmin
   20


   15


   10


    5


    0
          1      2      3         4   5      6     7      8    9   10

                                      Periods




Figure 4: Binding minimum in VCMmin for each group over time




                                          - 27 -
Figure 5: Average contribution levels among coalition members and free-riders as well
as average coalition size across treatments

 25                                                       6
         VCMbase
         COALfull
                                                          5
 20      COALpartial
         COALmin
         VCMmin                                           4
 15

                                                          3

 10
                                                          2
                                                              COALfull
   5
                                                          1   COALpartial
                                                              COALmin
   0                                                      0
          mean(qi) free          mean(qi) coal                 mean(k)




Figure 6: Average internalization ratios conditional on coalition size.

   1

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3         COALfull
 0.2         COALpartial
 0.1         COALmin
   0
         internalization(coal)




                                                 - 28 -
Figure 7: Average internalization ratios conditional on coalition size in COALmin:
suggested minimum ratio (int_qimin), binding minimum ratio (int_min), chosen fraction
of mutual benefits that are internalized in coalition (int_qi); the dashed line (int_needed)
shows the internalization ratios theoretically required to stabilize the respective coalition
size.

  2.5
                                                             int_qi
                                                             int_qimin
    2                                                        int_min
                                                             int_needed

  1.5



    1



  0.5



    0
         2        3        4       5        6        7       8           9
                                        k




                                            - 29 -
Appendix
Experimental instructions for the COALmin treatment


Instructions
Welcome to the Magdeburg Experimental Laboratory MAXLAB!
Please read these instructions carefully and should you have any questions please signal
us by opening the door or a show of hands. In the laboratory experiment you are taking
part in, you can win money depending on your decisions and the decisions of your fellow
players. Your payout from the experiment will be calculated in LabDollars (LD). The
conversion rate between € and LD is 1:100, i.e. 100 LD are €1. All your decisions made
the experiment will remain anonymous. Only the experimenter will know your identity,
but your data will be treated confidentially.
Rules of the game
Now you will learn more about the rules of the game you will be participating in.
Altogether 10 players take part in the game, so besides you there are 9 more players.
Every participant faces the same decision making problem. Your task in the game, and
also your fellow players’ task, is to decide how many points you would like to contribute
to a joint project. Your payout will be calculated as follows:
Your payout = −(your contribution to the project)2 + 10⋅(sum of all contributions of all
players to the project)
Example: If all other players have contributed an amount of 90 points to the project and
you contribute an amount of 10 points, then your payout will be:
− (10)2 + 10⋅(10+90) = 900 LD
If, however, all other players contribute a total amount of 50 points and you do not
contribute anything, your payout will be:
− (0)2 + 10⋅(0+50) = 500 LD
To simplify the calculation of your payout, you will find an excel-file called “Simulator”
on your screen. You can enter your contribution and the average contribution of all other
players and so quickly determine your payout.
There are two stages in this game. In stage 1 you can decide whether you want to
become a member of a coalition, i.e. if you want to join a coalition or not. Should you
decide that you want to join a coalition you additionally can decide which amount should
be the minimum amount each member of the coalition should contribute to the project.
Also all other members of the coalition can state their desired minimum amount. The
members will be informed about the proposals for the minimum amount of all members.
If you are member of a coalition, stage 2 will be to decide for yourself which amount you
want to contribute. In this decision the smallest minimum amount of all members will
form your lower limit of contribution. If you have decided not to join a coalition, stage 2
for you will be to state your contribution to the project without any limitation.


                                          - 30 -
The game consists of 10 separate rounds in each of which you will play the same two-
stage game. The nine other players you will interact with will be the same in every round.
If the experiment is complete you will receive the payout of one of the rounds in €
(according to the conversion rate stated above). The round to be paid out will be
determined randomly. This means you should behave in each round as if it were the
round relevant for payout. In the beginning, two trial rounds will be played which are
not relevant for payout. Independent of the course of the game you will receive €1 for
your participation.


Control questions
If you have read the instructions and do not have any questions, please answer the
following control questions (hint: use the simulator).
   1. Please assume your contribution to the project is 10 points and the average
      contribution of all the other players is 15 points. How much LD will be your
      payout of this round?
       My payout is: _______
   2. Please assume the average contribution of all other players is 5 points, which of
      the following amounts will result in the highest payout for you?
       O 5 points     O 10 points            O 20 points           O 30 points
   3. Please assume you want to maximise your payout, does it make sense to not
      contribute at all (meaning zero points) to the project?
       O yes O no
   4. Please assume you and three other players have joined a coalition and all
      members have stated the following minimum contribution: 4, 88, 22, 56. In which
      range does your contribution to the project have to be?
       More than or equal ____ and less than or equal _____.
   5. Is it possible that a member of a coalition has to contribute more than he proposed
      as his minimum contribution?
       O yes O no
   6. Please assume all players chose the same amount, which of the following
      contributions results in the highest payout for all players (please check the
      according box)?
       O 10 points    O 30 points    O 50 points    O 70 points    O 100 points


If you have answered all questions, please signal us. We will then check your answers.
The game begins when all participants in the experiment have successfully completed the
test.
Good luck in the experiment! The MaXLab-Team



                                          - 31 -
