                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       POP INTERNATIONALISM:
 HAS A HALF CENTURY OF WORLD MUSIC TRADE DISPLACED LOCAL CULTURE?

                                          Fernando Ferreira
                                           Joel Waldfogel

                                        Working Paper 15964
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15964


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




We thank the Wharton Global Initiatives Research Program for funding. Fernando Ferreira would
like to thank the Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for financial
support. Matthew Berg, David Katzianer, Nikhil Bhargava, Eun Young Choi, and Alejandro Jerez
provided tireless research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Fernando Ferreira and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Pop Internationalism: Has A Half Century of World Music Trade Displaced Local Culture?
Fernando Ferreira and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 15964
May 2010
JEL No. F13,L82

                                            ABSTRACT

Advances in communication technologies over the past half century have made the cultural goods
of one country more readily available to consumers in another, raising concerns that cultural products
from large economies – in particular the US – will displace the indigenous cultural products of smaller
economies. In this paper we provide stylized facts about the global music consumption and trade
since 1960, using a unique data on popular music charts from 22 countries, corresponding to over
98% of the global music market. We find that trade volumes are higher between countries that are
geographically closer and between those that share a language. Contrary to growing fears about large-
country dominance, trade shares are roughly proportional to country GDP shares; and relative to GDP,
the US music share is substantially below the shares of other smaller countries. We find a substantial
bias toward domestic music which has, perhaps surprisingly, increased sharply in the past decade.
We find no evidence that new communications channels – such as the growth of country-specific
MTV channels and Internet penetration – reduce the consumption of domestic music. National policies
aimed at preventing the death of local culture, such as radio airplay quotas, may explain part of the
increasing consumption of local music.


Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu

Joel Waldfogel
Business and Public Policy
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
1400 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
waldfogj@wharton.upenn.edu
        I.      Introduction
        Advances in communication technologies over the past half century have made the
cultural goods of one country more readily available to consumers in another. While lower trade
costs are generally good news for consumers – they make a wider range of products available to
more people – reduced transaction costs in cultural goods are greeted with much less enthusiasm.
A large group outside economics is concerned with possible negative effects of cultural products
from distant and large economies, particularly the US, on the local cultural products of smaller
economies.
        The French have taken the rhetorical lead in exclaiming the American threat to local
culture. During the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations in 1993, Jacques Toubon, the French
Minister of Culture said, “We must not let our souls be asphyxiated, our eyes blinded, our
businesses enslaved. We want to breathe freely – breathe the air that is ours, the air that has
nourished the culture of the world, and that, tomorrow, is in danger of being lost to humanity.
. . . Let us mobilize for this battle of survival.”1 Then-president François Mitterrand echoed
similar sentiments: “Let us be on guard. If the spirit of Europe is no longer menaced by the great
totalitarian machines that we have known how to resist, it may be more insidiously threatened by
new masters – economisme, mercantilism, the power of money, and to some extent, technology.
. . . What is at issue is the cultural identity of nations, the right of each people to its own culture,
the freedom to create and choose one's images. . . . A society that relinquishes to others its means
of representation, is an enslaved society.”2
        The US dominance in the world movie industry provides the main fuel for these
concerns. Hollywood movies accounted for 64 percent of revenue across the 15 countries of the
EU in 2001 (Eurostat, 2003; Waterman, 2005). While not as large as the movie industry, the US
recorded music industry is nevertheless substantial. The combined 2001 value of the recorded
music industry in the US and Europe (24 billion euros) exceeds theatrical box office (15.3
billion) but not combined box office and DVD sales/rentals (56.2 billion euros).3 Fears of
American dominance in music are not entirely unfounded: from 2001 through 2007, 31 artists
have appeared simultaneously on at least 18 countries’ charts in at least one year. Twenty three

1
  Quoted in McMahon, Darrin. “Echoes of a Recent Past: Contemporary French Anti-Americanism in Historical and
Cultural Perspective.” International Security Studies at Yale University, January 1995
(http://www.ciaonet.org/wps/mcd01/ ).
2
  From McMahon (1995).
3
  These figures are from European Commission (2003).

                                                      2
of these artists – Avril Lavigne, Backstreet Boys, Beyoncé, Black Eyed Peas, Britney Spears,
Christina Aguilera, Destiny's Child, Eminem, Enrique Iglesias, Evanescense, Faith Hill, Gnarls
Barkley, Gwen Stefani, Jennifer Lopez, Justin Timberlake, Madonna, Mariah Carey, Outkast,
P!Nk, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Rihanna, Usher, and Vanessa Carlton – are American.4 See Table
1.
         While it has become easier for the world’s consumers to get access to US music, at the
same time it may also have become easier for the world’s music producers to get access to the
US – and other – markets (Cowan, 2002). The remaining eight artists appearing on charts
around the world are from a variety of countries of varying sizes: Nelly Furtado (Canada), Kylie
Minogue (Australia), Las Ketchup (Spain), Shaggy (Jamaica), Shakira (Colombia), T.A.T.U.
(Russia), Dido and Robbie Williams (United Kingdom). So it’s possible that in a connected
world, small-country artists could find new export audiences. As the examples above suggest,
globalization could either promote or diminish large-economy dominance in cultural products.

         The debate matters for contemporary public policy. Despite a general trend toward free
trade negotiated under successive international agreements, cultural goods have had longstanding
exceptions. The first GATT agreement in 1947 allowed European countries to place import
quotas on American films and, moreover, allowed European countries to undertake policies to
“protect national treasures.” At French insistence – and to Hollywood’s dismay – audiovisual
products were allowed a “cultural exception” under the Uruguay Round of the General
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), allowing European countries to maintain import
quotas and subsidies to domestic cultural production.5 Europe’s commitment to policies
promoting local culture has been reaffirmed by its 2006 ratification of the UNESCO Convention
on Cultural Diversity, which seeks “to protect and promote the diversity of cultural expressions”
and which reaffirms “the sovereign rights of States to maintain, adopt and implement policies
and measures that they deem appropriate for the protection and promotion of the diversity of



4
  Our definition of nationality is based on three criteria, in order: place of first recorded album, country of origin,
and most popular in a given country. Avril Lavigne, Enrique Iglesias, and Rihanna, for example, were born in
Canada, Spain and Barbados, respectively, but recorded their first albums in the United States. Our results are
unchanged when using the country of origin as our unique measure of nationality.
5
  See Grasstek (2005) and Roger Cohen, “Europeans Back French Curbs on U.S. Movies,” New York Times,
December 12, 1993.


                                                            3
cultural expressions on their territory.”6 Most European countries subsidize their domestic
audiovisual sectors,7 and some regulate music as well. Four countries in our sample – France,
Canada, New Zealand, and Australia – impose domestic radio airplay quotas to promote
domestic musical artists.

         There are large theoretical and empirical literatures on patterns of bilateral trade in
goods.8 While scholars note the relative paucity of research on services – and have taken steps to
correct it (see Reinsdorf and Slaughter, 2009) – lack of reliable data is a major obstacle,
especially for cultural goods. Few studies document trade in cultural services (see Disdier, et. al
(2010) and Hanson and Xiang (2008)).9

         The goal of this project is to provide stylized facts about the patterns of trade and
consumption of popular music since 1960. We use novel data based on singles charts covering,
for example, the weekly top 40 songs, from as many as 22 countries over past half century
(Argentina, Austria, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the UK, and the US). Music consumption in these 22 countries corresponded to
over 98% of the recorded music market in 2003.10 The dataset includes 1,202,554 chart entries
covering 68,283 songs and 23,377 artists. By employing the national origin of each of the artists,
we can determine the penetration of each national repertoire into each importing country. In
short, we can ask who buys whose music? What roles do language and geography play in trade
flows? Because we observe a measure of sales of each repertoire in each market – and not just

6
  See http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=33232&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html#I for a description of the terms of the
UNESCO convention, accessed February 6, 2010. See
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/portal/action/diversity/unesco_en.htm, accessed February 6, 2010, for announcement of
Europe’s ratification of the UNESCO convention.
7
  The Television without Frontiers directive, now called the Audiovisual Media Services Directive, “requires
broadcasters to reserve a majority proportion of their transmission time, excluding the time appointed to news,
sports events, games, advertising, teletext services and teleshopping, for European works.” See
http://ec.europa.eu/avpolicy/reg/tvwf/promotion/index_en.htm.
8
   Krugman (1979), Anderson (1979), and Krugman (1980) provide prominent theoretical contributions. See, for
example, Leamer and Levinsohn (1995) or Disdier and Head (2006) for introductions to empirics on trade and
bilateral trade patterns in particular.
9
  Section II discusses the trade theory in more detail, in addition to the relevant empirical studies of trade in cultural
goods.
10
   The recorded music industry generated roughly $34 billion in annual revenues in 2003, and according to the
International Federation of the Phonograph Industry (IFPI) our sample of 22 countries accounted for $33.4 billion in
revenues, or nearly all of the world’s recorded music revenue for that year.

                                                            4
international trade – we can also examine the extent of home bias in consumption of music.
And, finally, how have all of these changed over time during a period when technological change
has held the promise of making trade – particularly trade in digitally reproducible services –
frictionless?

       Despite widespread fears about American dominance, we find that music trade is roughly
proportional to countries’ GDPs and that several smaller countries, such as Sweden, have a larger
proportional share of trade than the United States. Trade in music bears some similarities to the
trade of physical goods: shorter distances and sharing a common language promote higher trade
volumes between countries, and those relationships have been relatively stable over the last 50
years. We also find a large bias toward domestic consumption of music which has, perhaps
surprisingly, increased in the past two decades: the share of consumption worldwide that
originates from domestic artists increased from less than 50% during the 1980’s to almost 70%
in 2007. This increased home bias is robust to a number of specifications, from descriptive
analysis to gravity equations.

       What factors explain the increasing consumption of domestic music? We first ask
whether the lower trade costs resulting from new communication channels – such as MTV and
the Internet – help displace local production and consumption of music. We find that increased
home bias is positively associated with the increase in local MTV channels and Internet
penetration. Second, we examine the role of protectionist policies to spur the popularity of
locally produced music. We document the importance of this mechanism by estimating the
impact of quotas on domestic radio airplay on the share of domestic consumption.

       A few caveats accompany these results. First, American music may indirectly affect the
type or genre of music produced and consumed by other countries, i.e., French artists may
produce rock & roll in France. We explore this issue with a limited analysis of genre data.
Second, smaller countries that have benefited the most from globalization, such as Sweden, may
actually produce and export music in English – which is arguably not indigenously Swedish.
Finally, while we cannot determine whether our results apply to developing countries such as
China, India, and African countries, our data from Brazil show negligible effects of fifty years of
globalization on its music trade and consumption patterns.


                                                 5
       Overall, our estimates indicate that fears of cultural globalization seem misplaced, at least
with respect to the music market. Some smaller countries actually benefit substantially in this
global market, as they are able to achieve market shares that are sometimes two or three times
larger than the relative sizes of their economies. Moreover, new technologies that lower trade
costs do not appear to have a destructive effect on local production and consumption of music.
Still, national policies that stimulate the production of local music appear effective in stimulating
demand for domestic products.

       The paper proceeds in six sections after the introduction. Section II reviews the literature
and provides theoretical background that motivates the questions we ask. Section III describes
the data used in the study. Section IV reports results, in three parts. First, we offer descriptive
characterization of national repertoires’ market shares, home bias, and the spatial pattern of
contemporary music trade. Second, we characterize changes in national market shares and trade
patterns over the past half century. Third, we examine these questions via empirical gravity
models of the sort employed in the trade literature. Section V then turns to a discussion of our
results. We present evidence supportive of the view that the recent growth in home bias is
related to changes in technology, such as MTV and Internet, and also due to changes in national
policy, such as the implementation of radio quotas. Section VI presents additional robustness
tests of our main estimates, and Section VII concludes the paper.




       II.     Background

       II.a. Theory

       Music, along with other reproducible cultural products such as movies, is a differentiated
product that is produced subject to increasing returns. The costs of recorded music, particularly
as distribution technology has advanced, are almost entirely fixed. The motivations for trade in
such products are outlined in Krugman (1979): consumers like variety, and trade makes a wider
variety of products available to consumers in each country. Because of increasing returns, each
variety is produced in only one country. It is not clear which product gets produced where, but
trade is balanced in the sense that the representative consumer’s product bundle has proportional
representation from each producing country (according to the respective countries’ sizes). This

                                                  6
simple model, with identical tastes and capabilities throughout the world gives rise to a simple
frictionless gravity equation: artists from each country will have a world music market share
equal to their countries’ share of the world economy/labor force.

           The “gravity model,” in which trade between countries i and j is related to the market
sizes of the two countries, can be derived from a variety of trade theories. The starkest version
of this model, adapting Anderson (1979) to our context, is

                      YiY j
     (1) M ij                ,
                       Y

where Mij is the sales of repertoire from i in country j, Yi is the GDP of country i, and Y is the
world GDP. This version of the model has a single good, no transport costs, and identical
preferences across all countries. It can be restated, intuitively, to say that the market share of
repertoire from country i among overall sales in country j equals country i’s share of the world
economy:

           M ij       Yi
     (2)          
            Yj        Y .

           Although this “proportional” model is not meant as a realistic prediction, it does provide
a benchmark for beginning the analysis. The empirical literature on trade, discussed below, does
so with an eye toward deviations from this simple proportional model due to supply factors,
including trade costs associated with distance between countries, as well demand factors relating
to differences in preferences across countries, including home bias in consumption, and effects
of linguistic similarity on consumption.
           Industrial economics also provides a framework for thinking about possible dominance of
the world market by large-market producers. As Sutton (1991) argues, when product quality is
determined by investments in fixed costs – as is clearly the case for media products – and when
consumers agree on what constitutes quality, so that competition is vertical, then market
enlargement need not lead to fragmentation.11 The opening of trade is a form of market
enlargement, explicitly so if the tastes of the trading countries are identical. With a larger

11
  Berry and Waldfogel (forthcoming) draw on Sutton (1991) to interpret the relationship between market size and
concentration in US newspaper markets.

                                                        7
market, a firm can profitably maintain market share by larger investments in quality, maintaining
market share even as market size increases. Thus when trade opens among a group of countries,
it is possible that some artists or some national repertoires can invest in quality (for example
through music videos or other promotional activity) and be more appealing to consumers around
the world.

        While some features of media products – heavy reliance on fixed costs – correspond well
to the Sutton setup, others may not. First, while competition may indeed have some vertical
aspects, it is also clear that music products are horizontally differentiated (think, for example, of
different genres of popular music, including country, rap, and pop). Moreover, different
countries quite possibly have different taste distributions. So while Sutton provides a way to
organize thinking about how the worldwide availability of, say, Britney Spears could result in
her domination of the world market for popular music, the framework also provides ways to
rationalize continued fragmentation and continued attachment to domestic products in the face of
globalization, or greater trade possibilities.

        The foregoing section serves to organize the descriptive analysis that follows, in which
we seek to examine two questions:

1)      Who trades with whom in the popular music market? Is trade proportional, as in
  frictionless gravity models, or do artists from particular countries play a disproportionate
  share?
2)      How have patterns of trade changed over the past half century as “transport costs” of
  various sorts (literal, based on cultural distance) have declined? Has globalization promoted
  increased or decreased dominance by artists from large countries?

        II.b. Relevant Literatures

        This study is also directly related to three existing literatures in economics: 1) the (small)
empirical literature on trade in cultural products, especially movies; 2) the empirical literature on
the effect of distant media products on local behaviors; and 3) the normative theoretical literature
on the desirability of free trade in cultural products. We describe these in turn.




                                                  8
        Despite the interest in cultural trade, there is relatively little empirical work in economics
about the subject. Cowan (2002), critical of naïve anti-globalizationists, provides anecdotal
evidence that globalization allows promotion of small-country cultures. Disdier et al (2010)
estimate empirical gravity models on bilateral trade flows, 1988-2004, in cultural goods
(including books, newspapers, recorded media, visual arts, and audio visual materials). They
find that distance reduces trade flows and that common language and colonial links raise trade.
They rely on the UN’s COMTRADE database. While perhaps the best data source available on
trade in cultural products, it nevertheless has some shortcomings, such as incomplete coverage of
transactions among subsidiaries of multinational corporations (see UNESCO, 2005). Because of
the shortcomings in conventional trade data, Hanson and Xiang (2008) use film industry sources
to assemble a novel dataset covering foreign box office receipts for Hollywood movies, allowing
them to calculate their own trade statistics. They find that they are more popular in countries
with similar languages and in countries with smaller economies. US movies are less popular in
countries that, all things equal, are further away.12 Blum and Goldfarb (2006) study US Internet
users’ visits to foreign sites and document a surprisingly strong distance effect for information
consumed digitally over the Internet.13

        Another relevant strand of work examines the effect of distant, as opposed to local, media
products on behaviors. Research in this vein includes Oster and Jensen’s (2007) work on the
spread of cable television to remote regions of India and concomitant effects on treatment of
local women, research on the effect of the spread of national newspapers on the targeting of local
newspaper products (George and Waldfogel 2006), and work on the effect of local media
products on voter turnout (Oberholzer, Gee, and Waldfogel 2009). Disdier, Head and Mayer
(2010) provide evidence that the introduction of foreign television in France causes substantial
changes in baby naming, away from traditional French names such as Sebastien drawn from
saint names and toward American names such as “Dylan” or “Brenda.” This is evidence that
trade in cultural products – in this case television programming – affects a symbolically
important local behavior, how children are named.


12
  See also Marvasti and Canterbery (2005).
13
  Felbermayr and Toubal (2010) find that bilateral scores in the Eurovision Song Contest, a measure of cross-
cultural affinity, are correlated with trade flows.



                                                         9
        Finally, economists have recently developed theoretical models in which the effect of
trade in cultural goods has ambiguous benefit. Francois and Ypersele (2002) develop a model in
which domestic consumers value both a global (“Hollywood”) and a local good. Because of
fixed costs, the local good can be driven out by trade, so depending on the distribution of tastes,
it’s possible for a tariff on foreign movies to be welfare-improving. Janeba (2003) also models
network externalities for cultural goods, and finds that trade can be welfare improving if the
world is culturally homogeneous but may not be if countries are culturally diverse. Bala and
Van Long (2005) develop an evolutionary model in which trade can cause the preferences of a
large country to take over the preferences of a smaller country. Such an effect can, in turn,
justify restrictions on cultural imports into smaller countries.

        All of these models suggest potential problems with displacement of local products. But
the concerns they raise are relevant only if the products of some countries actually drive out the
products of others, a question this paper seeks to address.




        III.     Data

        The data for this study are based on chart entries from 22 countries, from 1960 through
2007. Charts are collected from disparate sources, so they differ in frequency and length
(number of positions). For many countries and years, we have weekly top 20 charts. For others,
we have the weekly top 100. We have weekly charts for 10 of the countries over at least some
years. For two countries – Australia and Brazil – we have only annual top 100 charts. The data
include a total of 1,222,384 chart entries.14 We transform these sources of disparate lengths and



14
  We obtained the chart data from a variety of online sources (links accessed on December 2009): Argentina -
http://top40-charts.com/chart.php?cid=3; Austria - http://austriancharts.at/weekchart.asp?cat=s; Australia -
http://www.austchartbook.com.au/; Belgium - http://www.ultratop.be/en/ultratop.asp; Brazil -
http://www.hot100brasil.com/timemachinemain.html; Canada -
http://www.1050chum.com/index_chumcharts.aspx?chart=1 and
http://www.muchmusic.com/tv/countdown/index.aspx?CountdownDate=4/16/2009; Chile - http://www.top40-
charts.com; Denmark - http://www.dr.dk/p3/tjeklisten/; Finland - http://finnishcharts.com/index.asp; France -
http://lescharts.com/weekchart.asp?cat=s ; Germany - http://ki.informatik.uni-
wuerzburg.de/~topsi/deutop20.html#thisyear; Italy - http://www.hitparadeitalia.it/hp_weeks/index.html; Japan -
http://top40-charts.com/chart.php?cid=16; Netherlands - http://dutchcharts.nl/weekchart.asp?cat=s ; New Zealand -
http://charts.org.nz/index.asp ; Norway - http://norwegiancharts.com/weekchart.asp?cat=s ; Portugal - http://top40-
charts.com/chart.php?cid=20; Spain - http://top40-charts.com/chart.php?cid=21; Sweden -

                                                        10
frequencies into comparable annual data. Tables 2 and 3 describe the underlying data’s
frequency (e.g. weekly or monthly) and the length of the periodic music charts.

         Although ours is a sample of convenience, we have tried to find multiple countries
speaking each language (e.g. Brazil and Portugal; France and Belgium; Spain, Chile, and
Argentina; Germany, Austria and Switzerland) so that we can distinguish effects of distance and
common language on trade. We have 10 countries continuously since the mid 1960s (or earlier):
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, the UK, and US. We have another
four with data since at least the mid 1970s: Switzerland, Belgium, New Zealand, and Sweden.
France’s chart data are available since 1984. Our dataset picks up two more beginning in the
mid-1990s: Denmark and Finland. Finally, it expands by five countries beginning in the early
2000s: Argentina, Japan, Portugal, Spain, and Chile. Overall, countries included in our sample
correspond to approximately 98% of the $34 billion in revenues raised with recorded music in
2003. Descriptive results and gravity equations presented in this paper are robust to the
exclusion of countries that only appear in the sample after 1970 or 1980 (see sections III and V).

         To make the data usable, we first needed to clean the artist names so that they are the
same in each country. We accomplished this through tedious visual inspection. We also needed
to determine the nationality of each artist. To this end we undertook a laborious process of
searching various sources (including music encyclopedias, allmusic.com, and Wikipedia) to
determine the nationality of each artist. A nationality is defined in three possible ways, in order
of importance: 1) the country of the first record; 2) the country of birth; 3) country where the
artist was most popular. Of the chart entries in our final sample, 34%, 48%, and 1% used criteria
1, 2 and 3, respectively.15 This process allows us to attach nationalities to the vast majority
(82%) of the artist entries appearing in the sample. Additionally, we mechanically assign an
artist’s nationality to his or her chart country if that is the only country in which an artist appears




http://www.swedishcharts.com/index.asp; Switzerland - http://hitparade.ch/index.asp; United Kingdom -
http://www.chartstats.com/; United States - http://www.billboard.biz/bbbiz/index.jsp.
15
   For the sub-sample of entries with known country of first record and known country of origin, these two criteria
have a similar nationality for 92% of the artists.

                                                         11
on the charts (15% of chart entries use this assignment). We were unable to find or assign
nationalities to the remaining 3% of entries.16

         While we would like to observe sales, our data are instead ordered chart rankings. These
rankings are based largely on sales, although they are also based on part on radio airplay.17
Although we could calculate national repertoire market shares based on, say, the share of US
top-100 songs by artists from France, this approach is potentially misleading. It is clearly not the
case that a number-20 song contributes as much to sales as a number-one song. We can improve
on equal weighting by translating chart positions into indices based on some information about
the distribution of sales. There is by now an established empirical tradition of translating sales
ranks into (pseudo) sales data, necessitated by the difficulty – which we share – of not observing
sales quantities directly. For example Chevalier and Goolsbee (2003) and Brynjolffson, Hu, and
Smith (BHS, 2003) find that sales of online books obey the “80-20 rule”18 and are well described
by the Pareto distribution. This can be described by a relationship between log sales and the log
sales rank. With fragmentary data on sales and ranks, the above authors have explored
regressions of the form: log                            log                , where α and β are coefficients, and
ε is an error term. Chevalier and Goolsbee find a coefficient of -0.855 for books, while BHS
report -0.871. We follow this approach, converting ranks into sales indices, using β = -1.19 To
this end we create a sales index that is the reciprocal of the sales ranking. That is, if a song is
number 5 on a national chart in a given week, we describe its sales as (1/5)th as high as the
number-one song, and so on.

         In addition to giving differently-ranked songs more appropriate roles in sales, the use of
this index also helps to deal with charts of different length and frequency across time and place.

16
   In this version of the paper we only used the nationality of the first artist listed in a chart. About 9% of the charts
have at least two artists, and these two artists have identical nationality in 70% of the cases.
17
   Chart methodologies have changed over time with the changing role of singles. Since 1991, the Billboard Hot
100 chart has relied on a combination of sales data from Soundscan (which mechanically monitors music sales) and
radio airplay data from Broadcast Data Services (which mechanically monitors airplay) rather than manual reports
from radio stations and record stores. Prior to September 1995, songs could enter the chart based on airplay alone;
afterwards, entering the chart required both airplay and sales. In December 1998 the methodology changed to allow
songs to enter the chart based on airplay alone, allowing songs never released as singles to enter the chart. Beginning
in 2005, Billboard allowed paid digital downloads to enter the chart regardless of airplay. See
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Billboard_charts#Methodology_of_its_charts, accessed February 9, 2010
18
   That is, 20 percent of the products account for 80 percent of total sales.
19
   We were able to collect weekly data on recent rankings and actual sales of records for South Korea from 2001 to
2008 from the Music Industry Association of Korea in order to test such prediction. We estimated β coefficients
that ranged from -.9 to -1.1, and our preferred data and specification resulted in a coefficient of -1.03.

                                                           12
For example, we have top-20 weekly charts for many of our country-years and top-50 weekly
charts for others. If sales follow this rule, then the top 20 account for 69 percent of the sales of
the top 100, and the top 50 account for 87 percent of the sales of the top 100 in that week.
Whatever the underlying (weekly or monthly, etc.) chart lengths, we aggregate each artist’s sales
index in a chart country to the annual level, creating an annual sales index. Each country-year
has at least 100 entries, so the Pareto distribution implies that a very small share of sales is
omitted in our calculation of market shares. We explore the effects of different weighting
schemes in section VI, and find that our main results do not depend on our choice of a particular
weighting scheme.

         While this translation of rank into a sales index gives us a method for calculating, say, the
market share of French artists in Belgium, we also want to calculate the share of French artists in
the world market (which, for us, is the sample countries). This calculation requires measures of
market size – total music sales – in each of the sample countries. For years since 2003 we have
direct measures of music sales in the sample countries, from the International Federation of the
Phonographic Industry (IFPI). We have national GDP (from the Penn World Tables) back to the
beginning of the sample. Appendix Table 1 shows IFPI and GDP shares for all countries in our
sample in 2003. With the exception of Japan and England (with higher shares of music
consumption than GDP shares) and Brazil (with lower share of music consumption than GDP
share), all other countries in our sample have music consumption shares similar to GDP shares.
We also run a regression of log IFPI on log GDP for the countries in our sample from 2003 to
2007 to gauge the relationship between both measures. The estimated coefficient of log GDP is
0.97 with standard error 0.054.

         In practice, if   is the French artist market share in country i, and mi is the size of the
music market in country i – which we operationalize as either IFPI music sales or GDP – then
the world market share for French repertoire is:

               ∑
   (3)          ∑
                       ,


where we have omitted time subscripts.




                                                   13
           IV.    Empirical Results

           Our empirical inquiry proceeds in three steps. First, we descriptively examine patterns of
contemporary trade in music. Second, we ask how these patterns have changed over the past half
century. Third, we turn to regression models, such as gravity equations, to document these
relationships more systematically, and in ways that simultaneously control for a variety of
factors.

           IV.a. Contemporary Trade in Music

           i. World Sales, Trade Shares and Proportionality

           Proportionality provides a benchmark for characterizing trade in music. Under the strict
proportionality view – which would prevail if countries differed in size but had identical
preferences and tendencies to supply music and if trade costs were zero – each repertoire would
have the same market share in each country market. That is, the French music market share
would be the same in France and in Belgium; furthermore, it would equal the French share of
world GDP. Moreover, each repertoire’s share of world trade would equal its share of world
sales.

           Table 4 provides a first glimpse at sales and trade data, with a comparison of each
national repertoire’s share of trade and world consumption (which includes domestic sales of
local artists) compared with the respective countries’ shares of “world” GDP.20 Because of
measures of sales fluctuate somewhat year to year, we use a five-year period for our
characterization of contemporary patterns. In particular, we choose the most recent 5-year
period for which we have sales data for all countries (2003-2007). The first column shows each
country’s share of sample countries’ GDP, while the second column shows each national
repertoire’s share of world sales, and the third column shows each repertoire’s share of world
trade. For example, the second row of the table shows that while Australia has 2.2 percent of
world GDP, its artists garner 0.6 percent of world sales. Australian music makes up 1.2 percent




20
  Our sample of countries accounts for almost the totality of music revenues in the world, but it only accounts for
48% of the world GDP (as of 2003). To make the GDP-shares, music-shares comparisons more appropriate, we
assume that “world” GDP shares are based on the total world GDP of the 22 countries in the sample.

                                                         14
of world music trade. The United States leads the world consumption and trade of music – 52%
and 48% respectively - but it also has the largest share of GDP – 39%.

         To better visualize the discrepancies between sales and GDP shares, Figures 1 and 2
depict the respective relationships between log GDP shares and the repertoires’ log world sales
shares and log trade shares graphically. In each figure the solid line represents proportionality:
the line is upward sloping because the repertoires of larger countries would be expected to
occupy larger shares of total sales or trade. Both scatters of points are upward-sloping,
confirming that the repertoires of larger countries tend to have larger sales and trade shares. In
the world sales figure, four repertoires – from the US, UK, Japan, and Sweden – are
disproportionately large and lie above the proportionality line. Many repertoires lie below the
line. Three – for Portugal, Chile, and Argentina – lie far below the line.

         The scatter for trade in Figure 2 remains upward-sloping, confirming that repertoires
from bigger countries occupy a larger share of trade as well as world sales, as proportionality
would imply. The biggest difference between the total sales and trade figures is Japan’s position.
While Japanese music has a large world market share due to its home sales, it makes up a small
share of trade with the other sample countries.21 In contrast, the musical repertoires of Sweden,
New Zealand, and Canada occupy much larger shares of trade than sales.

         While the points are not literally on the line, proportionality is not a bad first
approximation.22 Using the consumption data, the repertoire with the most disproportionately
large share – Sweden – has a sales share that is 59 percent above its country’s world GDP share.
The UK is 52 percent above proportionality with GDP, and the US is 33 percent above. Looking
only at trade, six countries have disproportionately large shares of world trade: Sweden (3.2
times GDP), Canada (2.2), Finland (2), UK (1.9), New Zealand (1.4), and the US (1.2). With the
exception of the UK and the US, these are not particularly large countries. The US is by far the
largest, and while it does have a disproportionate share of trade, its share is only 24 percent
above its GDP share.

21
   This difference is presumed exaggerated by our sample’s inclusion of no other Asian countries. But the bias is
likely to be small because of regional differences in language and culture, and because other countries in Asia
represent a very small fraction of the world sales.
22
   Regression models do not reject proportionality at 5% significance: a linear regression of log sales shares on log
GDP shares estimates a correlation of 0.61 (s.e. 0.38), while a linear regression of log trade shares on log GDP
shares has a correlation of 1.31 (s.e. 0.25).

                                                          15
         This leads to our first empirical observation: despite widespread concern about large-
country dominance of markets for cultural goods, country repertoires’ shares are roughly
proportionate to their sizes, and the US has neither the most disproportionate share of total
consumption nor trade.

         ii. Home Market Bias?

         The deviation between repertoire shares of world trade and world sales reflects a
deviation from proportionality and, in particular, possible bias in favor of domestic products.
The last column of Table 4 presents each country’s domestic share (e.g. the American artists’
market share in the US). Under proportionality, the domestic shares would equal each country’s
GDP shares. Thus, the domestic shares would be larger for larger countries. Indeed, US and
Japan have the largest domestic shares (89.9% and 86.6%). Figure 3 depicts this relationship for
all countries. The scatter is clearly upward-sloping, confirming that larger countries repertoires
have higher domestic sales shares. However, every country’s domestic share vastly exceeds its
GDP share.23

         The repertoires furthest off the proportionality line – with the highest domestic shares
relative to their roles in world GDP – include New Zealand and the Scandinavian countries.
Their domestic shares average nearly 50 times their shares of world GDP. The countries with
the smallest proportional home bias include the US (domestic share 2.3 times its world GDP
share), Germany (4.4), and Australia (6).

         Home bias is by no means unique to our cultural good context: Wei (1996) documents
that an average OECD country “imported” about 2.5 times as much from itself as from an
otherwise similar foreign country. Still, the contemporary evidence on home bias in popular
music shows a striking deviation from proportionality reflecting a strong preference for domestic
repertoires.

         iii. Who Trades with Whom?




23
  Home bias has received substantial attention in the empirical trade literature. See, for example, Holger C. Wolf
(2000), or John McCallum (1995).

                                                         16
       Although home bias leads to a clear deviation from proportionality in sales figures, it is
still possible that proportionality would hold among the products traded across borders for each
country. To explore this, we calculate each repertoire’s share of imports in each country where it
is sold. Figure 4 depicts these as bar charts showing each repertoire’s share of imports in other
countries. (For example, the upper left picture shows Australian music’s share of imports into
each destination country). Under proportionality of trade, the bars for each exporter would be of
equal height everywhere they are imported. For example, French music would make up the
same share of imports in both the US and Belgium.

       A glance at Figure 4, which depicts the import shares in descending order, shows that
such proportionality does not hold for trade. The bars for each repertoire are not of equal height.
For most repertoires, their height declines quickly when ordered from largest to smallest. For
example, the upper left panel shows Australian music’s share in the markets where it makes up
the largest share of imports. These are, in order, New Zealand, the UK, and Canada. Australian
music makes up 4 percent of imports in New Zealand, but less than 3 percent in the UK and
Canada. Other drop-offs are similarly quick: Canadian music makes up a third of US imports
but less than a tenth of imports in the next country.

       While all drop-offs are clear, three occur more slowly than others: the US, UK, and
Sweden (depicted in the last three panels of Figure 4). US repertoire makes up over 80 percent
of imports in Canada and Australia. US repertoire makes up over 40 percent in 16 of 22
countries and over a quarter in all sample countries.

       Examining these panels gives a sense of the importance of two central factors in the
empirical literature on trade in goods, geographic proximity and linguistic similarity of trading
partners. Brazil’s repertoire has its largest trade share in Portugal, the only other Portuguese-
speaking country in the sample. France has large import shares in Belgium and Switzerland
(which are nearby and partly Francophone). Germany has large shares in other German-
speaking countries: Austria and Switzerland as well as other nearby countries, including the
Netherlands and Scandinavian countries. As noted above, American and Canadian repertoires
are especially popular in Canada and the US, respectively, which share both a language and a
border. Spain has its most substantial trade shares in Spanish-speaking Chile and Argentina, as
well as geographically adjacent Portugal. We will directly estimate the importance of both

                                                 17
geography and languages in the gravity equations in Section III.3. Before that, however, we
descriptively examine the historic patterns in music consumption and trade.

       IV.b. A Half Century of Popular Music Trade

       How have national repertoires’ shares of world consumption, or world trade, evolved
over the past 50 years? Figure 5 provides a first pass at this question, with each country’s share
of the world market since 1960. Because we have only recent IFPI music sales data, we
calculate trade figures using our rank data in conjunction with GDP data. The figure includes 16
countries with continuous data since 1984, to guarantee that composition effects are not driving
recent results (although similar patterns are observed for the complete sample). Only two
country shares, the US and the UK, are clearly visible. A striking pattern in this figure is what
one might term, “the rise and fall of the British empire”: The UK repertoire share rises from
about 10 percent in 1960 to a peak of over 30 percent in the 1960s (the “British invasion”). The
UK share fell to 20 percent in 1970, then rose to a peak of roughly a third of the world market in
the mid-1980s (the “Second British invasion”). The UK share has fallen steadily since. Music
from the US takes up the largest share of the world market, but its share fell from nearly 80
percent in 1960 to a low of 40 percent in the mid-1980s. Since then, the US share has risen fairly
steadily to its current level of nearly 60 percent. Because other economies tend to be small
relative to the UK and, especially, the US, their consumption shares are small.

       As we saw in the contemporary evidence, repertoire shares of large economies tend to be
large simply because of the size of the economies. Figure 6 reports the consumption shares
divided by GDP shares. Under proportionality, countries’ indices would hover near one and
would not vary much over time. In this figure, the US index is close to its proportional share,
while the UK index has, for most of the period, been the highest. In the mid-1980s the UK
repertoire’s market share was over four times its share of GDP. At times, other repertoires have
had disproportionate shares: Australia’s ratio reached 3 in the late 1970s, and Sweden’s ratio
passed 3 in the early 1990s. Canada’s ratio passed 1.5 in the late 1990s. All other countries
show ratios below one.

       As we saw in contemporary data, home bias causes world market shares to deviate from
trade shares. For example, because the US and Japan are large markets, their consumption of


                                                18
domestic artists swells their national repertoires’ shares of world sales. Concerns about
globalization are arguably better documented with national repertoires’ share of trade, as
opposed to total sales. Figure 7 does this, showing that for most of the period – between the mid
1960s and 1990 – UK repertoire had the highest share of world trade, around 40 percent. The
UK share has declined steadily since 1990, and the US share, roughly a third for most of the
period, has surpassed the UK share, reaching about 40 percent in the past 15 years.

         Relative to GDP, the national repertoires that have occupied disproportionate shares of
world trade over the sample period are those of the UK, Sweden, Canada, and Australia. While
the US index of trade has risen over the sample period, it has been below its proportional share
the entire time. Except in the early 1960s, the US index has always been below the UK index,
usually far below (see Figure 8).24

         Despite policymaker and popular concern over US dominance, Figures 5-8 show that
increased consumer access to foreign products over the past half century has not brought about a
trend systematically favoring the US repertoire, or those of large economies generally, relative to
smaller economies. Moreover, despite popular fears, the US is not the most disproportionately
dominant supplier to the world’s popular music market. The contemporary data provided
evidence of a bias in favor of domestic music in every sample country. Figure 9 summarizes
worldwide home bias over time (with the share of consumption worldwide that is domestic
artists). This “overall home share” fell steadily from the early 1960s until the mid-1980s. As of
the mid-1980s – a few years after the introduction of a single worldwide MTV – it appeared that
consumers around the world were losing interest in their domestic artists. One might at the time
have viewed this as a symptom that preferences were converging across the world. However, the
overall home share has rebounded steadily since the mid-1980s, reversing what might have
appeared ominous in 1985.25


24
   Figures 6 and 8 are normalized by GDP that also changes over time. In Appendix Figure 1 we normalize export
shares by a constant IFPI from 2003. These figures are almost identical to Figure 8, indicating that actual sales are
the main source of variation of exports over time.
25
   One caveat about growing home shares in the past two decades is that ranking methodologies could also be
influencing our results. As described in Section II, Billboard charts are a function of sales of singles, albums, videos
and DVDs, with weights for these items changing over time. For example, the US Billboard charts have given more
weight towards radio airplay time since 1998. Additionally, starting in 2005, sales of digital music are also part of
the ranking equation. Our data reveals, however, that such events did not dramatically change the levels of home
consumption shares in the United States. The data is more consistent with a growing trend in home bias that started

                                                          19
        Figure 10 shows each country separately. While home shares have declined in the UK
over the past quarter century, they have risen in many other countries – including the US,
Sweden, Brazil, France – over the past 20 years, producing the overall increase in the home
share. The rising home shares outside the UK correspond to the decline of the British
repertoire’s market share.

        The descriptive analysis presented above could be confounded by factors not directly
modeled in those figures and tables, such as distance and language effects, and other country of
origin or country of destination specific effects. We now turn to estimating the home bias,
language, and distance effects in the context of the gravity model in order to separate and control
for those specific factors.

        IV.c. Gravity Equation Evidence

        We can characterize the trade data parsimoniously – and in accordance with common
empirical practice in trade – using a gravity equation (see Leamer and Levinsohn, 1995 and
Disdier and Head, 2010). Generically speaking, these are regressions of the log of the trade flow
between countries i and j on measures of the sizes of the source and destination economies, as
well as the distance between the two countries and measures of cultural similarity such as
whether they speak a common language.26 Because we have data on both trade flows and
domestic consumption, we can treat “domestic imports” as another observation and include a
variable for domestic consumption, providing an estimate of home bias.

        A few additional comments are in order. First, we follow the practice of including source
and origin fixed effects rather than measures of economy size (Anderson and van Wincoop,
2003). Second, measuring home bias requires a measure of the distance travelled by domestic
consumption. As Wolf (2000) points out, the literature has not converged on an agreed-upon
method for doing this, so we try a variety of approaches. A first approach is to treat internal
imports as travelling 1 km, so that log distance is zero for domestic imports. This approach
understates domestic distance and will therefore understate the extent of home bias. Second, we

in 1985 and that has not stopped since. Of course, this does not imply new technologies do not influence home bias
– in Section IV we will in fact estimate their importance to domestic shares.
26
   We obtain data on distance and language from
http://www.macalester.edu/research/economics/page/haveman/trade.resources/tradedata.html#Gravity, accessed
February 9, 2009.

                                                        20
define domestic distances to be the somewhat arbitrary 100 or 500 kilometers. Finally, following
Wolf (2000), we define the domestic distance as half the distance to each country’s nearest
country in the sample.

       We begin by using annual data, 2003-2007, based on IFPI sales. An observation is the
volume of imports from each national repertoire to each country by year. Thus – suppressing
time subscripts – we estimate equations of the form:

   (4) ln                ln                                                                       ,

where ln(tradeij) is the log of trade from country i to country j during a year, ln(distanceij) is the
log of distance (in km) between countries, (same language)ij is an indicator which is 1 if both
countries speak the same language, (domestic)ij is an indicator which is 1 for domestic
consumption (when i=j), µi and µj are origin and destination fixed effects, and εij is an error. We
estimate the model on annual data, and we cluster errors on country pairs to deal with non-
independence of observations across years.

       Table 5 reports results. The first column includes only trade (excluding domestic
consumption). The distance coefficient is -0.42, indicating that a one percent increase in
distance between trading partners reduces music trade by 0.42 percent. Trade is substantially
higher if the trading partners share a language: the coefficient is 0.85 in log terms. The
remainder of table also includes domestic consumption, allowing for measurement of home bias.
In column (2) internal distance is 1 km, and the home bias is small and insignificant, while the
distance coefficient remains close to -0.4, and the same-language coefficient remains close to 1.
When the internal distance is measured in the other proposed ways, the home bias becomes
large, with a log coefficient between 2 and 2.5. (That is, the domestic share is about three times
higher than would be expected under proportionality). The distance coefficient remains about
-0.4, and the same-language coefficient remains roughly 1. Column 6 repeats the latter
regression using the GDP-based import measure for the same time period, with very similar
results. This is reassuring given that we rely on the GDP-based measures for the comparisons
we make over time.

       The appearance of a distance effect for recorded music 2003-2007 is interesting given the
small trade costs associated with recorded music since 2003. Relative to manufactured goods,

                                                  21
recorded music has always had smaller trade costs. As music has become a digital product in the
most recent decade, traditional trade costs have declined even further.

        In a meta analysis of 1467 distance coefficients from 103 studies of goods trade, Disdier
and Head (2010) find an average of 0.9 (“with 90 percent of estimates lying between 0.28 and
1.55”). Distance thus matters less with music than with typical goods, which is what one might
expect given the small transport costs of recorded music. That said, literal transport costs
provide only one of a number of possible interpretations of distance coefficients. Blum and
Goldfarb (2006) find a distance coefficient of 1.1 for information consumed digitally over the
Internet. Because transport costs are literally – or virtually – zero in their context, it seems that
transport costs for cultural goods might well reflect demand (preferences for proximate
products), rather than supply (transport costs). A similar interpretation may hold for the distance
coefficient in our context.

        Using the GDP-based import measures, we can estimate the gravity model on data back
to 1960. We first estimate separate models for each decade, in Table 6. We use half the distance
to the nearest country as home market distance in this table’s regressions. The comparison
across decades reveals some interesting patterns. First, while the distance effect was small in the
1960s, it has been larger and stable since, even as trade costs of various sorts have declined.
Second, the same-language preference has remained roughly constant over time. Finally, the
extent of home bias has risen sharply in the last decade.

        We can document this more flexibly by pooling all years’ data and interacting the home
dummy with a dummy for every year in the sample.27 Figure 11 shows the evolution of the
average extent of home bias over time. The home bias was between 2 and 3 in the 1960’s
(indicating that domestic music had an average domestic share about exp(2) and exp(3) times
higher than otherwise similar foreign music), and the effect drops to approximately 1 during the
1970’s and 1980’s. Since the late 1990s, the home bias coefficient has risen steadily to 3,
indicating a home bias of about exp(3).28 This time pattern matches the path of the overall home
shares shown in Figure 9. The 95% confidence intervals for each point estimate presented in the

27
   We also interact year with same language, and year with distance in the same equation, in addition to including
fixed effects for year, and country of origin and destination.
28
   Our finding of a growing home share accords with recent trends documented elsewhere. According to European
Commission (2003), “Recordings by domestic artists have risen from 58% to 68% of sales between 1991and 2001.”

                                                        22
same figure also show that some of the recent estimates of the home bias effects are statistically
distinguishable from the trough of the home bias effect observed in the 1980’s. For comparison
purposes, we also plot yearly point estimates for same language and distance effects in Appendix
Figure 2. Interestingly, those effects are somewhat constant over those five decades.




        V.       Possible Explanations for the Increasing Home Bias

        It seems ironic that the world’s consumers have become more interested in their domestic
music even as they have become better able to gain access to the world’s music. In this section
we investigate the role of recent audiovisual policies and of the spread of new technologies on
the rising home bias. We consider three factors as possible explanations of the growing home
bias in the music market: the appearance of regional and country-specific music television, the
growth of the Internet, and domestic airplay quotas.

        V.a. Mechanisms

        Prior to 1980 the main way that consumers became aware of music was through radio
airplay. Beginning in 1981 MTV broadcast music videos over cable television in the US. While
MTV was not allowed to operate in Canada, a Canadian firm launched a Canadian music
television station, CHUM MuchMusic, in 1984. But for roughly half a decade, there was only
one MTV station throughout the world, which would seem to provide a force favoring a
convergence of musical consumption across the globe. Moreover, it would tend to promote
whichever repertoire was being broadcast. And indeed, the early years of MTV correspond to
the period when the UK repertoire gained substantial market share throughout the world.

        However, beginning in 1987, MTV began to splinter regionally, creating region or
country-specific channels carrying some local programming (and local music). In 1987 MTV
Europe was launched, broadcasting common programming throughout Europe in English. Since
then, MTV has increasingly customized programming to particular countries.29 Each of these


29
   MTV Brasil launched in 1990. MTV Japan launched in 1992. The year 1995 saw the launch of MTV
Netherlands. In 1997, MTV launched MTV Central, serving German-speaking countries of Europe – Germany,
Austria, Switzerland, and Liechtenstein – in German. MTV Argentina launched in 1999. The network also
launched MTV Italy, in Italian, MTV Australia, and MTV One for the UK (in English). MTV launched MTV

                                                   23
channels was locally tailored in terms of both language and carriage of local artists.30 Figure 12
shows the number of country-targeted MTV channels (for the countries in our sample) over time.
While MTV may have begun as a force favoring convergence in music consumption across the
globe, by the year 2000 MTV appeared to be a force promoting local as well as global artists.

        Since the late 1990s – when consumers began sharing music illegally on the Internet –
the web has supplemented the role played by traditional media (radio and television) in musical
discovery. It is not clear how the web would affect trade. On one hand, the web makes music of
each country available to consumers both at home and abroad, which would tend to raise trade
without necessarily reducing the world shares of any particular countries. On the other hand, it is
possible that the web reinforces local distribution. Web distribution may complement the local
promotion of concerts, in which case it would tend to promote domestic consumption more than
trade. These arguments are familiar from the debate over whether the Internet provides a
complement or a substitute for physical agglomeration. Evidence in Gaspar and Glaeser (1998)
and Sinai and Waldfogel (2004) suggest that communication technology (including the Internet)
is, on balance, a complement for agglomeration. Figure 13 shows the time pattern of Internet
adoption in our sample countries.31 Internet penetration grew rapidly from 1995 to about 2005,
when it ranged from around 20 percent (in sample South American countries) to around 80
percent (in the sample’s Scandinavian countries).

        The promotion of domestic musical artists is of sufficient importance that many countries
mandate their carriage on domestic radio. Since 1971 Canada has mandated that a certain share
– now 35 percent – of music be of Canadian origin32. Since 1996, France has required 40
percent of music on the radio to be French. Australia and New Zealand also require domestic
content.33 Figure 14 documents the time pattern of the mandated domestic shares in Australia,


France and MTV Spain in 2000, along with English-language MTV Nordic for Scandinavia. MTV Chile launched
in 2001. MTV launched MTV Portugal in 2003. In 2005, MTV launched separate channels for Norway (MTV
Norge), Finland, Denmark, and Sweden (MTV Sverige) in their respective languages. In 2006 Austria and New
Zealand got their own flavors of MTV. In 2009 MTV Switzerland appeared.
30
   See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_MTV_channels and the pages linked for information on the launch of
local MTV channels (accessed January 26, 2010).
31
   See World Bank site http://ddp-ext.worldbank.org/ext/DDPQQ/showReport.do?method=showReport for internet
data, accessed in January 2010.
32
   See http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/rpm/028020-200-e.html , accessed January 21, 2010.
33
   See http://www.mca.org.au/web/content/view/104/6), Bernier (2003), and Scott (2008) for evidence on the timing
of these quotas. Richardson (2008) provides a theoretical treatment.

                                                       24
France, Canada and New Zealand along with the domestic music shares in the respective
countries. Particularly in Canada, New Zealand, and France, the imposition of the domestic
quota coincides with a growth in domestic share.

         V.b. Empirical Evidence

         All of these factors – the presence of a local or a regional MTV station, the domestic
adoption of the Internet, and the presence of domestic radio quotas – may explain the growing
home bias. To explore this, we regress the log home share for each country in each year on time
dummies, country dummies, and dummies for music television, as well as measures of Internet
penetration and quotas. Results are shown in Table 7.

         All three groups of variables have positive coefficients. Domestic radio quota and
Internet penetration are statistically significant. The coefficient of 1.49 on the quota variable
means that an increase from 0 to 0.4 (the French case) would raise the domestic sales share by
about 0.6 log points. The Internet coefficient of 1.29 means that a movement from 0 to 100
percent Internet penetration at home would raise the domestic music share by 1.29 log points
(roughly doubling it). The MTV coefficients are also positive but rather imprecisely estimated.

         To test the validity of those results, we also estimate two falsification tests. First, we test
whether those channels affected a different cultural product – movies. Second, we estimate
whether the three mechanisms affect home bias five years prior to the relevant time period where
we should observe an effect of MTV or Internet penetration. Columns 6 and 7 of Table 7
respectively report these estimates. While the three mechanisms have positive and generally
significant coefficients in music equations, they enter the movie equations insignificantly (and
with negative coefficients).34 However, the timing falsification test on column 7 casts a doubt on
the potential causality of the results for MTV and Internet, while it still corroborates the effect of
domestic radio quotas on the growing home bias. Even though we do not have a randomized
experiment to estimate the causal impact of these new communication technologies on music

34
   Film data are drawn from European Commission (2003). The film data include the national box office revenue
and shares of box office receipts in up to 30 European countries (as well as the US and Japan) for films from each of
the US, Britain, Germany, France, Italy, and Spain. The data also include the share of receipts for domestic films
from each sample country. The data are available for 1980, 1985, 1990, and then annually, 1995 -2001.



                                                         25
consumption, we can at least infer from our regression estimates that they did not diminish the
viability of domestic music. Moreover, protectionist policies aimed at increasing the domestic
consumption of culture goods may have produced their expected result.

         While it is off our main point, it is nevertheless interesting to explore whether the quota-
increased domestic shares translate into high shares abroad. If radio airplay stimulates sales,
then it’s not surprising to see that the French repertoire share increases with the French domestic
quotas. But how about the French repertoire share abroad? If the quotas promote airplay of
music that cannot meet a market test, the music should not fare well in countries where it is not
promoted by quotas. Figure 15 shows the French share in France, as well as its major music
trading partners, Belgium, Spain, and Switzerland. Visual inspection suggests, perhaps
counterintuitively, that protected French repertoire passes a market test abroad, particularly in
Belgium.35




         VI.      Robustness Tests

         VI.a. Pareto Distributed “Sales” vs. Equal-Weighted Chart Entries

         Our “sales” data derived from ranks place higher weights on chart-topping artists and
therefore give a larger world consumption or trade market shares to repertoires that appear in,
say, the top 10 on country charts. It is possible that some national repertoire shares vary between
the top of the charts and the remainder. Our basic sales measure would understate the role of a
repertoire appearing disproportionately in the “basement” of country charts.

         To explore this we analyze an alternative measure that weights all entries equally, a
national repertoire’s share of chart entries among, say, the top 50 chart entries for each country.
Table 8 shows each repertoire’s share among entries among sample country charts and, within
country, across ranges of chart positions for the period 2003-2007. The table shows, for

35
   We can explore this more systematically with a regression of log repertoire shares in destination countries on year
dummies, origin-destination fixed effects and dummies for both domestically protected repertoire (whether at home
or abroad) and domestically protected repertoire in its protected home market. This regression yields a coefficient
of 0.39 (with a standard error of 0.11) on protected repertoire, and an additional 0.36 (0.29) on protected repertoire
at home. That is, following the imposition of domestic protection, a protected repertoire increases its share by a
statistically and economically significant 39 percent in foreign markets. Its increase in share at home is even larger
but not statistically significantly so.

                                                         26
example, that chart entries for US repertoire made up roughly a third of total chart entries in
sample countries’ annual top 50s. Interestingly, the US share is virtually identical for the top and
bottom of the charts. Most repertoires have similar shares among top 10 and lower-ranked
entries. The UK is an exception. UK repertoire makes up 8 percent of the top 10 and almost 20
percent of the entries outside the top 50. The general similarity of repertoire shares among top
10 and lower ranges indicates that our basic measure’s heavier weighting of highly ranked
entries does not exert an important influence on the results.

         Equal weighting among the country top 50 charts also allows us to calculate a simple
overlap measure of chart convergence. We calculate this as the ratio of the number of distinct
artists appearing on any charts in a year, divided by the number of chart entries in the year
(essentially the number of included countries times 50). Figure 16 illustrates this. The index
declines from 1960 through the mid-1980s, as the world charts come to include fewer distinct
artists per chart entry. Since the mid-1980s the index has risen steadily as world charts have
featured more distinct artists per entry.36 This divergence has two causes. First, it reflects the
waning of the second British Invasion of the 1980s documented above. Second, it reflects the
growth in attention to home-country artists in the past decade, also documented above.

         VI.b. Zero Gravity Issues

         Our study faces a common challenge for gravity equations, the treatment of country pairs
observed not trading in a given year. Omitting these observations from the sample will give rise
to biased estimates of the distance parameter if, as is plausible, observing no trade is caused by
factors similar to those that would cause little trade. For our purpose we are less concerned with
bias at a point in time than with possible changes in the bias from ignoring zeroes over time.
One simple strategy for dealing with the zeroes is to set the zero trade observations equal to
some low value, for example the minimum import observation observed for the country (from
any exporter), on the view that the true value of imports is not zero but is not observed because it
falls below, say, the threshold needed to appear among the importing country’s top 100. Of


36
  Because the number of countries included increases over time, the first figure is potentially affected by sample
composition. We examined this by creating separate figures for different sets of countries: 1) the 7 with chart data
since 1960, 2) the 9 with data since 1965, 3) the 13 with data since 1975, 4) the 15 with data since 1984, and 5) the
22 with data since 2001. Each of these shows the chart convergence in the mid-1980s followed by divergence since.
These figures are available upon request.

                                                         27
course, other corrections are possible, for example limited dependent variable techniques37. As a
rough pass at the problem, Panel A of Table 9 reports gravity equations by decade (as in Table
6), replacing the formerly missing trade data with the minimum value of imports for each
importer. The levels of various estimated parameters change: distance parameters become
substantially more negative, indicating that pairs of countries with no observable trade are more
like to be distant from each other. Similarly, the home bias grows larger. Of greatest interest to
us, the level of home bias rises sharply in the 1990s and the 2000s, as before.

         VI.c. Changing Country Coverage over Time

         Because the changing home bias over time is our main result, one might be concerned
that it arises spuriously because of the growth in country coverage over time. To explore this,
we re-estimate the gravity equations, by decade, from Table 6, including only destination
countries that have been in the sample since at least 1970. Panel B of Table 10 shows that
substantive results continue to hold. In particular, the extent of home bias grows substantially in
the past decade.

         VI.d. Genre

         While our results thus far show that US artists do not disproportionately dominate the
world popular music market, the US could still be spreading its culture if artists elsewhere copy
American music styles. We could explore this if we had data on the genre of each artist along
with information on the national origin of each genre. Then, for example, if the spread of an
indigenous American genre such as rap could reflect US dominance even if the rap sold were by,
say, French or German artists. To explore this, we obtained data on the genre for every CD
available for sale in the US between 1985 and 2002 from MUZE, a service providing catalog
data to music retailers. Some of the categories of genre in the data set include pop & rock, R&B,
electronic, country, gospel, reggae, spoken word, oldies, and international.38 Figure 17 plots

37
   See Helpman, Melitz, and Rubinstein (2008) for a theoretical model predicting both the extensive and intensive
margins of trade, along with an empirical implementation that deals with zero trade.
38
   Several caveats apply to these data: some genre are ad hoc classifications and are not necessarily associated with a
country; those categories may have a current view of genre (such as “Oldies”), or US based view (such as
International), or they may change over time (Spoken word is associated with Rap and Hip-Hop recently, but it was
associated with Beats in the 1960’s); there is a lack of unique local categories, such as Samba from Brazil, and Fado
from Portugal; the coverage is much better for US and Global artists, so budding artists in smaller countries are not
represented in MUZE.

                                                          28
markets shares of genre from 1960 to 2003. In 2003, R&B was the leading genre with 32%
market share, followed by spoken word (19%) and rock & pop (18%). Rock & pop achieved the
highest market share of the sample period, reaching close to 60% in the mid-1980s’, but R&B
displaced rock & pop as the genre leader in the mid-1990s.

       By construction, our genre data are representative of the music sold in the US, but the
match of genre data with music charts is quite incomplete in other countries. For example, only
6.5% of the unique French artists that appear in the French charts were assigned to a genre, and
they are usually artists that have more national or international recognition. For this selected
sample of artists outside the US and the UK, we find that 42% of them have rock & pop as the
main genre, 23% are classified as International, 12% are R&B, and all other genre have less than
4% participation each. To the extent that rock & pop and R&B were originally American styles
of music, one could infer that American genres are imitated abroad; but a conclusive answer to
this question awaits better data.




       VII.    Conclusion

       Using a new and novel dataset on trade in popular music among 22 countries over the
past half century, we add to what’s known about cultural trade. First, despite popular and
policymaker concern over large-country dominance, we find that repertoire shares of the world
market – and of world trade – are roughly proportional to countries’ shares of world output.
Second, despite this rough proportionality, consumers clearly prefer domestic repertoire over
imported music. Third, imports favor repertoires from countries that are geographically closer
and which share a language. These estimates for music – a traditional and important cultural
service – resemble the patterns observed in bilateral trade of physical goods.

       Fourth, despite rapid improvement in information and communication technologies over
the past half century, the effects of distance and language have remained fairly constant. Fifth,
perhaps surprisingly, the degree of home bias has increased sharply since the late 1990s. Sixth,
we present evidence that this change occurs amid the adoption of the Internet, the regional
splintering of MTV, and – in four of our countries – the growth of domestic radio airplay quotas.
These results imply that concerns about technological change making music more easily

                                                 29
available across places do not appear to threaten the popularity of domestic artists at home.
Moreover, it indicates that countries imposing quotas or providing subsidies to local cultural
industries may achieve their desired goals, as several countries have ramped up their
governmental intervention in cultural markets recently, such as China, India and Brazil.

       Overall, our findings suggest that concern about cultural domination by large economies
– particularly the US – is misplaced for music. The US is the largest consumer and exporter of
music, but relative to its GDP, the US share of world music trade is sixth behind Sweden,
Canada, Finland, the UK, and New Zealand. We cannot extrapolate the same conclusion for
other cultural goods, such as movies and TV programs. The production of music requires only a
fraction of the fixed costs demanded in the movie industry, for example, and the distribution of
movies and TV shows depend on other channels. Additional empirical research is necessary to
gauge the potential effect of globalization on those goods.




                                                30
       References
Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
  Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 93 (2003), 170–192.

Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, 42
  (2004), 691–751.

Bala, Venkatesh and Ngo Van Long. “International Trade and Cultural Diversity with Preference
  Selection,” European Journal of Political Economy, 25 (2005), 143–162.

Bernier, Ivan. “Local Content Requirements for Film, Radio, and Television as a Means of
  Protecting Cultural Diversity: Theory and Reality,” Université Laval, Mimeo, 2003.

Berry, Steven T., and Joel Waldfogel, “Product Quality and Market Size,” Journal of Industrial
  Economics, forthcoming.

Blum, Bernardo S., and Avi Goldfarb, “Does the Internet Defy the Law of Gravity?” Journal of
  International Economics, 70 (2006), 384–405.

Chevalier, Judith, and Austan Goolsbee, “Measuring Prices and Price Competition Online:
  Amazon vs. Barnes and Noble,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics I, 2 (2003), 203–222.

Cowen, Tyler. Creative Destruction: How Globalization is Changing the World Cultures
  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002).

Disdier, Anne Celia, and Keith Head, “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on
  Bilateral Trade,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (2008), 37–48.

Disdier, Anne Celia, Keith Head, and Thierry Mayer, “Exposure to Foreign Media and Changes
  in Cultural Traits: Evidence from Naming Patterns in France,” Journal of International
  Economics, 80 (2010), 226–238.

Disdier, Anne Celia, Silvio H.T. Tai, Lionel Fontagne, and Thierry Mayer, “Bilateral Trade of
  Cultural Goods,” Review of World Economics (Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv), Springer, vol.
  145 (2010), 575–595.

European Commission, Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, “Cinema,
  TV, and Radio in the EU, Statistics on Audiovisual Services, Data 1980-2002,” Luxembourg,
  2003.

Felbermayr, Gabriel J., and Farid Toubal, “Cultural Proximity and Trade,” European Economic
  Review, 54 (2010), 283–297.

Francois, P., and T. van Ypersele, “On the Protection of Cultural Goods”, Journal of
   International Economics, 56 (2002), 359–369.


                                               31
Gaspar, J., and Edward L. Glaeser, “Information technology and the future of cities,” Journal of
  Urban Economics, 43 (1998), 136–156.

George, Lisa M., and Joel Waldfogel, “The New York Times and the Market for Local
  Newspapers,” American Economic Review, 96 (2006), 435–447.
Grasstek, Van, “Treatment of Cultural Goods and Services in International Trade Agreements”,
  Mimeo (2005).

Hanson, Gordon H. and Chong Xiang, “Testing the Melitz Model of Trade: An Application to
  U.S. Motion Picture Exports,” NBER Working Paper 14461. October 2008.

Elhanan Helpman, Marc Melitz, Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners
  and Trading Volumes," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2008), 441–487.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.2, Center for
  International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
  Pennsylvania, September 2006.
Janeba, Eckhard, “International Trade and Cultural Identity,” NBER Working Paper No. 10426,
   2004.
Krugman, Paul, “Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International Trade,”
  Journal of International Economics, 9 (1979), 469–479.
Krugman, Paul, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,” American
  Economic Review, 70 (1980), 950–959.
Leamer, E.E., and J. Levinsohn, 1995, “International Trade Theory: The Evidence,” in
Grossman G. and K. Rogoff (eds), Handbook of International Economics Volume 3,
Elsevier, North-Holland.

Marvasti, Akbar, and E. Ray Canterbery, “Cultural and Other Barriers to Motion Pictures
  Trade,” Economic Inquiry, 43 (2005), 39–54.
McCallum, John, “National Borders Matter: Canada-US Regional Trade Patterns,” American
  Economic Review, 85 (1995), 615–623.
Oberholzer Gee, Felix, and Joel Waldfogel, “Strength in Numbers: Group Size and Political
  Mobilization,” Journal of Law & Economics, 48 (2005), 73–91.

Oberholzer Gee, Felix, and Joel Waldfogel, “Media Markets and Localism: Does Local News en
  Español Boost Hispanic Voter Turnout?”, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Oster, Emily, and Robert Jensen, “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s Status in
  India,” NBER Working Paper No. 13305, 2007.

Reinsdorf, Marshall, and Matthew J. Slaughter, International Trade in Services and Intangibles
  in the Era of Globalization, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009).

                                               32
Rauch, James E., and Vitor Trindade, “Neckties in the Tropics: A Model of International Trade
  and Cultural Diversity,” Unpublished Paper. University of California, San Diego, May 2004.
Richardson, Martin, “Commercial Broadcasting and Local Content: Cultural Quotas,
  Advertising, and Public Stations,” Economic Journal, 116 (2006), 605–625.
Scott, Michael, “The Networked State: New Zealand on Air and New Zealand’s Pop
  Renaissance,” Popular Music, 27 (2008), 299–305.
Sinai, Todd and Joel Waldfogel, “Geography and the Internet: Is the Internet a Complement or a
   Substitute for Cities?” Journal of Urban Economics, 56 (2004), 1–24.
Suranovic, Steve, and Robert Winthrop, “Cultural Effects of Trade Liberalization,” George
  Washington University, Mimeo, 2005.
Sutton, John. Sunk Costs and Market Structure (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991).
UNESCO Sector for Culture, “International Flows of Selected Cultural Goods and Services,
  1994-2003,” UNESCO Institute for Statistics, Montreal, 2005.
United Nations, Creative Economy Report 2008, 2008.
Waterman, David. Hollywood’s Road to Riches. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2005).
Wei, Shang-Jin, “Intra-National versus International Trade: How Stubborn Are Nations in
 Global Integration?” NBER Working Paper No. 5531, April 1996.
Wolf, Holger C., “Intranational Home Bias in Trade,” Review of Economics & Statistics, 82
 (2000), 555–563.




                                              33
Table 1: Artists appearing on 18+ Charts’ Top 100’s Since 2001
 artist                     2001      2002        2003      2004       2005      2006       2007 Artist nationality
 Avril Lavigne                         19          19        20                                     United States
 Backstreet Boys             18                                         18                          United States
 Beyonce                                           21                                        18     United States
 Black Eyed Peas                                   18        19         20                          United States
 Britney Spears              19                              22                                     United States
 Christina Aguilera                                19                             18                United States
 Destiny's Child             18                              20         19                          United States
 Dido                        18                                                                     United Kingdom
 Eminem                                21          21        19         18                          United States
 Enrique Iglesias                      19                                                           United States
 Evanescense                                       22        19                                     United States
 Faith Hill                  18                                                                     United States
 Gnarls Barkley                                                                   18                United States
 Gwen Stefani                                                           19                          United States
 Jennifer Lopez              20                    19                   20                          United States
 Justin Timberlake                                                                18                United States
 Kylie Minogue               18        19                                                           Australia
 Las Ketchup                           18                                                           Spain
 Madonna                               19          18                   19        18                United States
 Mariah Carey                                                           18                          United States
 Nelly Furtado                                                                    19                Canada
 Outkast                                                     18                                     United States
 P!Nk                                  20                                         19                United States
 Red Hot Chili Peppers                 19                                         19                United States
 Rihanna                                                                                     18     United States
 Robbie Williams                       18                                                           United Kingdom
 Shaggy                      18                                                                     other
 Shakira                               21                                         18                other
 T.A.T.U.                                          21                                               other
 Usher                                                       18                                     United States
 Vanessa Carlton                       18                                                           United States
Notes: Figures based on music chart data collected for 22 countries – Argentina, Austria, Australia, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK, and the US. Our definition of nationality is based on three criteria, in order:
place of first recorded album, country of origin, and most popular in a given country. Avril Lavigne, Enrique
Iglesias, and Rihanna, for example, were born in Canada, Spain and Barbados, respectively, but recorded their first
albums in the United States. See data section for more details about the sample.




                                                         34
Table 2: Chart Frequency Availability
Country              Chart Entries            Annual              Monthly    Twice monthly    Weekly

Argentina                  5754                                                              2001-2007
Australia                  1458             1960-2005
Austria                   55502                                  1965-1979     1980-1989     1990-2007
Belgium                   98964                                                              1970-2007
Canada                    82516             1960-2006
Chile                      4319                                                              1960-2007
Denmark                   13620                                                              2002-2007
Finland                   12243                                                              1994-2007
France                    86051                                                              1995-2007
Germany                   21441                                                              1984-2007
Italy                     37570                                 1960-1964,     1965-1970     1971-1977
                                                                1978-2007
Japan                     6418                                                               1960-2007
Netherlands               88760                                                              2001-2007
New Zealand              76057                                                               1965-2007
Norway                   32113                                                               1975-2007
Portugal                  8000                                                               1960-2007
Spain                     6640                                                               2001-2007
Sweden                   52100                                                               2001-2007
Switzerland              83260                                                 1976-1993     1994-2007
United Kingdom           175088                                                              1968-2007
United States            249980                                                              1960-2007
Notes: The complete list of chart sources is available in footnote 14.




                                                          35
Table 3: Chart Length Availability
                           Top 10-      Top 15       Top 20        Top 30      Top 40      Top 50-75    Top 100

 Argentina                                          2002-2007                   2001

 Australia                                          1960-1992                              1993-2005

 Austria                  1965-1966                 1967-1984     1985-1994   1995-2000    2001-2007

 Belgium                                                          1970-1994                1995-2007

 Brazil                                                                                                 1960-2006

 Canada                                                           1969-2007                1960-1968

 Chile                                              2002-2007

 Denmark                                            1994-2007

 Finland                                            1995-2007

 France                                                                                    1984-1997    1998-2007

 Germany                                            1960-1976     1977-2007

 Italy                    1960-1984                 1985-2006        2007

 Japan                                              2001-2007

 Netherlands                                                                  1965-2007

 New Zealand                                                                  1975-1978,   1979-2004
                                                                              2005-2007

 Norway                   1960-1994                 1995-2007

 Portugal                                           2001-2005                              2006-2007

 Spain                                              2001-2007

 Sweden                                             1975-1990                 1991-1994    1995-2007

 Switzerland              1968-1975    1976-1982                  1983-1991     1992       1993-1998    1999-2007

 United Kingdom                                                                            1960-1982;   1983-1991;
                                                                                           1992-2006       2007
                                                                                                        1960-2007
 United States
Notes: The complete list of chart sources is available in footnote 14.




                                                          36
Table 4: Proportionality in World Sales, World Trade, and Home Shares, 2003-2007

                         (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)
 Country              % of GDP          % of Sales        % of Trade          % Home
                                                                               Share
 Argentina              1.7%               0.0%               0.0%             30.5%
 Australia               2.2%              0.6%               1.2%             13.4%
 Austria                0.9%               0.3%               0.7%              9.6%
 Belgium                 1.0%              0.4%               0.8%             16.0%
 Brazil                  5.3%               0.6%              0.2%             57.4%
 Canada                 3.5%               3.2%               7.7%             31.2%
 Chile                  0.9%                0.0%              0.0%             17.9%
 Denmark                 0.5%               0.3%              0.5%             45.5%
 Finland                0.5%               0.5%               1.0%             76.4%
 France                 5.7%               3.6%               1.5%             48.1%
 Germany                 7.7%               3.5%              2.9%             34.2%
 Italy                  5.1%               1.2%               1.2%             35.4%
 Japan                  11.9%              15.6%              0.0%             86.6%
 Netherlands             1.7%               0.8%              0.9%             33.6%
 New Zealand             0.3%               0.2%              0.4%             16.1%
 Norway                  0.6%              0.3%               0.1%             33.2%
 Portugal               0.7%               0.0%               0.0%             23.7%
 Spain                  3.7%               0.9%               0.4%             42.6%
 Sweden                 0.9%               1.4%               2.8%             58.8%
 Switzerland             0.8%               0.2%              0.4%              6.6%
 United
 Kingdom                5.8%               8.8%               10.9%            45.9%
 United States          38.6%              51.5%              48.0%            89.9%
 Other                                     4.9%               15.1%
 Unknown                                   1.1%               3.5%

Notes: Column 1 calculates GDP percentages for each country based on the sum of GDP of the 22 countries in our
sample. Data comes from Penn World Table 6.3. Column 2 calculates each country percentage of total
consumption of music based on IFPI, and includes domestic consumption of music. Column 3 calculates each
country share of total trade only. Column 4 calculates the share of each country’s consumption that is fulfilled by
domestic artists.




                                                         37
Table 5: Gravity Estimates, 2003-2007

                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
                           IFPI            IFPI            IFPI             IFPI            IFPI            GDP
 Log Distance            -0.4238         -0.3958         -0.3958          -0.3958         -0.3789         -0.3821
                       (0.0704)**      (0.0711)**      (0.0711)**       (0.0711)**      (0.0743)**      (0.0745)**
 Same Language           0.8513           0.9988          0.9988           0.9988          0.9816          0.9724
                       (0.2148)**      (0.2060)**      (0.2060)**       (0.2060)**      (0.2076)**      (0.2073)**
 Home Bias                               0.2906           2.1134          2.7504           2.5801           2.583
                                        (-0.5576)      (0.3196)**       (0.2824)**      (0.3007)**      (0.3002)**
 Distance Measure         Km+1            Km+1          Km + 100         Km+500             Km+             Km+
                                                                                         nearest/2       nearest/2

 Observations               922            1011            1011            1011            1011             1011
 R-squared                  0.71           0.75            0.75            0.75             0.75            0.75
Notes: Dependent variable is log imports. Columns(1)-(5) use music sales measures. Column (6) uses GDP. All
regressions include source and destination country fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on
country pair.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




Table 6: Gravity Regressions across Decades
                                 (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)               (5)
                               1960s             1970s              1980s           1990s          Since 2000
Log Distance                  -0.0553           -0.2666            -0.3332         -0.2566           -0.3430
                             (0.1409)         (0.0616)**         (0.0629)**      (0.0591)**        (0.0636)**
Same Language                  1.0338            1.2720             0.8569          0.7736            0.8271
                            (0.2667)**        (0.1631)**         (0.1739)**      (0.1561)**        (0.1790)**
Home Bias                      1.9597            1.0288             1.1194          1.7690            2.5836
                            (0.4375)**        (0.2509)**         (0.2389)**      (0.2362)**        (0.2637)**
Observations                     540              1115               1366            1819              1914
R-squared                       0.71              0.71               0.76            0.75              0.71
Notes: Dependent variable is log imports, based on GDP. All regressions include source and destination country
fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on country pair.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                         38
Table 7: Determinants of Domestic Share in Music Consumption

                                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
MTV regional                    0.1335                                            0.1644       -0.0666      0.0977
                               (0.0812)                                          (0.0850)     (0.1463)     (0.0955)
MTV local                                   0.1268                                0.0881       -0.1512      0.1027
                                           (0.0799)                              (0.0838)     (0.1503)     (0.0918)
Domestic Radio Quota                                     1.2699                   1.4863       -1.4816      0.2166
                                                       (0.3668)**               (0.3732)**    (0.8217)     (0.4373)
Internet Penetration                                                  0.0108     0.0129        -0.0167      0.012
(per 100 people)                                                    (0.0035)** (0.0035)**     (0.0073)   (0.0038)**

Observations                     680         680          680          680          680         192          587
Number of groups (countries)      22          22           22           22          22           27          22
R-squared                        0.16        0.16         0.18         0.17         0.2         0.03         0.1
Notes: Columns 1 through 5 show regressions of the log domestic share on year dummies, country fixed effects and
the variables shown. The dependent variable in column 6 is log domestic share of movie consumption. Column 7
shows similar regression for the the log domestic music share in year t-5.. Robust standard errors in parentheses. An
observation is a country-year.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                         39
Table 8: National Repertoire Shares of World Chart Entries, by Chart Range, 2003-2007
   Nationality                  top 10             next 15          next 25      remainder         Total
   Argentina                     1.4%               1.5%             1.9%            0.3%           1.3%
   Australia                     1.0%               0.9%             1.0%            1.4%           1.0%
   Austria                       0.8%               0.7%             0.5%            1.2%           0.8%
   Belgium                       1.6%               1.4%             1.8%            2.4%           1.8%
   Brazil                        2.9%               2.1%             2.9%            0.6%           2.1%
   Canada                        3.4%               3.8%             4.1%            2.3%           3.4%
   Chile                         1.2%               0.5%             1.4%            0.2%           0.8%
   Denmark                       2.5%               2.3%             1.3%            1.1%           1.8%
   Finland                       4.8%               4.6%             3.7%            4.0%           4.3%
   France                        5.5%               4.5%             4.8%            6.6%           5.3%
   Germany                       3.9%               4.6%             4.4%            4.9%           4.5%
   Italy                         2.3%               2.1%             2.5%            1.9%           2.2%
   Japan                         3.9%               3.9%             4.2%            3.3%           3.8%
   Netherlands                   2.0%               2.2%             1.7%            2.9%           2.2%
   New Zealand                   0.7%               0.5%             0.8%            0.7%           0.7%
   Norway                        1.9%               1.5%             1.4%            1.2%           1.5%
   Portugal                      1.1%               1.1%             0.8%            0.5%           0.9%
   Spain                         3.2%               3.0%             3.5%            1.5%           2.8%
   Sweden                        4.6%               3.6%             4.0%            5.6%           4.5%
   Switzerland                   0.6%               0.4%             0.6%            1.1%           0.7%
   United Kingdom                7.9%              11.4%            12.8%           19.7%          13.0%
   United States                32.8%              35.0%            32.4%           28.5%          32.2%
   Other                        10.1%               6.4%             5.4%            3.6%           6.4%
   Unknown                       1.7%               2.3%             2.9%            4.8%           2.9%
Notes: Each column calculates the national repertoire shares of world chart entries, constraining the sample to parts
of the chart availability distribution (for example, column 2 calculates shares only for all top 10 entries in each
year/country), and it weights all entries equally.




                                                         40
Table 9: Gravity Equations across Decades: Replacing Missing Trade Values and Restricting
Sample to Countries with Data since 1970

                                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
                                           1960s           1970s           1980s            1990s           2000s
 B. Replacing Missing Trade Values
    Log Distance                          -0.1637         -0.4355          -0.5605         -0.4694          -0.6926
                                         (-0.1057)      (0.0814)**       (0.0791)**      (0.0726)**       (0.0719)**
    Same Language                         0.5639           1.0509           0.9417          0.6869           1.1835
                                         (0.2333)*      (0.2299)**       (0.2086)**      (0.1626)**       (0.2131)**
    Home Bias                             3.2285           2.2802           2.2715          2.7836           3.1269
                                        (0.5907)**      (0.5307)**       (0.5006)**      (0.4729)**       (0.4546)**
    Observations                            1804            2838             3190            3542             3674


 B. Countries with data since 1970
    Log Distance                          -0.0553         -0.2819          -0.3368         -0.2238          -0.3608
                                          -0.1409       (0.0670)**       (0.0808)**      (0.0650)**       (0.0925)**
    Same Language                          1.0338          1.3603            0.875          0.856            0.7016
                                        (0.2667)**      (0.1674)**       (0.1840)**      (0.1792)**       (0.2138)**
    Home Bias                              1.9597          0.9735           0.9456          1.576            2.0906
                                        (0.4375)**      (0.2606)**       (0.2601)**      (0.2368)**       (0.3007)**
    Observations                             540            1027             1109           1325              1081
Notes: Dependent variable is log imports, based on GDP. All regressions include source and destination country
fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on country pair. In contrast to Table 7, missing trade
values for a country pair are replaced with the minimum value of imports observed for an importer. Destination
countries with data since 1970 included: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Italy, Netherlands,
Norway, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and United States.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                         41
Figure 1. Music Consumption Shares and GDP Shares, 2003-2007
                        .1 .2 .4                                                                                   US


                                                                                                     Japan
                                                                                       United Kingdom


                                                                             Canada FranceGermany
   Consumption Shares




                                                    Sweden
                                                                                   Italy
                                                                 Netherlands Spain
                                                                     Australia      Brazil
                                          Finland      Belgium
                                            DenmarkAustria
                                               Norway
                                   New Zealand     Switzerland




                                                                 Argentina
                                               Portugal




                                                    Chile

                                                                                                .1           .2   .4
                                                                     GDP Shares

Notes: Each dot shows each country’s average GDP share from 2003-2007 and the corresponding total music
consumption share in the same period. Red line is the 45 degree line. Figure is plotted in log scale.

Figure 2. Music Trade Shares and GDP Shares, 2003-2007
                                                                                                                   US
                        .1 .2 .4




                                                                                       United Kingdom
                                                                             Canada


                                                    Sweden                                     Germany
   Trade Shares




                                                                                     France
                                                                  Australia       Italy
                                          Finland             Netherlands
                                                      Belgium
                                                   Austria
                                            Denmark
                                   New Zealand    Switzerland               Spain

                                                                                      Brazil

                                               Norway


                                                                 Argentina



                                                                                                     Japan
                                               Portugal

                                                                                                .1           .2   .4
                                                                     GDP Shares

Notes: Each dot shows each country’s average GDP share from 2003-2007 and the corresponding music trade share
in the same period. Red line is the 45 degree line. Figure is plotted in log scale.




                                                                                       42
                                                                                              Im po rt S har e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Domestic Shares
                                                                                                                                                                UN
                                        A
                                            rg
                                                            0 .0 5 .1 .1 5                          Sw                       0    .1   .2 .3                     ni e w
                                                                                                                                                                   te
                                                                                                                                                                     d Ze
                                                                                                                                                                                            0 .0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .1   .2                                                    .4                        .7 1
                                    N          e                                                        itzA u                                                          Ki a
                                    et Cnti n                                                       N Fersl tria                                                         Cnag dla n
                                       he B h a
                                                                                                 U e thSwinlaand                                                  U P Sn aomd
                             U          Frlarai le                                                  ni er e dn                                                      ni o p d
                               nit SFi n lan dzi l                                                    te Fl a e d                                                     te Frt ua ina
                                                                                                         d r ndn                                                         d
                                  e d P wra nsd                                                             Sa                                                         D Sra ng a
                                  S K o ednc
                                     w in rtu ee                                              U        DNotances
                                                                                                          e rwte                                                         Benmtatecel
                                N itz g g n                                                     ni                   s
                                                                                                   te n m                                                             A Fei l g ar s
                                   ew Ne rdo a l                                                     d BS a                                                              rg n i u k
                                        Zeo rlwa nm                                              N Ki el gpaar ky                                                   N enlat nm
                                                                                                    ewP ng iu i n
                                        Beal ad                                                            o                                                          et Sw i nd
                                                                                                                                                                        h It a
                                U        A l ga ny                                                       Zertdu o m                                                 Sw erle da l y
                                  ni G Jusi umd                                                              alagma
                                     te er a tria                                                      AAr u s It n dl                                                  itzAua nedn




                                                                             Spain
                                       d mpa
                                          S                                                                ge tr a l                                                      Nersl tri s
                                                                                                                                                                            o




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Australia




                                                                                                                                                  Germany
                                      De taatnny                                                       G Jan tiali ya                                                  G rCwaanad
                                          nmItaes                                                         er pn a                                                         er h y
                                           S ly                                                              ma                                                             Jm il
                                       ACanpaark                                                          C Chan n                                                      A Ba paaney
                                         us a i n                                                           an i y                                                         us ra n




     Graphs by nationality
                                                                                                             B adle


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      New Zealand
                                             tr ada                                                            ra a                                                           tr az il
                                                 l ia                                                             z il                                                            l ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Finland

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Denmark




                                                            0   .0 5   .1                                                    0 .0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4                                             0 .0 1 .0 2 .0 3
                                                                                                      Sw F                                                            N Po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Norway




                                            NFin la                                                             ra                                                      et Frt
                                                                                                                                                                          h u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Portugal



                             U               For n                                                    Ne i tzB eBrnc e
                                 ni D Jrawn ayd                                               U                  r a                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                      Sw Be rrlaa nga
                                   te e a c                                                                                                                         nit   itzel gn cel
                                     d n                                                          n it th erel gla nz il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chile



                                  N K Smpaaen                                                         e d la iu md                                                    ed G Aerl iudms
                                    e in                                                                  K AuSpnd s                                                      K e rumsat nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Austria

                                    Nw BZ eg pd arink                                                      Sin s a in                                                U in g ari a
                                      et el g o
                                                      m                                                   G wgdtori a                                                 ni Ar don
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sweden




                                    SwGhe ralai um                                                           er ed m                                                    te g I my
                                                                                                                                                                          d enta
                                         i tze rla nnd                                                     PF m e                                                             St ti ly
                                              em ads                                                      A o inlaan n                                                            an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Switzerland

                                                                                                          Ar usrtu n yd                                              N S SChteas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belgium




                                          AAu ursl ann y                                                     g tr g a                                                  ew w pai l e
                                                st triad
                                  Un              ra                                                N e
                                                                                                          DNeo ntal i al




                                                                                                                                                  Italy
                                                                                                   U w en rwi n a                                                          ZNeoer d ei n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Brazil
                                     i teP o Ch il ia                                                 ni         m                                                             Ja lawan




                                                                             Sweden
                                        Ad Srt Iutalel                                                   teZe C aar y                                                    D F a p ndy
                                           rg t g y                                                        d ahk                                                            e nin a
                                           Swe na tea l                                                        Stl a il e                                                   C mla nn
                                           C e ti ns                                                           J a nd                                                          a
                                              an d a                                                       C aIptea s                                                     A Bn aa rkd
                                                B aden                                                         a n ta n                                                      us rada
                                                  ra a                                                             adly                                                          traz il
                                                     zi
                                                        l                                                              a                                                             li a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                     U
                                                            0 .1 .2 .3 .4                     U                              0 .0 0 0.0
                                                                                                                                      1 0 0.020 0 3                 ni                      0 .1 .2 .3 .4
                                                                                                  n it                                                                 te
                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Australia




                                                                                                    ed F                                                                  PS
                                  Ne D S I                                                                   i
                                                                                                   U KSinwnel a                                                      Sw o rttat
                                                                                                                                                                            F ue
                                     the n ptaaly                                                    ni g dnd
                                      Peor lama in                                                   Stwed A doen                                                       Gitz era ngasl
                                                                                                          itzSutast m                                                      e rl c
                                          rtundrk
                                                                                                             e ria                                                      DBerma ne
                                U NFiBnragasl
                                  ni S o l a z                                                     N P Sr late s                                                U Ne Ne nl giuandy
                                                                                                                                                                 ni th om m
                                    te w rwn il                                                     New Nor tpuanind                                               te e r ar
                                                                                                                                                                   N d rlawak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Spain




                                                                                                       et Zeor g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GDP Shares
                                     Gd Se d ady                                                                                                                     e wK Au n y
                                     A e                                                                 h e aw al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Netherlands Canada




                                NeSw rgrmta teen                                                             r l aa                                                       Zineg sdtrds
                                    w itz e nan s                                                            Jlaa nndy                                                              i
                                       Zeerl ti ny                                                       G p ads                                                        Ar a lao ma
                                                                                                            er                                                             g e It n
                                        Aual aa nad                                                      D FrmItaa lny                                                   ASwentai l dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Italy




                                                                                                            ena nn                                                          us d na
                                                                                                                         y                                                     t




                                                                                                                                                  Japan
                                       BeJastrni d                                                                                                                                  e
                                        F lg p a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Canada
                             U                                                                             C Cmace




43
                                                                                                                                                                           FJi aral ian
                                                                                                             a n h rk                                                          np
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Brazil




                               ni Au r aiuamn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 4. Repertoire Shares of Imports, 2003-2007
                                 te C str nc                                                               B B adi le                                                         Brlaann
                                   d an a e                                                             AA uesl graza                                                             a d
                                      Kin Ca l ia                                                          rg t i u il                                                    C SChz il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              France




                                                                             United Kingdom
                                          g dhdi a                                                           e nra m                                                         anpail e
                                               omle                                                               ti nli a                                                        adi n
                                                                                                                        a                                                             a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Repertoire Shares of Imports
                                                            0 .2 .4 .6 .8                                                    0 .0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4                                             0.0 5.1.1 5.2.2 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Germany




                             UN C                                                                          Be                                                        S B
                              ni e wA a                                                       U                                                                         w e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              United Kingdom




                                te usn                                                            ni GFi l gi                                                            itz l g
                                  d Z t ad                                                          te e nlau                                                        N Poerl iau m
                                     K ea ra a                                                         d Ar m nm                                                       et rt n
                                         in l a l ia                                                      K ua d
                                            g                                                                                                                           Ah e rSpugad
                                           B d nd                                                           ingst n
                                                                                                            F d ri y                                            U         rg la a
                                           J r om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Japan




                                     DNoaap z il                                                         D ra o a                                                 ni GFei n n dinl
                                                                                                                                                                    te e n tin s
                                       Senmrwaa n                                                    Sw SenS pncme                                                     d Armla na
                                                                                                                   ai
                                                                                                   N i tzwm                                                              K uad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 3. Domestic Music Shares and GDP Shares, 2003-2007




                                 N G we darky                                                         ew P e e darkn                                                       in s n
                                   et e e                                                          U Zorrl aen                                                                gt y
                                                                                                     n          t n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2




                                 SwhPerrmIatanly                                                                                                                          Sw dI orima
                                     i tzo rlat n ny                                                 Ni tedNe alug ad                                                          e tda ly
                                                                                                       e th or an l
                                          er ugds                                                                                                                  U De JaChen
                                               la a                                                         eSr tawad
                                                                                                               l ty
                                                                                                                                                                     ni n p i l
                                         FS p n l                                                             Jaa ned s                                             N ted Bmaane




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 France
                                    Ar Ainu laaidn                                                                p s                                                 e w S ra rk
                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                         ge s n                                                            C CItaa n                                                      Zeota     z
                               U B Cntitri ad                                                                an h ly                                                           r teisl
                                                                                                                    i




                                                                                                                                                  Netherlands
                                 ni el hn a                                                                                                                                 Fra w
                                                                                                                                                                                la ay




                                                                             United States
                                   te F g il                                                             AArusB raadlea
                                      d ra iu e                                                             getra z                                                      ACuana nnc d
                                          St n m                                                                                                                              st a de
                                               a tce                                                            nt l iai l                                                      ra a
                                                                                                                   in                                                               l ia
                                                  es                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    US




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                domestic music share in the same period. Red line is the 45 degree line. Figure is plotted in log scale.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Notes: Each dot shows each country’s average GDP share from 2003-2007 and the corresponding consumption of
Figure 5. Music Consumption Shares by Country, 1960-2007
                  .8



                                                                                                              US
                  .6
    sh a re s
       .4




                                                            UK
                  .2




                                                         A u s tra l i a            C ana da
                  0




                                1960   1970   19 80                        1 9 90                 2000        2010
                                                            ye a r

Notes: Gray lines show data for all countries that have small market shares. Consumption shares calculated
according to equation (3) in the text.

Figure 6. Music Consumption Shares Divided by GDP Shares by Country, 1960-2007
                                                                UK
                  4




                                                                                       Sw eden
    n o rm al ize d sh a re s
                          3




                                                      A u s tr a l ia
            2




                                                                                       C ana da
                                                                                                         US
                  1
                  0




                                1960   1970   19 80                        1 9 90                 2000        2010
                                                            ye a r

Notes: Gray lines show data for all countries that have small normalized market shares. Consumption shares
calculated according to equation (3) in the text, averaged over three years, and then divided by average GDP shares
over the same three years. Horizontal line of 1 represents proportionality in shares of total consumption of music.




                                                                           44
Figure 7. Music Export Shares by Country, 1960-2007
                   .8
                   .6




                                                             UK
    sh a re s




                                                                                                               US
       .4          .2




                                                          A u s tra l i a            C ana da
                   0




                                 1960   1970   19 80                        1 9 90                 2000        2010
                                                             ye a r

Notes: Gray lines show data for all countries that have small market shares. Export shares calculated according to
equation (3) in the text, but omitting consumption of domestic music.

Figure 8. Music Export Shares Divided by GDP Shares by Country, 1960-2007
                                                                 UK
                                                                                        Sw eden
                   6
     n o rm al ize d sh a re s




                                                       A u s tr a l ia
                    4




                                                                                        C ana da
    2              1




                                                                                                          US
                   0




                                 1960   1970   19 80                        1 9 90                 2000        2010
                                                             ye a r

Notes: Gray lines show data for all countries that have small normalized market shares. Export shares calculated
according to equation (3) in the text (but omitting consumption of domestic music), averaged over three years, and
then divided by average GDP shares over the same three years. Horizontal line of 1 represents proportionality in
music export shares.




                                                                            45
Figure 9. Overall Domestic Shares, 1960-2007
         .8
         .7
   shares
     .6  .5
         .4




                1960        1970      1980                 1990      2000          2010
                                                year

Notes: Overall domestic shares calculated as the total consumption of domestic music in all countries in a given
year, divided by the total consumption of music in that year.

Figure 10. Domestic Shares By Country, 1960-2007
            1




                                                                                      US
            .8




                                                                                      Sw eden

                                                                                      F r a n ce
                .6
       sh a re s




                                                                                   B r a z il
                                                                                      UK
    .4      .2
            0




                     1960   1970        19 80               1 9 90     2000             2010
                                                  ye a r

Notes: Gray lines show data for all countries that have small domestic shares. Domestic shares calculated as the
total consumption of domestic music in each country in a given year, divided by the total consumption of music in
each country in that year.




                                                              46
Figure 11. Estimated Home Bias, 1960-2007
             3              5
                            4
    Estimate
       2                    1
                            0
                            -1




                                                 1960              1970            1980          1990                 2000             2010
                                                                                          Year

                                                                           Home Bias                Home Bias 95% CI



Figure 12. Local MTV Evolution
                                            20




                                                                                                                                NZ,AU
                                                                                                                              SW,NO,DE,FI
   Sample Countries with Dedicated Music TV
                                  15




                                                                                                                       Por tu gal
                     10




                                                                                                            Fran ce , Bel gium

                                                                                                  Australia , German y, Ita ly, UK
          5




                                                                                            Netherl ands
                                                                               Bra zil
                                                                 Canad a
                                                        United States
                          0




                                                 1980          1985         1990          1995         2000              2005         2010
                                                                                          year

Notes: Each dot shows the first year of local MTV activities for the assigned country. Source: Wikipedia.




                                                                                                      47
Figure 13. Internet Penetration, 1990-2008
                   80
   Internet Users (per 100 people)
    20         40  0       60

                                     19 0




                                     19 4




                                     19 8



                                        01




                                        05
                                        91
                                        92
                                       93


                                        95
                                        96
                                       97


                                        99
                                        00



                                     20 2
                                        03
                                        04



                                     20 6
                                        07
                                        08
                                        9




                                        9




                                        9




                                        0




                                        0
                                     19


                                     19
                                     19
                                     19


                                     19
                                     19
                                     19


                                     20
                                     20
                                     20


                                     20
                                     20
                                     20


                                     20
Notes: Graph shows box plots by year of internet users per 100 people for the countries in our sample.


Figure 14. Domestic Shares and Radio Quotas

                                                    Australia                                 Canada
        .6
        .4
        .2
        0




                                                    France                                  New Zealand
        .6
        .4
        .2
        0




                                     1960   1970   1980    1990   2000   2010 1960   1970    1980   1990   2000   2010
                                                                         year
                                                   Domestic Share               Domestic Content on Radio
   Gra phs b y co untry


Notes: The green line in each panel shows the percentage of consumption of domestic music in the respective
country. Red lines indicate the minimum percentage of radio air play devoted to domestic music according to each
country’s legislation.



                                                                                      48
Figure 15: French Repertoire Share at Home and Abroad, and French Radio Quotas, 1970-2007

                                 Belgium                                      France
     .6
     .4
     .2
     0




                                  Spain                                     Switzerland
     .6
     .4
     .2
     0




                  1970   1980      1990    2000      2010 1970       1980       1990      2000   2010
                                                     year
                                Domestic Share                  Domestic Content on Radio
   Gra phs b y co untry


Notes: Each panel shows the percentage of consumption of French music in the respective country. Red lines
indicate the minimum percentage of radio air play devoted to French music according to the legislation in France.

Figure 16. Chart Convergence, 1960-2007
             .7
             .6
   overlap
             .5
             .4




                  1960           1970             1980            1990            2000           2010
                                                         year

Note: the index is the ratio of (distinct artists appearing on world charts in a year)/(number of chart entries in the
included countries).




                                                                      49
Figure 17. Genre Shares, 1960-2003
            .6




                                                    Rock_Pop
            .4




                                                                  R_B
   shares




                    Oldi es
            .2




                                                                             Spo ke n_W ord

                                                                         Unkno wn
            0




                 1960         1970   1980             1990            2000           2010
                                             year

Notes: Gray lines show data for genre that have small world shares.




                                                          50
Appendix Table 1. GDP and IFPI shares in 2003

                      GDP shares     IFPI shares
Argentina               1.5%            0.2%
Australia                2.1%           2.4%
Austria                 0.9%            1.0%
Belgium                 1.0%            0.9%
Brazil                   5.2%           1.0%
Canada                  3.4%            2.3%
Chile                   0.7%            0.1%
Denmark                  0.5%           0.6%
Finland                 0.5%            0.5%
France                  5.8%            7.5%
Germany                 8.0%            7.2%
Italy                   5.3%            2.3%
Japan                   12.1%          16.9%
Netherlands              1.7%           1.8%
New Zealand              0.3%           0.4%
Norway                   0.6%           0.9%
Portugal                0.7%            0.5%
Spain                   3.6%            2.1%
Sweden                  0.9%            1.0%
Switzerland              0.8%           0.9%
United Kingdom           5.8%          11.4%
United States           38.5%          38.0%




                                            51
Appendix Table 2. Shares only using “born in” criteria to define nationality

 country              % of Sales    % of Trade        % Home
                                                       Share
 Argentina               0.0%           0.0%           30.5%
 Australia               0.6%           1.1%           13.4%
 Austria                0.3%            0.7%            9.6%
 Belgium                 0.4%           0.8%           16.0%
 Brazil                  0.6%           0.2%           57.4%
 Canada                 3.9%            9.3%           34.4%
 Chile                  0.0%            0.0%           18.8%
 Denmark                 0.3%           0.4%           45.5%
 Finland                0.5%            1.0%           77.1%
 France                 3.6%            1.4%           48.2%
 Germany                 3.5%           2.8%           34.2%
 Italy                  1.2%            1.2%           35.4%
 Japan                  15.6%           0.0%           86.6%
 Netherlands             0.8%           1.0%           33.6%
 New Zealand             0.2%           0.6%           16.5%
 Norway                  0.3%           0.1%           33.2%
 Portugal               0.0%            0.0%           23.7%
 Spain                  1.0%           0.7%            42.6%
 Sweden                 1.4%            2.7%           57.5%
 Switzerland             0.2%           0.4%            6.6%
 United Kingdom          9.0%          11.4%           45.8%
 United States          50.0%          44.6%           88.1%
 other                  5.3%           16.2%
 unknown                1.1%           3.4%




                                                 52
Appendix Figure 1. Export shares normalized by constant IFPI
                 6                                                                     Sw eden
   n o rm al ize d sh a re s
                        4




                                                                    UK
                                                           A u s tr a l ia             C ana da
     2           1




                                                                                                         US
                 0




                               1960   1970         19 80                      1 9 90              2000        2010
                                                                 ye a r




Appendix Figure 2. Estimated Distance and Same Language Effects, 1960-2007
           3 5
             4
  Estimate
      2      1
             0
             -1




                          1960        1970        1980                       1990            2000         2010
                                                             Year

                                       Distance                               Same Language
                                       Distance 95% CI                        Same Language 95% CI




                                                                                53
