NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERRACIAL FRIENDSHIPS IN COLLEGE
Braz Camargo
Ralph Stinebrickner
Todd R. Stinebrickner
Working Paper 15970
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15970

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

We would like to thank Peter Arcidiacono, John Bound, Kerwin Charles, Stacy Dickert--Conlin, Lance
Lochner, Eugenia Toma, and numerous seminar participants for very useful comments and suggestions.
This paper would not have been possible without the help of Dianne Stinebrickner and the tireless
efforts of Lori Scafidi. We are extremely grateful for generous support from The Mellon Foundation,
The Spencer Foundation, The University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research, The National Science
Foundation, The Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and Berea College.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Braz Camargo, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd R. Stinebrickner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Interracial Friendships in College
Braz Camargo, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd R. Stinebrickner
NBER Working Paper No. 15970
May 2010
JEL No. I0
ABSTRACT
Motivated by the reality that the benefits of diversity on a college campus will be mitigated if interracial
interactions are scarce or superficial, previous work has strived to document the amount of interracial
friendship interaction and to examine whether policy can influence this amount. In this paper we take
advantage of unique longitudinal data from the Berea Panel Study to build on this previous literature
by providing direct evidence about the amount of interracial friendships at different stages of college
and by providing new evidence about some of the possible underlying reasons for the observed patterns
of interaction. We find that, while much sorting exists at all stages of college, black and white students
are, in reality, very compatible as friends; randomly assigned roommates of different races are as likely
to become friends as randomly assigned roommates of the same race. Further, we find that, in the long-run,
white students who are randomly assigned black roommates have a significantly larger proportion
of black friends than white students who are randomly assigned white roommates, even when the randomly
assigned roommates are not included in the calculation of the proportions. This last result contradicts
previous findings in the literature.

Braz Camargo
Sao Paulo School of Economics
University of Western Ontario
bcamargo@uwo.ca
Ralph Stinebrickner
Berea College
ralph_stinebrickner@berea.edu

Todd R. Stinebrickner
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
trstineb@uwo.ca

1

Introduction

Motivated by the reality that the bene…ts of diversity on a college campus will be mitigated
if interracial interactions are scarce or super…cial, previous work has strived to document
the amount of interracial friendship interaction and to examine whether policy can in‡uence
this amount. In this paper we take advantage of unique longitudinal data to build on this
previous literature by providing direct evidence about the amount of interracial friendship
interaction at di¤erent stages of college and by providing new evidence about some of the
possible underlying reasons for the observed patterns of interaction.
We begin in Section 2 with a description of our data, which come from the Berea Panel
Study (BPS) conducted at Berea College. Berea College is located in central Kentucky
and operates under a mission of providing educational opportunities to students of “great
promise but limited economic resources."
In Section 3 we describe the basic empirical di¢ culty that is present if one wishes to
characterize the amount of racial sorting in friendships— that friendship decisions are not
observed directly in higher education data sources. Other existing approaches for characterizing the amount of sorting involve the use of indirect measures that permit the construction
of only a single cross–section. In contrast, our survey e¤orts allow us to directly observe
friendships at multiple times during school, starting at the end of the short orientation period that occurs immediately before the start of classes. We document a very high degree of
racial sorting at all stages of college.
In Section 4 we examine what we can add to the existing literature by using our direct
measures of friendship in conjunction with an experiment that arises because students at
Berea are randomly (and unconditionally) assigned roommates in their freshman year. In
terms of understanding why high degrees of racial sorting are observed, this experiment
allows us to provide some of the …rst evidence about perhaps the most obvious potential
explanation— that friendship compatibility is higher between students of the same race than
between students of di¤erent races. This is possible since the experiment essentially forces
some students to learn about their friendship compatibility with an individual of a di¤erent
race while other students are forced to learn about their friendship compatibility with an

2

individual of the same race. We …nd that roommates of di¤erent races are as likely to become
friends as roommates of the same race.
Previous literature has emphasized the value of understanding whether a particular
policy— in this case the random assignments of roommates— can in‡uence the amount of
interracial interaction later in school. In Section 4 we also …nd that, in the long–run, white
students who are randomly assigned black roommates have a signi…cantly larger proportion of
black friends than white students who are randomly assigned white roommates, even when
the randomly assigned roommates are not included in the calculation of the proportions.
This contradicts the related …nding in Boisjoly et al. (2006) who, without the bene…t of
direct measures of friendship, conclude that roommates “have little or no e¤ect on harder to
change behavior (such as befriending or socializing with someone from another racial/ethnic
group)."1 As such, our results tend to strengthen the general message in Boisjoly et al.
(2006) that roommates can matter in this context. However, the fact that the total amount
of racial sorting remains roughly constant over time in the sample as a whole reveals the
natural limit of this particular policy— that, by de…nition, only a limited number of white
students can be matched with black roommates.
In Section 5 we examine what else can be learned from our data. In addition to the
possibility that actual friendship compatibility may depend on whether two students are
of the same race or not, there are two other possible explanations for why high degrees of
racial sorting are observed. First, even if actual friendship compatibility does not depend
on race, a person may incorrectly believe that he or she is less compatible with students of
a di¤erent race. Second, the cost of meeting a potential friend, generally de…ned, or other
costs of forming friendships may be higher if the potential friend is of a di¤erent race.
Given the evidence on actual interracial friendship compatibility from Section 4, ascertaining whether misperceptions about interracial friendship compatibility exist at a point in
time requires knowledge of beliefs about interracial friendship compatibility at that point in
time. The potential for learning about beliefs at the time of entrance comes from the fact
1

Boisjoly et al. (2006) use survey questions asking whether “I have personal contact with people from
other racial/ethnic groups", “I interact comfortably with people from other racial/ethnic groups", and “I
socialize with someone with an African American Background." They …nd that the use of such questions do
not produce a particularly clear or consistent picture.

3

that we collected friendship decisions at a point in time— immediately before classes began
in the students’freshman year— when all observed friends are new friends and institutional
details at Berea suggest that the process by which a person encounters potential friends
is, to a close approximation, unconditionally random. Nonetheless, even in this best case
scenario, we stress in advance the di¢ culty of identifying beliefs from observed choices and
pay careful attention to detailing the assumptions that would be necessary for identi…cation
in this case to be credible. As we also discuss in Section 5, identifying beliefs from observed
choices becomes even more di¢ cult at subsequent stages of college when not all observed
friends are new friends and the process by which a student encounters potential friends is no
longer random.
We …nish in Section 6 with a discussion of how the conclusions of this work should be
shaped by the reality that we are studying one particular school and of the limitations of
using the roommate assignment process as a policy to in‡uence interracial interactions.

2

The Berea Panel Study
The data come from the Berea Panel Study (BPS) which, as described in detail in Stine-

brickner and Stinebrickner (2004, 2006, 2008a), was initiated by Todd Stinebrickner and
Ralph Stinebrickner with the goal of understanding a variety of decisions that students
make after entering college. The BPS consists of two cohorts that entered Berea in the
fall of 2000 and 2001, respectively, and were surveyed between ten and twelve times each
year while in school. Unique identi…ers allow the survey data to be matched with student
information from the school’s administrative database.
Of particular importance for this paper, the BPS collected substantial information about
friends and roommates at multiple times each year while students were in school. The
baseline survey took place at the end of the mandatory orientation period, which we refer to
as the “time of entrance" or the “start of classes."2 One key di¤erence between the two BPS
cohorts is that friendship information was collected on the baseline survey only for the 2001
2

In reality, the orientation period consists of two mandatory portions: a summer weekend and a short
period immediately before the beginning of courses. This distinction has some signi…cance in Section 4, and
we discuss it in more detail there.

4

cohort. Given this, we focus on the 2001 cohort for much of our work. For this cohort, the
participation rate for the baseline survey was approximately .90, and Column 1 of Table 1
shows descriptive statistics for our sample from this cohort. Approximately 43% of students
at Berea are male and 15.8% of students are black. We note that, because the very large
majority of non–black students are Caucasian, we combine all non–black students into a
group that we refer to as “white" in the remainder of the paper.
The number of observations for which friendship information is observed at the time
of entrance (354) is slightly smaller than the total number of baseline respondents (375)
because two students indicated that they had no friends and nineteen students listed no
friends that could be matched with individuals in our student database. The latter arises
primarily because, at the time of our baseline survey, students had been at Berea for a short
time and some individuals did not know both the …rst and last names of some of their friends.
Nonetheless, students were reasonably knowledgeable about the names of their friends even
at this early point in their college careers; we were able to …nd approximately 75% of the
listed friends in our o¢ cial database.3
Our survey collection e¤orts also allow us to directly identify friendships for students at
the middle of the …rst, second, and third years. The total number of students for which
friendship decisions are observed at these points are 335, 275, and 238, respectively. The
decrease in sample size after the baseline is almost exclusively due to drop–outs— response
rates were approximately 95% after the baseline survey among individuals who were still
enrolled at Berea and we were able to …nd approximately 95% of the listed friends after
the baseline survey. We describe the sample construction in the Appendix. We note that
attrition rates of black students are generally similar to those of white students, so that the
proportion of black students at the school remains quite stable over time. We discuss the
possible implications of survey attrition in Sections 3 and 4.
While the fact that the 2000 cohort did not answer the baseline survey makes its use
problematic in some parts of the paper, this cohort is useful for examining certain issues
in which having a larger sample size is of help. For the 2000 cohort, the total number of
3
We …nd that 95% of friends were met at Berea. The results in the paper use all friends, but removing
friends who were not met at Berea or removing students who have at least one friend who was not met at
Berea leads to virtually no change in the results.

5

observations for which friendships are observed in the middle of the …rst, second, and third
years are 353, 248, and 233, respectively.

3

Racial Sorting
Non–trivial interactions between students of di¤erent races are necessary for diversity to

yield bene…ts. Given this, one goal of recent literature has been to document the amount
of sorting that is present in close friendships on a college campus. The empirical di¢ culty
encountered in this exercise is that friendship decisions are not observed directly in higher
education data sources. In response to this di¢ culty, other work has found creative, although
typically indirect, measures of close friendships. For example, Marmaros and Sacerdote
(2006) proxy for friendships using the quantity of email that is exchanged between pairs of
students. Mayer and Puller (2008) obtain a more direct measure by examining friendship
links from Facebook.com, although one might worry that these links capture both close
friendships and acquaintances.4
The BPS includes very direct measures of friendship. At the end of the orientation period,
immediately before classes began in the freshman year, we elicited friendship information for
students in the 2001 cohort using the following survey question.5
Question A. Please list the names of the four people you currently consider your best friends at
Berea College and provide information about where you met each of them. Please list in order with
the person you would consider your best friend …rst.
First Name

Last Name

Where I met this person Circle ONE

1.

Hometown At Berea College Other (specify)

2.

Hometown At Berea College Other (specify)

3.

Hometown At Berea College Other (specify)

4.

Hometown At Berea College Other (specify)

4

As an extreme example, the thousands of Facebook friend requests that Michael Phelps received in the
days after winning eight gold medals in the 2008 Summer Olympics undoubtedly came from people who did
not know him personally.
5
As a general note, it is never possible to know how answers to a particular survey question might be
in‡uenced by respondents’perceptions about how the question will be used. However, in this respect, it is
worth noting that Question A, which does not refer to race in any way, was embedded in a very substantial
survey with an obvious focus on academic performance and educational attainment.

6

The relevant descriptive statistics in the …rst column of Table 2A show that a very
substantial amount of sorting by race is present at the start of classes when we characterize
sorting using the person that is listed as the best friend in Question A. Pooling males and
females and computing sample proportions, the Black (entrance) entry shows that 69.6% of
black students in our sample have best friends who are black while the White (entrance)
entry shows that only 5.7% of white students in our sample have best friends who are black.
If sorting were purely random, then, in large samples, the proportion of black students who
have black best friends would be 15.8% and the proportion of white students who have
black best friends would also be 15.8%. Statistical tests overwhelmingly reject the former
hypothesis, the latter hypothesis, and the hypothesis that the two conditions are jointly
true.6;7 The …rst column of Table 2B shows similar results at the start of classes when
we characterize sorting using information about all individuals that are listed as friends in
Question A. Pooling males and females we …nd that, on average (across sample members),
66.8% of the friends listed by a black student are black while only 9.7% of the friends listed
by a white student are black.
The reality that other research on this topic has not been able to provide evidence
about how sorting by race in friendships changes during school stems from the fact that
the approaches used in these other papers for measuring friendships allowed only for the
construction of a single cross–section.8 We provide direct information about how sorting
6

The test of the null hypothesis that the proportion of black students who have black best friends is 15.8%
has a standard normal test statistic of 11.334. The test of the null hypothesis that the proportion of white
students who have black best friends is 15.8% has a standard normal test statistic of 4.778. A test that the
proportion of black students who have black best friends is the same as the proportion of white students
who have black best friends has a standard normal test statistic of 12.030.
7
Sixty percent of male black students in the sample have black best friends while 77% of female black
students in the sample have black best friends. Given that this di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant
at traditional levels, we do not pay speci…c attention to di¤erences by sex in the remainder of the paper,
although we do …nd statistically di¤erent sorting patterns by sex at some points after the …rst year.
8
While, in theory, one could examine sorting across time by taking advantage of the fact that individuals at
di¤erent stages of school are present in the single cross–section, in practice, this would not be very successful.
For example, only 11% of freshmen and 23% of sophomores appear as “primary" sample members in the
cross–section of Marmaros and Sacerdote (2006), with the implication being that roughly 80% of the email
exchanged between two freshmen and roughly 60% of email exchanged between two sophomores would not
be observed. In Mayer and Puller (2008), one would seemingly need to attempt to adjust for the reality that
a students’s Facebook friends at a point in time likely represent the cumulative set of friends that the person
has met by that point in school (since people do not tend to remove friends from their Facebook pages).
Regardless, providing this type of evidence is not the focus of either work.

7

changes over time by taking advantage of the fact that we administered Question A not
only at the time of entrance, but also in the middle of the …rst, second, and third years of
college. Recall that the Black (entrance) and White (entrance) entries in the …rst column
of Tables 2A (best friends) and 2B (all friends) show the amount of sorting at the time of
entrance for the 2001 cohort. The remaining entries in the …rst column of Tables 2A and
2B show the amount of sorting for the 2001 cohort in the middle of the …rst, second, and
third years. The second column of Tables 2A and 2B show the amount of sorting for the
2001 cohort in the middle of the …rst, second, and third years using only observations for
students who participated in all survey waves. The results from the …rst two columns of
Tables 2A and 2B provide no evidence of decreased sorting over time, with the majority of
the sample proportions moving in the direction of more sorting after the time of entrance.
The …rst two columns of Tables 3A (best friends) and 3B (all friends) show similar results
when we increase the sample size by combining both the 2000 and 2001 cohorts.
Sorting is also present on the basis of other characteristics. We focus on a student’s
high school grade point average (HSGPA), which is the strongest pre–college predictor of
grade performance and drop–out at Berea. For illustration, examining friendship decisions
in the middle of the …rst year for the combined 2000 and 2001 cohorts, the results from an
OLS regression in the …rst column of Table 4 show that a student’s HSGPA is an important
predictor of the HSGPA of his best friend— the test of the null hypothesis that there exists
no relationship has a t–statistic of 4.797.
The second and third columns of Table 1 show that Berea has features which would be
consistent with some form of a¢ rmative action taking place in admissions. For example,
the sample average HSGPA of white students is 3.43 while the sample average HSGPA of
black students is 3.09. Then, it is natural to examine whether the di¤erence in the amount
of sorting on the basis of HSGPA is being driven to a large extent by the amount of sorting
on the basis of race. The second column of Table 4 shows that adding a student’s race
to the regressions in the …rst column diminishes the strength of the relationship between a
student’s HSGPA and the HSGPA of his best friend, but that the e¤ect of HSGPA remains
signi…cant at all conventional levels with a t–statistic of 3.354.9
9

Note also that there is no evidence of di¤erences in the strength of sorting by race. The point estimates

8

The fact that sorting is present on the basis of academic characteristics such as HSGPA
suggests that the promotion of interracial interactions through a¢ rmative action policies
can be made harder by the reality that these policies lead to academic di¤erences between
black and white students at a school.10 However, because the sorting on the basis of academic characteristics such as HSGPA is relatively weak compared to sorting on the basis of
race, we …nd that the in‡uence of this mismatch here is, in practice, not particularly large.
Speci…cally, combining the 2000 and 2001 cohorts, the …rst column of Table 5 examines the
proportion of students who have a black best friend in the middle of the …rst year, but uses
a linear probability model with whether a person’s best friend is black as the dependent
variable to control for HSGPA and a variety of other characteristics that could be correlated
with race. The Black (year 1) and White (year 1) entries remain very similar to the corresponding entries in the …rst column of Table 3A. The second column of Table 5 examines
the proportion of a student’s friends who are black, but uses a regression model with the
proportion of a student’s friends that are black as the dependent variable, to control for
the same set of characteristics. The Black (year 1) and White (year 1) entries remain very
similar to the corresponding entries in the …rst column of Table 3B.11

4

Evidence From a Roommate Experiment
In this section we examine what can be learned about actual interracial friendship com-

patibility by using our direct measures of friendship in conjunction with an experiment
which arises because students at Berea are assigned roommates in an entirely random fashion which, for example, does not take into account any characteristics or preferences of
associated with HSGPA are .152 and .143, respectively, when the …rst column of Table 4 is estimated using
the friendships of only white students and only black students, respectively.
10
For work that focuses on potential issues related to mismatch see, for example, Ayres and Brooks (2005),
Rothstein and Yoon (2008), and Arcidiacono et al. (2010).
11
Because of sample attrition, the composition of the sample changes over time. For example, in terms
of academic quality, because HSGPA is related to drop–out, the average HSGPA for the sample tends to
increase somewhat over time (e.g., from 3.37 at the start of classes to 3.45 in the middle of the second year).
The …nding in this section that the importance of sorting by HSGPA is relatively small compared to the
importance of sorting by race is consistent with the result that the second column of Tables 2A, 2B, 3A, and
3B is similar to the …rst column of Tables 2A, 2B, 3A, and 3B, respectively.

9

students.12 We also investigate whether the roommate assignment process has an impact on
interracial interactions.

4.1

Evidence about Actual Interracial Compatibility

Arguments about the bene…ts of educational diversity are often premised on the notion
that students from di¤erent races have much in common. Furthermore, as pointed out in
the Introduction, understanding whether black and white students are compatible as friends
is important for understanding the reasons behind the sorting observed in the data. To
the best of our knowledge, very little evidence exists about the issue of actual interracial
compatibility.
Whether a student becomes friends with someone else in college depends on a variety
of characteristics of that person, many of which are not easily observable when the two
students initially encounter one another. In what follows, we adopt an informal de…nition of
friendship compatibility that states that a student is as compatible with students of the same
race as he is with students of a di¤erent race if he would be, on average, indi¤erent between
students from the two races under a scenario in which: (i) there exists no uncertainty about
the friendship–relevant characteristics of all students; (ii) there are no costs on friendships
imposed by the views of others (e.g., stigma costs).
As pointed out above, a variety of characteristics that in‡uence the quality of friendship—
sense of humor and other personality traits, religious and political views, hobbies, interests,
and past experiences, among others— are not apparent when two students …rst meet. As we
discuss in detail in Section 5, this reality can create a disconnect between actual interracial
friendship compatibility and observed friendship choices since, in the presence of uncertainty
about actual interracial compatibility, beliefs about how compatibility is a¤ected by race
12

For those that need roommates, the assignment process is unconditionally random. A housing preference
questionnaire is not used at Berea, due to a belief that such questionnaires are of limited use due to misreporting of behaviors such as smoking. Two weeks before the start of school (and after all members of the
freshman class have been determined) pairs of roommates are drawn using a random number generator and
each pair is randomly assigned to a room on a freshmen dorm ‡oor. Thus, the process ensures randomness
with respect to both one’s roommate and the students in neighboring rooms. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner
(2004) provide indirect evidence of the randomness in the roommate assignment process by examining the
correlation between several observable characteristics of students and their roommates. In addition, here we
…nd no evidence of a relationship between a student’s race and the race of his assigned roommate.

10

may play an important role in decisions. The roommate experiment is valuable because, to
the extent that sharing a room makes a non–trivial amount of interaction and observation
unavoidable, the roommate assignment process implies that some students are forced to learn
about their actual match quality with one randomly chosen roommate of the same race while
other students are forced to learn about their actual match quality with one randomly chosen
roommate of a di¤erent race. Then, seeing how roommates appear in friendship outcomes
after the point at which learning has taken place reveals evidence about actual interracial
friendship compatibility.
It seems reasonable to believe that much is learned about one’s roommate after a couple
of months of sharing a room, and we begin by examining friendship choices from our middle–
of–the–…rst–year survey which was collected in November. At this point, for the 2001 cohort
27 white students in our 2001 sample were randomly assigned black roommates and 155
white students were randomly assigned white roommates.13 The …rst column (2nd panel)
of Table 6B shows that, for this cohort, 44.4% of black roommates are listed as one of the
four friends and 35.4% of white roommates are listed as one of the four friends. The …rst
column (2nd panel) of Table 6A shows that 18.5% of black roommates become best friends
and 18.7% of white roommates become best friends.14
Combining the 2000 and 2001 cohorts to increase the number of observations, we have 60
white students who were identi…ed as having been randomly assigned black roommates and
321 white students who were identi…ed as having been randomly assigned white roommates.15
13

The reality that, as described in Footnote 2, the orientation period actually consists of two portions is
the primary reason that the number of observations in this section is smaller than that in Table 2— 30% of
students request a roommate that they have met in the …rst (summer) portion. Of the 298 white students in
the …rst column of Table 2, 24 were assigned a single room, lived o¤–campus, or we could either not determine
whom the student’s roommate was or whether the student requested a roommate. Of the remaining 274
students, 193 were randomly assigned roommates (155 white, 27 black, 11 race missing–not used). Of the 56
black students in the …rst column of Table 2, 5 students were assigned a single room, lived o¤–campus, or we
could either not determine whom the student’s roommate was or whether the student requested a roommate.
Of the remaining 51 students, 32 were randomly assigned roommates (28 white, 3 black, 1 race missing–not
used). Students who choose roommates themselves during the …rst orientation period may be di¤erent than
those that do not. However, in practice, we …nd that these students have very similar proportions as the
entire sample. The proportions analogous to those in the …rst column of Table 2A are .718 and .086 for
this group and the three tests described earlier in Footnote 6 continue to be overwhelmingly rejected with
standard normal test statistics of 11.047, 4.314, and 8.715, respectively, when these students are removed.
14
The standard errors associated with the proportions are .095, .038, .074, and .021, respectively.
15
With regard to sample sizes, it is worth mentioning that the sample in Boisjoly et al. (2006) has 1278
white students, only 35 of which were assigned at least one black roommate. Furthermore, when they

11

The …rst column (1st panel) of Table 6B shows that 35.0% of black roommates are listed as
one of the four friends and 36.7% of white roommates are listed as one of the four friends.
The …rst column (1st panel) of Table 6A shows that 16.7% of black roommates become best
friends and 16.5% of white roommates become best friends.16 Thus, because the sample
proportions are always close for black and white roommates and are often higher for black
roommates, we are never close to rejecting the null hypothesis that white students are equally
compatible with black students as they are with white students.17 In other words, consistent
with the notion that black and white students do have a lot in common, we …nd evidence in
support of the notion that white students are, on average, as compatible with black students
as they are with other white students.
Further, our results from the second and third years of college are also consistent with the
conclusion that black and white students are compatible as friends.18 Column two of Table
6B examines whether the original roommate was named as one of the four best friends in the
middle of the second year. Column two of Table 6A examines whether the original roommate
was named as the best friend in the middle of the second year. The results in column 2 of
Tables 6A and 6B indicate that white students in the sample more often remained friends and
best friends with their roommate in the second year if they were assigned a black roommate
than if they were assigned a white roommate. For example, the second column (1st panel)
of Table 6B shows that 22.9% of black roommates in the combined cohorts are listed as one
of the four friends in the middle of the second year and 13.3% of white roommates in the
combined cohorts are listed as one of the four friends in the middle of the second year.19
investigate the e¤ect of being assigned a black roommate on socialization with black students, their sample
has 1087 white students, only 21 of which were assigned a black roommate.
16
The standard errors associated with the proportions are .061, .026, .020, and .048, respectively.
17
One might be interested in con…dence intervals (CI) associated with the di¤erence between the sample
proportion when the roommate is black and the sample proportion when the roommate is white. While
negative values will be contained in the con…dence intervals, the negative values are often not large relative
to the proportion of roommates that are reported as friends. For example, the 90% CI for the di¤erence in
proportions (one of four friends) in the middle of the …rst year for the 2001 cohort is ( :075; :254), so that
even the lower bound is only 17% of the proportion of black roommates that are reported as friends (.444).
Further, as will be discussed later, some 90% con…dence intervals in later years do not even include zero.
18
The validity of the experiment after the …rst year relies on the assumption that the race of the assigned roommate does not in‡uence college drop–out decisions or survey participation decisions. This seems
reasonable given that students are equally happy with black and white roommates.
19
The 90% con…dence interval for this di¤erence, (:003; :187), does not include zero, providing strong
evidence of interracial compatibility.

12

Similarly, the third column of Tables 6A and 6B reveal that white students in the sample
more often remained friends and best friends with their roommate in the third year if they
were assigned a black roommate than if they are assigned a white roommate.
Note that our experiment does not remove the external costs of interracial friendships
(e.g., stigma costs), if they exist. In the next section we describe why we believe that these
types of costs may not be important in our context. Regardless, it is worth noting that if such
costs do exist, then they would strengthen our conclusion about actual interracial friendship
compatibility since such costs would work against the formation of interracial friendships.
In the previous section we examined whether the promotion of interracial interactions
through a¢ rmative action policies could be made more di¢ cult by the reality that these
policies create a mismatch with respect to academic characteristics. Since the motivation for
promoting interracial interactions is often that such interactions will allow students to learn
that they have much in common with students from other races, it is valuable to understand
the in‡uence of academic mismatch on actual friendship compatibility.
We de…ne the variable MISMATCH to be the absolute value of the di¤erence between the
HSGPA of a student and the HSGPA of the student’s roommate. Combining the 2000 and
2001 cohorts and again limiting our sample to white students who were randomly assigned
a roommate, the …rst column of Table 7 shows the results from regressing a dummy variable
for whether the white student named his randomly assigned roommate as a friend in the
middle of the …rst year on MISMATCH. We …nd that students are signi…cantly less likely
to become friends when their HSGPA’s di¤er— the null hypothesis that MISMATCH has no
e¤ect on friendship is rejected at levels greater than .015.20
While the result in the above paragraph suggests that in general mismatch tends to decrease compatibility, it only strengthens the previous result that black and white students
are very compatible; the (unconditional) likelihood that white students become friends with
randomly assigned black roommates is as large as the likelihood that they become friends
20

Re–estimating after stratifying on the basis of the race of the assigned roommate produces no evidence
that the importance of MISMATCH varies with the race of the roommate. Among the white students
assigned a white roommate the estimated e¤ect (std. error) of MISMATCH is :160(:072). Among the
white students assigned assigned a black roommate the estimated e¤ect of MISMATCH is :141(:137): The
average value of MISMATCH is .427 for roommates who become friends and .527 for roommates who do not
become friends.

13

with randomly assigned white roommates despite the fact that the randomly assigned black
roommates are, on average, less compatible with the white students on the academic dimension. Formally, in the second column of Table 7 we add the race of the randomly assigned
roommate to the regression in the …rst column. Holding the amount of mismatch constant,
the estimated e¤ect of having a black roommate is very close to zero, but slightly positive.21
It is not possible to directly provide evidence about the compatibility of black students
with other black students since the random assignment implies that only a very small fraction
of all matches would involve two black students.22 However, we can examine whether black
students in the interracial pairs have views (about whether their roommates are friends) that
are similar to those held by the white students in the interracial pairs. We have 28 black
students in our initial sample who were identi…ed as having been randomly assigned white
roommates.23 In the …rst column (second panel) of Table 6B we see that, for this cohort,
39.3% of these roommates are listed as one of the four friends (compared to 44.4% for white
students in interracial pairs). In the …rst column (second panel) of Table 6A, we see that,
for this cohort, 17.9% of these students become best friends (compared to 18.5% for white
students in interracial pairs).24
Combining the 2000 and 2001 cohorts, we have 60 black students who were identi…ed as
having been randomly assigned white roommates. In the …rst column (…rst panel) of Table
6B, we …nd that 34.4% of these roommates are listed as one of the four friends (compared to
35.0% for white students in interracial pairs). In the …rst column (…rst panel) of Table 6A, we
…nd that 18.0% of these students become best friends (compared to 16.7% for white students
in interracial pairs).25 Thus, we …nd that black students in interracial pairs have views that
are similar to the white students in these pairs. If the compatibility of black students with
other black students is roughly the same as the compatibility of white students with other
21
The “white assigned white" estimate is very close, but slightly larger, than the “white assigned black"
estimate in the …rst column (…rst panel) of Table 6B.
22
From Footnote 13 we see that 14.2% of the students who were randomly assigned roommates are black
so that roughly (:142)2 = :002 of all matches would involve two black students. In the sample we …nd that
.014 of all matches for which the race of the roommate can be identi…ed involve two black students.
23
The number of black students who have white roommates (28) does not have to be the same as the
number of white students who have black roommates (27) because, in some cases, one of two roommates did
not participate in the BPS.
24
The standard errors associated with the proportions .393 and .179 are .092 and .072, respectively.
25
The standard errors associated with the proportions .344 and .180 are .062 and .048, respectively.

14

white students, then, by a simple transitivity argument, these results provide support to
the notion that black students are as compatible with white students as they are with other
black students.
One might wonder if, for some reason, the criteria used to name an assigned roommate
as a friend are fundamentally di¤erent from the criteria used to name a non–roommate as
a friend. Our …ndings related to academic mismatch provide evidence that general factors
that one might expect to in‡uence actual friendship compatibility can be found to be of
importance in our roommate experiment. Furthermore, this concern can be addressed directly by examining whether the initial roommate continued to be named as a friend after
the …rst year when there is no longer a requirement for him to remain a roommate. We
…nd no evidence that pairs of friends who are roommates in the …rst year are less likely to
remain friends after the …rst year than pairs of friends who are not roommates in the …rst
year. For example, combining cohorts, in the second year we observe 125 students who listed
their initial, randomly assigned, roommate as a friend in the …rst year. Thirty–four percent
of these students continue to name their initial roommate as a friend in the second year,
whereas, for the sample as a whole, 31% of students who are listed as friends in the …rst year
are also listed as friends in the second year. In the third year we observe 108 students who
listed their initial, randomly assigned, roommate as a friend in the …rst year. Twenty–four
percent of these students continue to name their initial roommate as a friend in the third
year, whereas, for the sample as a whole, 18% of students who are listed as friends in the
…rst year are also listed as friends in the third year.

4.2

Can Policy In‡uence Interactions?

The results of Section 3 indicate that, for the sample as a whole, there is signi…cant racial
sorting throughout college. This is important since a well–recognized condition necessary
for a¢ rmative action to be useful is that there is interaction between individuals of di¤erent
races (Marmaros and Sacerdote (2006)). It is natural to wonder whether school policy can
in‡uence the amount of interaction. Indeed, providing evidence about this issue has been
the primary objective of much of the literature in this area.

15

The approach taken by Mayer and Puller (2008) to address this question is to specify
a model which imposes signi…cant structure on the meeting process.26 They calibrate the
parameters of their model using their data from Facebook and use the estimates of the
parameters characterizing students’preferences for friendships with individuals of di¤erent
races to simulate the e¤ect of counterfactual policies (e.g., changes to housing assignment
rules or other changes that a¤ect the likelihood that black and white students meet) on the
amount of interracial friendships.
In the absence of an experiment, the approach of imposing structure in order to make
progress on the question of whether policy can in‡uence interactions seems reasonable. At
the same time, assumptions about the meeting process and a variety of other assumptions
that are needed for this approach to be viable are fundamentally unobservable, and it is not
readily apparent how changes to the particular structure that is imposed would in‡uence
conclusions. For example, in order to achieve identi…cation, Mayer and Puller (2008) assumes that preferences about people from di¤erent races do not change over time. But the
motivation for a¢ rmative action is that interaction is useful exactly because it might change
preferences (through changes in beliefs).
We provide direct evidence about this issue by taking further advantage of the experiment
involving randomly assigned roommates. Table 8A shows the proportion of a person’s friends
that are black in the middle of years one, two, and three, strati…ed by the race of the
roommate that was randomly assigned for the freshman year. The proportions in the …rst
panel include the roommate that was randomly assigned in the …rst year if this roommate is
identi…ed as a friend in the year being examined. The …rst column (…rst panel) shows that,
on average, students have 16.5% black friends in the middle of the …rst year if they were
randomly assigned a black roommate and 6.0% black friends in the middle of the …rst year
if they were randomly assigned a white roommate. The null hypothesis that the average
proportion of black friends in the middle of the …rst year does not depend on the race of
the randomly assigned roommate is rejected at all traditional signi…cance levels with the t–
statistic having a value of

4:863. The second and third columns (…rst panel) show similar

26

The model of Mayer and Puller (2008) is based on Jackson and Rogers (2007). The latter, in work that
does not focus on racial issues, examine a model of network formation in which an individual can form links
(friendships) with other individuals either randomly or through his existing friends.

16

results for the middle of the second and third years. Thus, the results indicate that policy
can have a substantial e¤ect on the amount of interracial interaction. Indeed, for white
students assigned black roommates, the average proportion of black friends in the sample is
greater than the proportion of black students (.158) at the school.
As shown in Subsection 4.1, many randomly assigned roommates end up being friends.
This raises the question of whether the results in the …rst panel are being driven entirely
by interactions with the assigned roommate. To examine this issue, the proportions in the
second panel of Table 8A exclude the roommate that was randomly assigned in the freshman
year if this roommate is identi…ed as a friend in the year being examined. The results in the
…rst column (second panel) show that, on average, white students have 8.1% black friends in
the middle of the …rst year if they were randomly assigned a black roommate and 6.7% black
friends in the middle of the …rst year if they were randomly assigned a white roommate.
The null hypothesis that the average proportion of black friends in the middle of the …rst
year does not depend on the race of the randomly assigned roommate cannot be rejected
at any traditional signi…cance levels since the t–statistic from the test has a value of

:656.

Thus, in the middle of the …rst year, the increased interracial interaction generated by the
roommate assignment appears to be generated by the fact that roommates are often friends
rather than by increases in the number of non–roommate friends that are black.
However, the results when roommates are excluded are di¤erent in the second and third
years. For example, the results in the second column of Table 8A (second panel) show that,
on average, white students in the sample have 15.9% black friends in the middle of the second
year if they were randomly assigned a black roommate in the freshman year and 5.4% black
friends in the middle of the second year if they were randomly assigned a white roommate.
The null hypothesis that the average proportion of black friends in the middle of the second
year does not depend on the race of the randomly assigned roommate in the freshman year
is rejected at all traditional signi…cance levels since the t-statistic from the test has a value
of

4:341. The third column of Table 5 (second panel) shows similar results in the middle

17

of the third year.27;28
Thus, our results show that policy can have a substantial in‡uence on interracial friendship interactions. Further, while the e¤ect arises in the …rst year simply because students
often become friends with their assigned roommate, the e¤ect arises in subsequent years
because students who are assigned black roommates are signi…cantly more likely to choose
other friends who are black. These results contradict the related …ndings in Boisjoly et al.
(2006) which are obtained without the bene…t of direct measures of friendship.
The two most obvious reasons for the e¤ect after the …rst year are that either students’
beliefs about interracial friendship compatibility change when they are assigned a black
roommate in their freshman year or that network e¤ects imply that students meet more
potential friends who are black when they are assigned a black roommate in their …rst
year.29 As discussed below in Subsection 5.2, distinguishing between these two possibilities
is very di¢ cult.

5

Other Evidence
In the previous section we used the roommate experiment to provide evidence that stu-

dents of di¤erent races at Berea are compatible as friends and that policy can potentially
in‡uence the amount of interracial interaction of some students. In this section we examine
what else can be learned from our data.
27

One might wonder how survey attrition impacts the numbers in Table 8A. Our primary interest in Table
8A is in examining whether, at certain points in time, there exist di¤erences between white students who
were assigned white roommates and white students who were assigned black roommates. In this case, one
needs only to believe that attrition has similar e¤ect on the two groups. This seems to be a reasonable
assumption since the only di¤erence between the groups at entrance is roommate race and there exists no
evidence in Table 8A that roommate race impacts attrition from the survey.
28
While not our primary focus, changes in sample composition over time could potentially make it di¢ cult
to understand changes in Table 8A that take place over time for a particular group. However, the results in
Table 8B show very similar results to Table 8A when we examine only students who responded in all years.
29
Other somewhat related possibilities are that black friends in the future are complements to existing
black friends or that students with cross–race roommates acquire skills that make it easier for them to form
future cross–race friendships.

18

5.1

Beliefs about Interracial Friendship Compatibility at the Start
of Classes

There are other factors besides interracial friendship compatibility that can also potentially in‡uence friendship decisions, and thus explain the observed sorting by race. For a
variety of reasons, it would be desirable to obtain evidence about the importance of these
other factors. For example, arguments in support of a¢ rmative action admission policies are
often premised on the notion that students may have misperceptions about how much they
have in common with individuals from other races (Alger (1997)). As such, even if actual
friendship compatibility does not vary with the race of one’s friend, it would be desirable to
know whether students believe they are more compatible with students of the same race.
Here we ask what can be learned about a person’s beliefs from his observed friendship
choices. Roughly speaking, if the costs of meeting friends or other subsequent costs of friendships did not vary with the race of potential friends, then students’beliefs about interracial
friendship compatibility would be identi…ed directly from observed choices. The di¢ culty
of ascertaining beliefs from observed choices arises because this assumption about costs is
not generally plausible. To see why, consider the process by which a student meets potential
friends. This meeting process, generally de…ned, involves two stages. First, during a particular period, a student“encounters" a variety of potential friends through his or her academic
and non–academic activities. Second, given that many friendship–relevant characteristics
may not be immediately observable during these encounters, a student must choose which
of these potential friends he or she will spend some time with in order to learn more about
friendship compatibility. It is not necessary to take a stand on how long this “evaluation"
period lasts, but it includes, for example, “breaking the ice" in order to start a dialogue with
a potential friend. We refer to the costs associated with these two stages as meeting costs.
The most commonly discussed reason why costs may vary with the race of potential
friends is that, in general, students will be encountered in a non–random fashion in the …rst
stage of the meeting process. Namely, a student may be involved in clubs, activities, social
circles, or classes in which he encounters a disproportionate number of students of his own
race. This concern led us to take advantage of the ‡exibility of our data collection e¤orts

19

to document friendship decisions at the end of a period— the short orientation period which
occurs before the freshman year— in which institutional details suggest that, to a reasonable
approximation, randomness in encounters is a reasonable assumption.
Speci…cally, in terms of formal assignments made by the school, randomness is the appropriate way to characterize how students are assigned to their o¢ cial orientation group,
how students are assigned roommates and dormmates (Footnote 12), and how students are
assigned to a job in Berea’s mandatory work–study program (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2003)). Randomness also seems to be a reasonable approximation for how students
encounter potential friends through other social avenues during orientation. Indeed, particular clubs that might interest speci…c types of students do not begin activities during the
orientation period and informal events (e.g., parties) held by upperclassmen (which might
draw disproportionate numbers of particular types of students) are unlikely during this period since school rules imply that almost all students live on campus and upperclassmen are
not present on campus during the orientation period.30 Instead, the primary social events
would be general types of functions (e.g., cookouts, etc.) provided by the school that would
presumably be of similar interest to all types of students.
Then, under the assumption that non–randomness in the encounter process is the sole
reason that friendship costs vary with the race of potential friends, we can identify whether
students believe they are more compatible with students of their own race by observing their
friendship choices at the end of the orientation period (i.e., at the start of classes). The
evidence from Section 3 of substantial sorting by race in friendship decisions at the start of
classes suggests that, despite evidence from Section 4 that friendship compatibility does not
depend on the race of the students, students believe that they are more compatible with
students of the same race.
It is important to view the above conclusion with appropriate caution. In an e¤ort to
30

Contributing to the reality that it is very reasonable to assume that o¤–campus parties represent a
negligible portion of social activities during the orientation period is the very low prevalence of alcohol use
at Berea (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2008b). In some schools, one might worry that the assumption
of randomness might be violated due to the presence of athletics. However, largely because a football team
does not exist, the number of freshmen at Berea who would be on–campus for athletics before or during
the orientation period is small. Further, using administrative data we …nd that athletes at Berea are not
disproportionately of any particular race.

20

allow the reader to draw his or her own conclusions, in the next two paragraphs we discuss
possible reasons why non–randomness in the meeting process need not be the only reason
why friendship costs may vary with the race of potential friends and discuss why the relevance
of each reason might be somewhat mitigated in the friendship context.
In terms of the evaluation process, a …rst concern might be that students may feel it
is costly to “break the ice" with someone of another race. However, such a feeling might
be indicative of a belief that friendship compatibility varies with race given that starting a
conversation is likely to be most di¢ cult when two people do not have much in common
to talk about. A second possibility, raised by Cornell and Welch (1996) in a labor market
context, would be that students are worse at evaluating their friendship compatibility with
a person of a di¤erent race, e¤ectively making it costlier for them to form di¤erent–race
friendships. However, from a conceptual standpoint, distinguishing between costs of this
type and beliefs may make more sense in a labor market context than in the friendship
context studied here. It seems likely that a belief that it is di¢ cult to evaluate friendship
compatibility with a student of a di¤erent race might arise from a feeling that there will not
be much in common or that it will be di¢ cult to communicate freely or comfortably. Then,
if sorting is generated by this mechanism, it is perhaps indicative of a belief that friendship
compatibility varies with race. A …nal possibility in the evaluation process is that both white
and black students correctly believe that they are equally compatible with students of the
other race, but at least one group believes that the other is biased. Thus, racial sorting would
occur because students do not choose individuals of the other race for fear of this choice not
being reciprocated. This is a somewhat di¤erent view of the data, but the conclusion for
policy is essentially the same: there is some type of misperception.
Finally, a possible cost that does not fall under the heading of meeting costs would be
that social norms (stigmas) imply that there is a cost to having both black friends and white
friends. For example, if the same race friends of a student criticize him for having friends of
a di¤erent race, then a person may not choose to have friends of both races even if he thinks
that he is equally compatible with students of both races. However, there are a couple of
things to note. First, if such a situation does exist, then it is strongly suggestive that at least
some people on campus believe that blacks and whites are quite di¤erent and probably not
21

particularly compatible— a view that is consistent with the notion that a misperception may
exist. Second, unless one believes that roommates are able to be friends without appearing in
public, this view of things seems inconsistent with the roommate …ndings from the previous
section. Finally, stigmas of this type seem quite inconsistent with the environment at Berea,
which is known for promoting interracial harmony.31

5.2

Learning About Interracial Friendship Compatibility

The evidence in the previous subsection raises the possibility that, while in reality students from di¤erent races are very compatible as friends, they may not realize this at the
time of college entrance. An important policy question is whether the interracial interactions
that occur on a campus are e¤ective in correcting this possible misperception. To examine
this question, one would need to ascertain beliefs about interracial friendship compatibility
from observed choices at times subsequent to the start of classes. We begin by stressing
the di¢ culty of this task, and then examine whether anything can be learned if we take
advantage of the longitudinal nature of our data to operationalize assumptions that have
been utilized recently in models of friendship formation.
Our examination in Subsection 5.1 of beliefs at the start of classes took advantage of two
unique features of the orientation period: (i) students were making all new friends during
the orientation period; and (ii) the process by which students encounter potential friends
during the orientation period is to, a close approximation, unconditionally random. As we
noted, even in this best case scenario, our results should be viewed cautiously since it is not
possible to rule out the existence of costs of friendship formation that vary with the race
of potential friends. At points of time subsequent to the start of classes, identifying beliefs
from observed friendship choices becomes substantially more di¢ cult since the two unique
features described above no longer hold. If there is little turnover in friendships or if network
e¤ects are strong (so that new friends tend to be met through other friends), then sorting
in earlier periods will tend to persist over time even if beliefs about interracial friendship
31

A variant of this explanation would be that social stigmas are present because of the views of parents.
For example, a student who believes that she is equally compatible with students of all races might end up
with more friends of the same race if it is unpleasant to introduce a friend of a di¤erent race to her family.

22

compatibility change over time.
In order to make progress, one would have to believe that it is possible to identify a
group of newly chosen friends that were encountered through a process that, to a reasonable
approximation, is random.32 In what follows we examine whether it is informative to follow
Jackson and Rogers (2007) and Mayer and Puller (2008) who, in their models, maintain
the assumption that a student encounters new friends either through her existing friends or
through a process that is random. Our longitudinal data allow us to remove all friends of
person i at time t who were identi…ed as either being friends of i at t
friends at t

1 or friends of i’s

1. Under the maintained assumption, we would then be left with the group of

new friends who were met randomly. Observing whether the amount of sorting changes over
time for this group provides information about whether beliefs change over time.33
The reality that the maintained assumption is very strong suggests that an asymmetry
may exist between what can be learned from a positive and a negative …nding from the
data.34 If sorting decreases signi…cantly over time when we focus on the group of new friends
who are deemed by the maintained assumption to have been met randomly then it seems
reasonable to conclude both that the maintained assumption has identi…ed a useful group
and that beliefs have changed over time. On the other hand, if sorting does not decrease
signi…cantly over time for this group, this could be the case because either the maintained
assumption did not identify a useful group or because beliefs have not changed over time.
For the 2001 cohort, the sorting results focusing only on this group are shown in the last
columns of Tables 2A (best friends) and 2B (all friends). For the combined 2000 and 2001
32
These new friends might, for example, be met while walking around campus, standing in line in the
cafeteria, or taking part in classes or activities that are not of particular interest to any speci…c type or race
of student.
33
We …nd that 23.7% of friends in the middle of the …rst year were listed as friends at the end of the
orientation period (i.e., they are not new), and that 32.1% of friends in the middle of the second year and
41.6% of friends in the middle of the third year were listed as friends in the middle of the previous year.
These numbers do not vary signi…cantly by race. We …nd that network e¤ects are relatively strong in the
meeting process. A new friend of a student i in the middle of the …rst year has a .0969 probability of being a
friend with any of i’s friends at the end of the orientation period. A new friend of a student i in the middle
of the second (third) year has a .132 (.084) probability of being a friend with any of i’s friends in the middle
of the …rst (second) year.
34
One can certainly question the assumption borrowed from Jackson and Rogers (2007) and Mayer and
Puller (2008). One might also wonder whether yearly friendship observations are frequent enough to accurately identify returning friends and friends that are met through other friend. Similarly, one might wonder
whether problems might arise because our question asks students to identify only four friends.

23

cohorts, the sorting results focusing on only this group are shown in the last columns of
Tables 3A (best friends) and 3B (all friends). The results in the last columns of Tables 2A,
2B, 3A, and 3B show substantial sorting in all periods, with the amount of sorting being
very similar to that observed for the group of all students in the …rst columns of Tables 2A,
2B, 3A, and 3B. Then, it seems necessary to conclude that not much can be been learned
about whether beliefs have changed from this exercise. Similar di¢ culties are present if one
wishes to understand why being assigned a black roommate was found in Subsection 4.2 to
cause a white student to have more black friends in later years.

6

Conclusion
We feel that it is important to be cautious about the conclusions in this paper since,

among other things, it is possible that actual interracial friendship compatibility may be different at Berea than other schools. Nonetheless, this paper makes a valuable contribution by
identifying a situation in which students from di¤erent races may indeed be very compatible
as friends, even if very substantial amounts of racial sorting are observed. The paper raises
the possibility that this may occur because students start school with mispercpetions about
interracial friendship compatibility
Examining what happens over time to the overall sample suggests that, by itself, having
a diverse group of students on campus will not guarantee substantial amounts of interracial
friendship interaction at any stage of college. Examining what happens over time to students
assigned a roommate of a di¤erent race suggests that an active policy can make a substantial
di¤erence, though. However, it is worth noting that, when the number of minority students is
not large, many majority students cannot receive the treatment of being assigned a minority
roommate. Further, the nature of the roommate instrument is quite unique; it is hard to
think of other potential policy instruments which, in essence, force students to learn so much
about each other.

24

Appendix — Data Construction Description
The 2001 cohort was …rst asked about friendships on the baseline survey using Question
A described in Section 3. We refer to the friendships that we characterize using this survey as
friendships “at the time of college entrance." This cohort was asked about friendships three
additional times during their …rst year using the same question, and we use these surveys
to characterize friendships “during the …rst year of college." Two of these surveys (4 and
5) took place in November of the …rst semester while the other surveys took place during
the second semester. In order to construct the friendship information for the second year, if
the student responded to survey 5, we characterize friendships using information from this
survey. If not, we turned to survey 4 and then, if necessary, to Survey 12. Since 94% of our
responses come from Surveys 4 or 5, friendships during the …rst year of college are essentially
synonymous with friendships “in the middle of the …rst year of college." The second cohort
was asked about friendships four times during their second year and four times during their
third year. Using an approach similar to that described above for the …rst year, we use
this information to construct friendships “during the second year" of college and friendships
“during the third year" of college.
We observe friendship information for 335 students during the …rst year of college, for
275 students during the second year of college, and for 238 students during the third year
of college. The numbers are less than the total sample size, 375, for three reasons. First,
14, 84, and 128 of the students in our sample had left Berea at the time of the …rst, second,
and third year friendship surveys, respectively. Second, 21, 14, and 4 students chose not to
participate in any of the friendship surveys in the …rst, second, and third years, respectively.
Finally, 5, 2, and 5 of students who participated on the friendship surveys either indicated
they had no friends or listed friends that could not be matched in the …rst, second, and third
years, respectively. The numbers above imply that 94%, 95%, and 98% of individuals in our
sample who were still at Berea answered one or more friendship surveys for the …rst, second,
and third years respectively.

25

References
Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban M. Aucejo, Hanming Fang, and Kenneth I Spenner. 2010. Does
a¢ rmative action lead to mismatch? A new test and evidence. Unpublished Manuscript,
Duke University and University of Pennsylvania.
Ayres, Ian, and Richard Brooks. 2005. Does a¢ rmative action reduce the number of black
lawyers? Stanford Law Review 57: 1807-1854.
Boisjoly, Johanne, Greg J. Duncan, Michael Kremer, Dan M. Levy, and Jacque Eccles. 2006.
Empathy or antipathy? The impact of diversity. American Economic Review 96: 1890-1905.
Cornell, Brad, and Ivo Welch. 1996. Culture, information and screening discrimination.
Journal of Political Economy 104: 542-571.
Jackson, Matthew, and Brian Rogers. 2007. Meeting strangers and friends of friends: How
random are social networks? American Economic Review 97: 890-915.
Marmaros, David, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2006. How do friendships form? The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121: 79-119.
Mayer, Adalbert, and Steven L. Puller. 2008. The old boy (and girl) network: Social network
formation on university campuses. Journal of Public Economics 92: 329-347.
Rothstein, Jesse and Albert Yoon. 2008. Mismatch in law school. Working Paper No. 14275,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Stinebrickner, Todd, and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2003. Working during school and academic
performance. Journal of Labor Economics 21: 473-491.
— — -. 2004. Time–use and college outcomes. Journal of Econometrics 121: 243-269.
— — -. 2006. What can be learned about peer e¤ects using college roommates? Evidence
from new survey data and students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Journal of Public
Economics 90: 1435-1454.
— — -. 2008a. The e¤ect of credit constraints on the college drop–out decision: A direct
approach using a new panel study The American Economic Review 98: 2163-2184.
— — -. 2008b. The causal e¤ect of studying on academic performance. The B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis and Policy (Frontiers) 8(1): Article 14.

26

Table 1
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS - 2001 COHORT
(1)
BLACK AND
WHITE
n=354

(2)
WHITE
n=298

(3)
BLACK
n=56

Male

.432

.429

.446

Black

.158

1.0

0.0

High school grade point average

3.37 (.48)

3.43 (.462)

3.09 (.491)

Population density of home county

363 (535)

273 (436)

809 (728)

Family income at college entrance

25238 (18079)

26535 (18408)

17627 (15076)

Athlete in first year

.189

.184

.214

The table shows the mean (standard deviation) for The Berea Panel Study 2001 cohort (n=375).

Table 2A
THE PROPORTION OF STUDENTS WHO HAVE BLACK BEST FRIENDS AT THE START OF CLASSES
AND IN THE MIDDLE OF YEARS ONE, TWO, AND THREE - 2001 COHORT

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

ALL
OBSERVATIONS

RESPONDENTS
WITH FRIENDSHIP
OBSERVATIONS IN
ALL PERIODS

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
WHITES
RANDOMLY
ASSIGNED
BLACK
ROOMMATES

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
RETURNING
FRIENDS AND
FRIENDS OF
FRIENDS

Black (entrance)

.696 (.061) n=56

.757 (.074) n=33

.696 (.061) n=56

.696 (.061) n=56

Black (year 1)

.767 (.056) n=56

.787 (.071) n=33

.767 (.056) n=56

.904 (.064) n=21

Black (year 2)

.804 (.058) n=46

.787 (.071) n=33

.804 (.058) n=46

.782 (.086) n=24

Black (year 3)

.805 (.065) n=36

.848 (.062) n=33

.805 (.065) n=36

.846 (.100) n=13

White (entrance)

.057 (.013) n=298

.068 (.019) n=175

.033 (.010) n=270

.057 (.013) n=298

White (year 1)

.050 (.013) n=279

.051 (.016) n=175

.035 (.011) n=252

.055 (.018) n=161

White (year 2)

.069 (.016) n=229

.074 (.019) n=175

.058 (.016) n=204

.081 (.024) n=123

White (year 3)

.064 (.016) n=202

.068 (.019) n=175

.049 (.016) n=181

.08 (.031) n=75

The entries show the proportion of students who have black best friends for various subsamples of the 2001
cohort. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors of the estimator of the population proportion.
Note 1: All friendship observations at entrance come from 2001 cohort. Column 1 uses all observations. Column
2 uses only students that answered the survey at the time of entrance, the middle of the first year, the middle of
the second year, and the middle of the third year. Column 3 is the same as column one except that it omits all
white students who were randomly assigned black roommates. Column 4 is the same as column one except that it
omits all friends of person i at a time t who can be identified as either being friends of i at t-1 or friends of i=s
friends at t-1.

Table 2B
THE AVERAGE PROPORTION OF ALL LISTED FRIENDS WHO ARE BLACK AT THE START OF
CLASSES AND IN THE MIDDLE OF YEARS ONE, TWO, AND THREE - 2001 COHORT
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

ALL
OBSERVATIONS

RESPONDENTS
WITH FRIENDSHIP
OBSERVATIONS IN
ALL PERIODS

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
WHITES
RANDOMLY
ASSIGNED
BLACKS

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
RETURNING
FRIENDS AND
FRIENDS OF
FRIENDS

Black (entrance)

.668 (.046) n=56

.712 (.058) n=33

.668 (.046) n=56

.668 (.045) n=56

Black (year 1)

.654 (.051) n=56

.686 (.065) n=33

.654 (.051) n=56

.647 (.057) n=51

Black (year 2)

.766 (.049) n=46

.724 (.065) n=33

.766 (.049) n=46

.748 (.057) n=46

Black (year 3)

.708 (.057) n=36

.727 (.057) n=33

.708 (.057) n=36

.784 (.059) n=34

White (entrance)

.097 (.012) n=298

.102 (.016) n=175

.066 (.010) n=270

.098 (.012) n=298

White (year 1)

.073 (.009) n=279

.070 (.010) n=175

.063 (.009) n=252

.067 (.010) n=261

White (year 2)

.072 (.009) n=229

.070 (.011) n=175

.062 (.009) n=204

.071 (.012) n=212

White (year 3)

.080 (.011) n=202

.082 (.013) n=175

.071 (.011) n=181

.077 (.015) n=186

The entries show the average proportion of listed friends who are black for various subsamples of the 2001
cohort. For example, the upper left entry shows that the 56 black students observed in the 2001 cohort at the time
of entrance have, on average, 66.8% black friends. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors of the estimator of
the population mean (i.e., the mean of individual-specific proportions in the population).
Note 1: See Note 1 in Table 2A

Table 3A
THE PROPORTION OF STUDENTS WHO HAVE BLACK BEST FRIENDS AT THE START OF CLASSES
AND IN THE MIDDLE OF YEARS ONE, TWO, AND THREE - COMBINED 2000 & 2001 COHORTS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

ALL
OBSERVATIONS

RESPONDENTS
WITH FRIENDSHIP
OBSERVATIONS IN
ALL PERIODS

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
WHITES
RANDOMLY
ASSIGNED
BLACKS

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
RETURNING
FRIENDS AND
FRIENDS OF
FRIENDS

Black (entrance)

.696 (.061) n=56

N.A. (See Note 1)

.696 (.061) n=56

.696 (.061) n=56

Black (year 1)

.773 (.039) n=115

.785 (.049) n=70

.773 (.039) n=115

.812 (.043) n=80

Black (year 2)

.788 (.043) n=90

.80 (.047) n=70

.788 (.043) n=90

.822 (.056) n=45

Black (year 3)

.746 (.050) n=75

.785 (.049) n=70

.746 (.050) n=75

.75 (.096) n=20

White (entrance)

.057 (.013) n=298

N.A. (See Note 1)

.033 (.010) n=270

.057 (.013) n=298

White (year 1)

.052 (.009) n=573

.052 (.011) n=359

.037 (.008) n=513

.054 (.010) n=455

White (year 2)

.066 (.012) n=433

.064 (.012) n=359

.051 (.011) n=385

.078 (.017) n=228

White (year 3)

.058 (.011) n=396

.061 (.012) n=359

.042 (.010) n=352

.071 (.021) n=140

The entries show the proportion of students who have black best friends for various subsamples of the combined
2000 & 2001 cohorts. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors of the estimator of the population proportion.
Note 1: The information in the columns is the same as described in Note 1 of Table 2A except that, because
friendship observations are not observed for the 2001 cohort at the time of entrance, Column 2 uses students that
answered the survey in the middle of the first year, the middle of the second year, and the middle of the third year.

Table 3B
THE AVERAGE PROPORTION OF ALL LISTED FRIENDS WHO ARE BLACK AT THE START OF
CLASSES AND IN THE MIDDLE OF YEARS ONE, TWO, AND THREE - COMBINED 2000 & 2001
COHORT
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

ALL
OBSERVATIONS

RESPONDENTS
WITH FRIENDSHIP
OBSERVATIONS IN
ALL PERIODS

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
WHITES
RANDOMLY
ASSIGNED
BLACK
ROOMMATES

SAME AS
COLUMN 1
EXCEPT
OMITTING
RETURNING
FRIENDS AND
FRIENDS OF
FRIENDS

Black (entrance)

.668 (.046) n=56

N.A. (See Note 1)

.668 (.046) n=56

.668 (.045) n=56

Black (year 1)

.724 (.033) n=115

.730 (.042) n=70

.654 (.051) n=115

.724 (.034) n=110

Black (year 2)

.742 (.036) n=90

.732 (.042) n=70

.766 (.049) n=90

.728 (.041) n=86

Black (year 3)

.72 (.038) n=75

.732 (.039) n=70

.708 (.057) n=75

.760 (.059) n=66

White (entrance)

.097 (.012) n=298

N.A. (see Note 1)

.066 (.010) n=270

.098 (.012) n=298

White (year 1)

.070 (.006) n=573

.068 (.007) n=359

.058 (.006) n=513

.066 (.006) n=555

White (year 2)

.072 (.007) n=433

.072 (.008) n=359

.054 (.006) n=385

.079 (.010) n=403

White (year 3)

.070 (.008) n=396

.075 (.009) n=359

.058 (.008) n=352

.062(.009) n=345

The entries show the average proportion of listed friends who are black for various subsamples of the combined
2000 and 2001 cohorts. For example, an upper left entry shows that the 115 black students observed in the
combined 2000 & 2001 cohorts at the middle of the first year have, on average, 72.4% black friends.
Numbers in parentheses are standard errors of the estimator of the population mean (i.e., the mean of individualspecific proportions in the population).
Note 1: See Note 1 in Table 3A.

Table 4
OLS REGRESSIONS
DEPENDENT VARIABLE: HSGPA OF STUDENT=S BEST FRIEND-COMBINED 2000 & 2001 COHORTS
(1)
COEFFICIENT SE

(2)
COEFFICIENT SE

Constant

2.646 (.146)

2.870 (.156)*

HSGPA (own)

.205 (.042)*

.150 (.044)*

Black (own)
R2

-.225 (.058)*
.034

.056

The first column shows an OLS regression of the high school grade point average (HSGPA) of a student=s best
friend on the student=s own HSGPA. The second column adds the student=s own race to the regression.
n=641.
* Significant at 5%.

Table 5
OLS REGRESSIONS
WHETHER BEST FRIEND IS BLACK IN MIDDLE OF THE FIRST YEAR (COLUMN 1) AND
PROPORTION OF FRIENDS THAT ARE BLACK IN THE MIDDLE OF THE FIRST YEAR (COLUMN 2) COMBINED 2000 & 2001 COHORTS
(1)
COEFFICIENT SE

(2)
COEFFICIENT SE

Black (year 1)

.744* (.044)

.715* (.036)

White (year 1)

.057* (.010)

.071* (.007)

Male-.413

-.031 (.019)

-.027 (.017)

(Population density-325.12)/100

-.001 (.003)

-.004 (.002)

Athlete in first year-.187

.017 (.042)

-.006 (.032)

(Family income -32877)/10000

-.0017(.007)

.007 (.005)

High school grade point average -3.389

-.052 (.026)*

-.052(.020)*

R2

.585

.694

The first column uses a linear probability model (with whether a person=s best friend is black as the dependent
variable) to control for HSGPA and observable characteristics of the student. The second column uses an OLS
regression model (with the proportion of a student=s friends that are black as the dependent variable) to control for
the same characteristics. So that the Black (year 1) and White (year 1) entries in the first and second columns,
respectively, can be compared to the Black (year 1) and White (year 1) entries in Tables 3A and 3B, respectively,
the observable characteristics are differenced from the mean sample values in the middle of the first year.
n=650 (White 540, Black 110).
* Significant at 5%

Table 6A
THE PROPORTION OF STUDENTS WHO LIST THEIR ASSIGNED ROOMMATE FROM THE FIRST
YEAR AS THEIR BEST FRIEND AT DIFFERENT POINTS IN COLLEGE
(1)
MIDDLE OF 1ST
YEAR

(2)
MIDDLE OF 2ND
YEAR

(3)
MIDDLE OF
3RD YEAR

White assigned black

.167 (n=60)

.083 (n=48)

.136 (n=44)

White assigned white

.165 (n=321)

.058 (n=240)

.042 (n=214)

Black assigned white

.180 (n=61)

.062 (n=48)

.073 (n=41)

White assigned black

.185 (n=27)

.08 (n=25)

.142 (n=21)

White assigned white

.187 (n=155)

.062 (n=127)

.055 (n=108)

Black assigned white

.179 (n=28)

.086 (n=23)

.111 (n=18)

Combined 2000 and 2001 cohorts

2001 Cohort

Table 6B
THE PROPORTION OF STUDENTS WHO LIST THEIR ASSIGNED ROOMMATE FROM THE FIRST
YEAR AS ONE OF THEIR FOUR BEST FRIENDS AT DIFFERENT POINTS IN COLLEGE
(1)
MIDDLE OF 1ST
YEAR

(2)
MIDDLE OF 2ND
YEAR

(3)
MIDDLE OF
3RD YEAR

White assigned black

.35 (n=60)

.229 (n=48)

.159 (n=44)

White assigned white

.367 (n=321)

.133 (n=240)

.088 (n=214)

Black assigned white

.344 (n=61)

.167 (n=48)

.146 (n=41)

White assigned black

.444 (n=27)

.24 (n=25)

.142 (n=21)

White assigned white

.354 (n=155)

.118 (n=127)

.083 (n=108)

Black assigned white

.393 (n=28)

.174 (n=23)

.111 (n=18)

Combined 2000 and 2001 cohorts

2001 Cohort

Table 7
OLS REGRESSIONS
WHETHER ROOMMATE NAMED AS A FRIEND IN MIDDLE OF FIRST YEAR WHITE STUDENTS RANDOMLY ASSIGNED ROOMMATES, COMBINED 2000 & 2001 COHORTS
(1)

(2)

COEFFICIENT SE

COEFFICIENT SE

Constant

.434 (.039)*

.433 (.040)*

MISMATCH

-.155 (.063)*

-.156 (.64)*

Roommate black
R2

.006 (.067)
.015

.056

MISMATCH is absolute value of difference between the HSGPA of a student and the HSGPA of his roommate.
n=380.

Table 8A
THE AVERAGE PROPORTION OF FRIENDS WHO ARE BLACK FOR STUDENTS RANDOMLY
ASSIGNED ROOMMATES - COMBINED 2000 & 2001 COHORTS
(1)
MIDDLE OF 1ST
YEAR

(2)
MIDDLE OF 2ND
YEAR

(3)
MIDDLE OF 3RD
YEAR

White assigned black

.165 (.026) n=60

.213 (.036) n=48

.166 (.036) n=44

White assigned white

.060 (.007) n=321

.053 (.008) n=240

.059 (.010) n=214

t test statistic. Null: average
proportion does not vary by race of
roommate

-4.863

-6.546

-3.705

White assigned black

.081 (.021) n=60

.159 (.035) n=48

.136 (.036) n=44

White assigned white

.067 (.008) n=321

.054 (.008) n=240

.059 (.010) n=214

t test statistic. Null: average
proportion does not vary by race of
roommate

-.656

-4.341

-2.661

Including roommate assigned in
first year

Not including roommate assigned
in first year

Note: The test involves a difference in population means. The population mean is the average proportion
in the population.

Table 8B
THE AVERAGE PROPORTION OF FRIENDS WHO ARE BLACK FOR STUDENTS
RANDOMLY ASSIGNED ROOMMATES - STUDENTS WITH FRIENDSHIP
OBSERVATIONS IN ALL THREE YEARS, COMBINED 2000 & 2001 COHORTS
(1)
MIDDLE OF 1ST
YEAR

(2)
MIDDLE OF 2ND
YEAR

(3)
MIDDLE OF 3RD
YEAR

White assigned black

.166 (.032) n=41

.207 (.040) n=41

.172 (.038) n=41

White assigned white

.056 (.008) n=197

.054 (.009) n=197

.062 (.011) n=197

t test statistic. Null: average
proportion does not vary by race of
roommate

-4.496

-5.645

-3.587

White assigned black

.085 (.021) n=41

.166 (.039) n=41

.146 (.038) n=41

White assigned white

.063 (.008) n=197

.054 (.009) n=197

.062 (.011) n=197

t test statistic. Null: average
proportion does not vary by race of
roommate

-.851

-4.177

-2.733

Including roommate assigned in
first year

Not including roommate assigned
in first year

Note: The test involves a difference in population means. The population mean is the average
proportion in the population.

