NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBAL BANKS AND INTERNATIONAL SHOCK TRANSMISSION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CRISIS
Nicola Cetorelli
Linda S. Goldberg
Working Paper 15974
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15974

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Address correspondences
to Linda S. Goldberg, Federal Reserve Bank of NY, Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New York,
N.Y. 10045. email: Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org or Nicola.Cetorelli@ny.frb.org . We acknowledge
the valuable comments from anonymous reviewers, Romain Ranciere, and participants in the IMF-Banque
de France-Paris School of Economics Conference on Economic Linkages, Spillovers and the Financial
Crisis (January 2010). We thank Patrick McGuire and Goetz von Peter for their assistance and thoughtful
insights on data on cross-country vulnerabilities of banking sectors to dollar market conditions. We
thank Craig Kennedy for his research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Global Banks and International Shock Transmission: ¸˛Evidence from the Crisis
Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 15974
May 2010
JEL No. F36,F42,G01,G15,G32
ABSTRACT
Global banks played a significant role in the transmission of the 2007 to 2009 crisis to emerging market
economies. We examine the relationships between adverse liquidity shocks on main developed-country
banking systems to emerging markets across Europe, Asia, and Latin America, isolating loan supply
from loan demand effects. Loan supply in emerging markets was significantly affected through three
separate channels: a contraction in direct, cross-border lending by foreign banks; a contraction in local
lending by foreign banks’ affiliates in emerging markets; and a contraction in loan supply by domestic
banks resulting from the funding shock to their balance sheet induced by the decline in interbank, cross-border
lending. Policy interventions, such as the Vienna Initiative introduced in Europe, influenced the lending
channel effects on emerging markets of head office balance sheet shocks.

Nicola Cetorelli
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
nicola.cetorelli@ny.frb.org
Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
Global banks expanded their international activities over their past decade, with this expansion
interrupted by the Great Recession. The consequences of this increased internationalization of
banking have been debated. One dimension of the debate focuses on the advantages and
disadvantages of banks from more developed financial systems having expanded and sometimes
dominant positions in emerging market economies. Banking globalization can lead to
institutional and regulatory or supervisory improvements, which promote “strong property rights
and a financial system that directs capital to its most productive uses [which] are crucial to
achieving high economic growth and the eradication of poverty” (Mishkin 2009). 1 When shocks
originate within the emerging markets, foreign bank entry into local banking systems is a
stabilizing force. It also results in more efficient allocation of productive resources in globalized
economies [see survey by Goldberg (2009)].
Yet, international banking linkages are viewed as having spread the profound difficulties
from the financial crisis that began in industrialized countries in 2007. The dramatic changes in
capital flows to emerging markets are cited as evidence for such concerns (Chart 1). After a
period of strong growth through 2007, capital inflows contracted across Emerging Asia, Latin
America, and Emerging Europe. The initial boom was across multiple forms of private
international capital flows (Chart 2), covering foreign direct investment, bank loans, portfolio
equity, and net debt securities. While the subsequent reversal was in all broad categories of
inflows, by far the sharpest decline in activity was in international bank loans. After rising to
over $500 billion in 2007, international bank loans dropped to slightly above $100 billion in
2008. Such observations prompted the International Monetary Fund’s April 2009 World
Economic Outlook (WEO) to argue that global bank linkages “fuel the fire” of the current crisis
to emerging markets (page 149).
In this paper we provide a conceptual and econometric examination of the international
transmission of the balance sheet shocks that pummeled industrialized-country banks. We
conjecture the existence of multiple channels of transmission of the original shock through the
1

See also the discussion by Crystal, Dages, and Goldberg (2001) and by Calomiris and Powell (2001).
Additionally, globalization of banking weakens the lending channel for monetary policy within the United States,
while extending the transmission of U.S. policy and liquidity shocks to foreign markets (Cetorelli and Goldberg,
2008). The home market shocks are transmitted into the lending of foreign affiliates. At the same time, such internal
capital markets mean that foreign bank subsidiaries do not need to rein in their credit supply during a (local)
financial crisis at the same time that domestically-owned banks need to (De Haas and van Lelyveld, 2009). .

1

operations of global banks. Using bilateral lending data covering cross-border lending and local
claims between countries, as well as data from destination emerging markets, we identify the
magnitude and consequences of respective channels of transmission through international banks.
To achieve this goal, we isolate loan demand from loan supply shocks, both of which contributed
to the patterns shown in Chart 2, adapting an econometric methodology recently utilized by
Khwaja and Mian (2008). Controlling for loan demand shocks is important, since the crisis also
induced declines in home investment, home consumption, and international trade.2
In Section II we use the heuristic of T-accounts for bank balance sheets to show that the
loan supply effects through global banks and international capital markets take three different
forms. The intuition begins with the observation that changes in the sources of funds available to
banks initiate a lending supply response (Kashyap and Stein 2000). The sources differ for global
banks and domestically-owned banks in emerging markets. The external capital market of all
banks in emerging markets includes local deposits, other host market sources, and cross-border
interbank borrowing. Banks that are part of a broader organization, for example a global bank
holding company, may also receive funding from related affiliates, with such resources falling
under the heading of internal capital market funding.3 Both external and internal capital markets
play roles in the international transmission of shocks.
In a crisis, a foreign-owned bank hit by an adverse liquidity shock may reduce its crossborder lending. If this bank has overseas affiliates, it may also activate an internal capital market
channel, reducing funding to affiliates abroad or actively transferring foreign funds in support to
the head office balance sheet. The foreign-owned banks are not the only entities that may reduce
lending in emerging markets. Domestically-owned banks may rely on external capital markets
2

The dramatic collapse of global trade in goods and services during the crisis has spawned a debate about the
reasons for this collapse. Comparative facts on the downturn are provided by Imbs (2010). Some studies posit that
banking and trade credit disruptions played a key role (Amiti and Weinstein, 2009; Chor and Manova 2009). Other
studies dispute the central role of trade credit, instead arguing that global demand and the expanded role of vertically
integrated production account for most of the observed collapse of trade (Eaton, Kortum et al. 2009, Yi, Bems, and
Johnson 2010, Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar 2009), or that the collapse was a manifestation of an inventory
adjustment (Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan 2010).
3
Internal capital markets have received earlier attention in domestic banking contexts. For example, Houston,
Marcus, and James (1997) emphasize active internal capital markets in banking organizations, with banks relying on
related entities in a bank holding company to get insulation from localized shocks within the United States.
Likewise, Ashcraft (2008) shows that bank holding companies are a source of strength to their affiliates, while
Campello (2002) shows that parent bank insulation from access to external capital markets extends to small
affiliated banks, leaving them less vulnerable to shocks than other small banks that are unaffiliated. See also
Ashcraft and Campello (2007). The application to global banks by Cetorelli and Goldberg (2008, 2009) argues that
there is often internal borrowing and lending between parent organizations and their overseas affiliates. Correa and
Murry (2009) consider the cross-border lending dynamics.

2

for funding local activities, with cross-border interbank borrowing being one of these external
sources. Hence, domestically-owned banks also could end up with a balance sheet shock that
reduces their own lending capacity. Indeed, the external capital markets of small host country
banks can be quite volatile, leading to lending activity that is hostage to the boom and bust
features of cross-border lending. Ex ante, however, it cannot be concluded that domesticallyowned banks operating in emerging markets will necessarily be more stable or effective lenders
in those markets than the foreign banks that have entered over the past decades. Which of these
respective channels are larger in emerging markets is an empirical question.
In Section III we provide the econometric analysis of the bank lending channel in
emerging markets, focusing on mechanics at work during the financial crisis of 2007 to 2009.
Our methodology, an adaptation of Khwaja and Mian (2008), uses a difference-in-difference
approach to isolate loan demand from loan supply in a matrix of lending between 17 developed
source and 94 emerging market destination countries across Asia, Latin America, and Europe.
Three types of lending are considered: cross-border loans, local loans extended by foreignowned banks, and local loans extended by domestically-owned banks.
We find evidence of substantial lending supply shocks to emerging markets through all
three balance sheet channels conjectured ex ante. Foreign banks that were particularly affected
by the original liquidity shock to their balance sheet, cut both cross-border lending and local
lending growth to emerging markets. Transmission through external capital markets was strong
for both foreign-owned and domestically-owned banks.

The loan supply contraction by

domestically-owned banks was not attributable to their reliance on cross-border funding sources
per se. Instead, the contraction was greater for those countries that had more cross-border
funding from banking systems that were ex ante more imbalanced.4
Section IV concludes with a discussion of related policy themes. We argue that crossborder lending and internal capital markets are both conduits for international shock
transmission, both positive and negative. However, these features do not imply that closed or
reduced access to international capital markets is welfare-improving for emerging markets.

4

Our approach focuses on transmission channels as a result of existing bilateral ties between source and destination
countries. A complementary take is to look at potential “contagion” effects, so that transmission occurs also through
“third” country channels. van Rijckeghem and Weder (2003) find evidence of significant transmission of shocks
through such channels.

3

II. A Brief Primer on Internal and External Capital Markets and Bank Balance Sheets
What can a bank do when confronted with a shock to its balance sheet? Alternative
responses to a liquidity shock can be illustrated using a simplified version of bank balance
sheets. The generic bank T-account has bank assets on the left side of the T and bank liabilities
on the right side. In broad terms, bank liabilities are divided into deposits, other funds, and bank
capital; bank assets are divided into liquid assets and less liquid assets such as loans extended to
bank customers.
Prior research describes how a contraction in available liquidity, for example through a
decline in a bank’s reservable deposits, has distinct consequences across types of banks, such as
small stand-alone banks, small banks affiliated with larger bank holding companies, and larger
banks (Kashyap and Stein 2000; Campello 2002). A contractionary monetary policy that reduces
the amount of reservable deposits (or other shock to bank funds) can translate into a reduction in
bank lending activity when banks are unable to replace each dollar of lost deposits with other
liabilities. The reduced liabilities will lead to a combination of reduced liquid assets and reduced
lending. Larger banks or bank holding companies can either be domestically oriented or have
operations spread across global markets. In the international context, balance sheet effects
incorporate international transmission through internal capital markets and are statistically and
economically important (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2008). International transmission also occurs
through cross-border flows by global banks, even those without overseas branches and affiliates.
The transmission of policy and liquidity shocks through U.S. bank cross-border flows has been
statistically and economically significant: a significant reduction in the level of cross-border
claims occurs during periods of U.S. monetary tightening, pointing to the existence of a crossborder lending channel (Correa and Murry 2009).
These themes are illustrated in Box 1 using the T-account framework applied to banks
lending to emerging markets. Consider two types of banks: a global bank with an affiliate
operating within an emerging market and a domestically-owned bank. The top panel presents the
global bank balance sheets, distinguishing between those of the parent bank balance sheet and
the affiliate. The parent bank has assets divided into liquid assets, loans in the home market, and
cross-border loans. Given an initial adverse shock to liabilities through deposits or other sources
of funds, the global bank can respond by trying to replace this liquidity in external capital
markets. If this is not sufficient (or desirable), the bank can engage in some form of lending
4

contraction, reducing loan issuance at home or cross-border flows to foreign markets. Some
balance sheet pressures can be alleviated if the parent organization borrows liquidity from
overseas affiliates, i.e., through internal capital markets. Such borrowing may mitigate the
liquidity shock consequences in the home market of the parent bank (Cetorelli and Goldberg
2008) or even cross-border loans. However, the internal capital market transfer changes the
balance sheet of the affiliate firm, leading to adjustments that might lead to a reduction of local
lending by that affiliate if other adjustments to affiliate bank assets or liabilities are not
forthcoming. The cross-border loan supply contraction and the contraction in affiliate lending
are two possible forms of parent bank transmission to emerging markets.

Box 1: Global Balance Transmission through Different Channels
Large global bank
Domestic parent
balance sheet
Liquid assets

Deposits

Loans

Other Funds

Domestic loans

External borrowing

Cross-border loans

Internal borrowing

Foreign affiliate
balance sheet
Foreign liquid Deposits
assets
Other Funds
Loans
Capital
Foreign loans
Internal lending

Capital

Stand-alone local
bank balance sheet
Liquid assets

Deposits

Loans

Other funds
Cross-border borrowing

Capital

By contrast, the initial transmission channel to the domestically-owned, stand-alone
banks may come from a drop in cross-border interbank borrowing, used by these banks as a
5

source of funds. It is possible that deposits move between the domestically-owned banks and the
foreign affiliates, but the direction of these flows is not straight-forward to predict. Without
access to offsetting alternative funding sources, the loans extended by the domestically-owned
bank might contract in line with the reduced availability of cross-border funds. This illustrates a
third channel through which there can be international transmission of shocks into the loan
supply to emerging markets.

III. Bank Funding and Lending Volatility in the Financial Crisis
The econometric analysis explores the scale and existence of these three channels of
transmission of global bank shocks to emerging market economies in the crisis beginning in
2007. A priority in this analysis is isolating contractions in loan supply from those in loan
demand. Below, we present the econometric methodology, discuss the main data sources, and
conclude with the empirical findings.

III. 1 The econometric methodology
Our goal is to assess to what extent the balance sheet shocks suffered by banks in many
developed countries during the financial crisis determined a corresponding shock to their supply
of 1) cross-border loans to emerging economies and 2) local loans from their offices located in
emerging market countries. Additionally, we want to assess the potential impact on the supply of
loans by domestic banks in emerging markets, and the extent that the retreat in cross-border
lending corresponded to a shock to domestic bank funding sources.
The empirical implementation presents important and well known identification
challenges. In particular, it requires showing that if banks are affected by a shock to their funding
sources, their ultimate response is to accommodate such shock with an equivalent adjustment in
their lending activity. However, as our section II exposition of bank balance sheets shows, this
accommodation of lending does not need to occur: banks may be able to substitute away from
adversely shocked funding sources into other, more readily available ones. Moreover, even in the
presence of imperfect substitution on the liability side of the balance sheet, banks may still be
able to insulate lending activity by absorbing the liability shock with a corresponding change in
available liquid asset buffers.

6

Moreover, establishing the existence of a bank lending channel also requires the
identification of an effective lending supply shock, separate from potential contamination by
concomitant changes in credit demand conditions. Recall from Chart 2 the substantial drop in
international bank lending to emerging markets in the aftermath of the crisis. This decline in
lending is not evidence per se of a loan supply shock. The same decline could have also been
observed if banks had been able to insulate their lending books from the original liquidity shock
– either through funding substitution and/or utilization of existing liquid asset buffers – and yet
firms, simultaneously hit on current product demand or on their future investment opportunities,
may have simply reduced overall loan demand. Given the extent of the crisis and the after-thefact impact on global GDP growth, we cannot exclude a priori this alternative explanation.
In a recent paper, Khwaja and Mian (2008) propose a simple but elegant identification
strategy that very effectively isolates a lending supply shock around a well-defined funding
shock on banks’ balance sheets.5 The authors focused their attention on bank lending activity in
Pakistan around the time of an exogenous macroeconomic shock that occurred in 1998 as a result
of nuclear testing by India and Pakistan. In this episode, capital controls were imposed in
response, generating a shock on dollar-denominated deposits and a resulting quasi natural
experiment that Khwaja and Mian (2008) exploited to assess the extent of both the bank lending
channel and the ultimate impact on firm borrowings.6 The authors relied heavily on the fact that
the liquidity shock was not felt homogeneously across banks, since ex ante not all Pakistani
banks had built similar levels of dollar-denominated liabilities. Moreover, the authors took
advantage of the fact that many firms had been borrowing simultaneously from more than one
bank; hence, firm funding sources were heterogeneously affected. In light of this set of
5

Schnabl (2009) provides another recent example of loan supply shock identification. He uses the 1998 Russian
default as a negative credit supply shock to international banks and analyzes its impact on bank lending in Peru.
With data on individual firms, he controls for credit demand by examining firms that borrow from several banks.
6
In retaliation to unanticipated nuclear tests in India in May 1998, Pakistan followed through in a matter of days
with its own nuclear tests. As a result of such tests, both countries were promptly sanctioned by the international
community, with the suspension of exchange rate support to the Pakistani rupee as part of the sanction package. This
chain of events, unrelated to the functioning of the Pakistani banking industry, ultimately resulted in a severe bank
liquidity crunch, since many Pakistani banks had a substantial deposit base in dollar-denominated accounts. The
dollars collected through these bank deposits, however, had to be transferred to the government, which upon
withdrawal requests from bank clients would eventually release such dollars at the exchange rate at the time of the
original deposit. In essence, the government bore all the currency risk on bank deposits. In response to the financial
sanctions cited above, the Pakistani government announced the suspension of this convertibility agreement,
releasing instead dollars at the current, much devalued exchange rate, effectively imposing a partial default on this
liability. Despite the much less favorable conditions, a substantial amount of dollars were withdrawn by depositors,
thus determining a severe funding crisis for the Pakistani banking system.

7

conditions, Khwaja and Mian (2008) modeled the change in the growth of lending supply by an
array of individual banks vis-à-vis an array of firms to which they make loans. This informative
difference-in-difference approach facilitates isolation of loan supply versus loan demand effects.
At least from the perspective of a natural experiment design, the characteristics of our
empirical study have strong similarities to those in Khawja and Mian (2008). The recent
financial crisis mainly originated as a sudden and exceptional shortage of dollar funding on the
balance sheet of banks in many developed economies, the result of previous large build ups of
dollar denominated assets from structured products that in the summer of 2007 became virtually
unmarketable (see, e.g., Coffey, Hrung, Nguyen, and Sarkar 2009). Bank funding problems
eventually mounted in the following months, and with the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy event in
September 2008, dollar funding sources for banks effectively froze across the board. Ex ante
vulnerability to dollar funding was significantly heterogeneous across banks, and, when
aggregated to the country level, also significantly heterogeneous across banking systems. Similar
to Khwaja and Mian (2008), the original balance sheet shock was felt differently across banking
systems. These differences created associated balance sheet shocks and the potential lending
supply shocks to differ across countries that previously had been a common source of funding to
emerging market economies.
Going back to Khwaja and Mian (2008), the derived lending supply schedule in terms of
(log) changes from before to after the shock is7

1

Lij  0  1  Di   j   ij

In their article, the dimension i represented individual banks, and j individual borrowing firms.
is a constant term, Δ

the indicator of the liquidity shock sustained by bank i, and

an

unobservable term capturing simultaneous shocks to firm j credit demand. The term ∆
captures the change in lending from before to after the event, and banks that were hit more by the
liquidity shock should be those that reduce more (or grow less) their lending. As shown by
Khawja and Mian, specification (1) as estimated with basic OLS would likely generate biased
estimates of

because of a correlation with simultaneous demand shocks embedded in the

unobservable term

. In normal circumstances, for instance, one would expect a simultaneous

reduction in credit demand when there is a liquidity shock, so that not taking this effect into
7

We defer to the original Khwaja and Mian (2008) article for the details of the model.

8

account would lead to an over-estimate of the true supply shock.8

However, introducing

borrowers’ fixed effects on model specification (1) would absorb any demand driven
contamination thus resolving the bias problem affecting the OLS estimation. Consequently, the
alternative model specification for estimation is

 2
with

Lij   1  Di   j   ij

now unbiased and

being a vector of fixed effect coefficients. In essence, this

alternative model specification achieves identification comparing the impact on lending of
separate banks i to the same firm j. Under the less stringent assumption that the same firm uses
multiple banks to obtain similar type of loans, any common shock on demand factors would not
affect the identification of the supply effect.
In our study, we use data on the aggregate international lending activity (cross border
claims and local claims) of developed countries i to emerging market economies j. We rely on
the fact that the banking systems of the lending countries had built up significantly different
degrees of reliance on dollar-denominated liabilities, and, therefore, from an ex ante perspective
exhibited substantially different degrees of vulnerability to what happened next, a sudden
shortage in dollar funding. In terms of the identification strategy above, this translates in
different ΔD . Through model specification (2), where destination country fixed effect indicators
are included, we test if the lending to a certain emerging market economy by banking systems
that were ex ante highly vulnerable to dollar funding shocks changed more from the crisis than
the lending to the same emerging market by banking systems that were ex ante less dollar
vulnerable. We perform these tests separately for cross-border lending and for local lending by
foreign-owned banks. We also explore whether government interventions to affect the bank
lending channel and maintain loan supply were effective. In particular, we focus on the so-called
Vienna Initiative, discussed further below.
While our empirical exercise lends itself very nicely to the same identification strategy,
we are obviously limited by the scope of our sample size: Khawja and Mian (2008) had
extensive micro-level data where each observation was a bank-firm loan, with a total sample size

8

Khawja and Mian (2008) actually argue for a possible negative correlation and in their case found evidence
consistent with their prior.

9

above 20,000 observations.9 In our case, as discussed in section III.2, we use data for 17 source
countries lending to 94 emerging economies, with a total theoretical sample size of 1598
observations, but that is smaller in practice since not all source countries may be lending to all
destinations.
Another part of our empirics considers whether domestically-owned banks in emerging
markets had balance sheet vulnerabilities to supply shocks via their reliance on cross-border
sources of funding, leading to a loan supply response. The testing of the existence of this third
channel of transmission, however, can only be based on simple cross sectional regressions using
lending data by domestic banks in the emerging markets. The inability to “correct” for
contemporaneous changes in loan demand is a problem. However, we can assess the potential
severity of the demand bias from the estimation results obtained analyzing the local lending of
foreign banks, under the assumption that local foreign banks and local domestic banks face
similar loan demand schedules. In the empirical exercise we analyze post-pre crisis domestic
lending growth in relation to two variables related to cross-border funding. One variable is total
cross-border bank lending to the emerging market (summed across all source markets) relative to
total domestic bank lending in the same emerging market. The second variable embeds a more
nuanced view of which source countries accounted for this cross-border bank lending.
Specifically, we consider the extent of funding sourced from low ex ante dollar-vulnerable
countries or from high ex ante dollar-vulnerable countries. This exercise allows us to address the
issue of whether loan supply contracted the most in the crisis for the domestically-owned banks
that relied the most on any cross-border financing (emerging market banking system most open
to international funding markets), or whether instead the contraction was mainly the result of
relative high exposure to a set of foreign countries that ex ante had become especially dollar
vulnerable.

9

The constraint imposed by the fixed effect specification is that, by relying on a within firm comparison of lending
by two separate banks, it can only be implemented on the subset of firms borrowing ex ante from more than one
bank. This limitations lead to a drastic reduction in sample size in the Khawja and Mian (2008) exercise (but still
leaving them with more than 5,000 unique bank/firm observations). In our case, this is less of an issue, since at an
aggregate level only a handful of destination countries in the dataset borrow from just one source country. In our
regression analysis those destination countries are excluded.

10

III.2 Data
Bank lending data. The bilateral data on international bank lending are from the Bank for
International Settlements’ (BIS) Consolidated International Banking Statistics. This database
contains information on positions of banks from BIS reporting countries with respect to
counterparties around the world, with data aggregated across all reporting banks from the source
countries. The two main lending variables are: 1) international claims, which capture the sum of
cross border lending and local claims extended in foreign currency, and 2) local claims in local
currency. These variables are our proxies for cross-border lending and local lending,
respectively, by foreign-owned banks in destination markets.10 Our analysis includes data for 17
source countries and 94 destination countries from three emerging market regions: Latin
America (30 countries), Emerging Asia (21 countries), and Emerging Europe (43 countries).
The source countries are: the United States, Japan, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Switzerland,
Denmark, Germany, Spain, France, Great Britain, Ireland, Sweden, Portugal, the Netherlands,
Luxembourg, and Italy. The list of destination countries is provided in Appendix Table 1.11
The pattern of partnering between developed countries and the emerging markets
validates our application of the Khwaja and Mian (2008) approach. Table 1 presents the
destination countries as rows, focusing only on the 8 largest emerging markets in each region,
and shows how many of the seventeen source countries were partners in cross-border lending or
local lending for each destination in the pre-crisis and crisis period. The cross-border flows come
from a wider array of source countries compared with local claims, where financial sector
foreign direct investment is a precondition. The similarity of pre- and post- columns for both
international claims and local claims shows that the capital flow adjustments were on the
intensive margin (quantity adjustments vis-a-vis existing partners) and not the extensive margin
(countries added or dropped as partners), at least as measured at the level of bank-country
observations. Table 1A presents information on the number of destination countries, out of the

10

The treatment of local claims in foreign currency in the database makes these proxy variables instead of true
representations.
11
Some gaps appear in the data available in DBSonline, and are due to confidentiality concerns of the reporting
central banks. For example, Both Denmark and Finland no longer have a numerous national banking system, as
most of their domestic banks have over time been bought up by larger banks from other Scandinavian countries.
When reported data is the aggregate from a small number of commercial banks, the reporting central banks may
report the observations to the BIS marked with Observation Level Confidentiality C Confidential, and this data is
suppressed from export to DBSonline. The bank type B Domestic Banks amounts vis-à-vis developing countries are
not in DBSonline, but the bank type A All Banks amounts are available there.

11

full sample of 94, that are served by very few of the (17) source countries. All destination EMs
receive cross-border funds. Only two EMs are served by a single source, and need to be dropped
from the fixed effects estimation sample. Almost all destination EMs receive cross-country funds
from more than three sources. The patterns, as expected, are much different for local claims.
Twenty-six EMs do not have local claims extended by any of the 17 source countries, while
another 19 EMs have only 1 source presented. The EM country sample for the fixed effects
specifications is the remaining group of 49 countries.
Table 2 provides a complementary set of observations from the vantage point of the
respective source countries. In cross border flows (international claims), a majority of the
emerging markets were served by France and Great Britain, followed by another broader group
of active European lenders and the United States. In local claims, source countries have more
limited international footprints as measured in terms of numbers of EM destinations. Some
source countries have had very little entry into EM banking systems (Australia, Ireland,
Luxembourg) while banks from other source countries have a broader global presence (United
States, France, Great Britain, Netherlands).
The upper panel of Table 3 provides detailed summary information covering bilateral and
domestic lending growth pre-crisis versus in the post-crisis period. These summary data directly
pertain to the dependent variables to be used in the formal econometric exercises. Cross-border
lending will include 1032 observations, while the number of local claims observations is smaller,
at 267. Positive mean pre-post values pick up a general upward trend in lending patterns.
Nonetheless, there is a wide range of experiences across pairs of countries, as illustrated by the
minimum, maximum, and standard deviation columns.
The final piece of lending information pertains to lending by domestically-owned banks.
Since such information is not readily available for the broad group of 94 EMs we construct a
proxy by combining the BIS local claims data and information from the International Monetary
Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS). From the IFS data we extract series on Bank
Claims on Private Sector and Bank Claims on the Central Government.12 Then, we construct
domestic bank lending as the sum of Bank Claims on Private Sector plus Claims on Central
12

IFS 22d for bank lending means something slightly different for different countries (most often claims on private
sector from banking institutions, but sometimes claims on other sectors from deposit money banks or another
combination). 22a through c are claims on central government, state and local governments, and nonfinancial public
enterprises.

12

Government from (both IFS), net of the total of Local Claims in Local Currency from all BIS
reporting countries. The last row of Table 3 shows that our analysis will work with a smaller
sample of data, on 62 country observations on the change in domestic bank lending growth, with
there being a wide range of positive and negative values across countries.

Banking Sector Dollar Vulnerability. A third type of data used in the econometrics is a
constructed indicator of banking system vulnerability at the onset of the crisis. Recall that the
strategy for identifying lending supply shocks relies on the observation that, from an ex ante
perspective, banks from different developed countries had differing degrees of vulnerability to
U.S. dollar funding shocks. This vulnerability was the result of the buildup of dollardenominated assets on their balance sheets and degrees of maturity mismatching between dollar
assets and corresponding funding sources. As shown by McGuire and von Peter (2009a, b), there
were substantial differences across countries in the tendency of internationally active banks to
accumulate mismatches.
Using confidential components of the BIS International and Consolidated Banking
Statistics, McGuire and von Peter have constructed three alternative measures capturing the
degree of dollar vulnerability for a number of developed-economy banking systems (see box).
The basic idea is that the measures reflect gross short term U.S. dollar funding risks. All
measures include the summed external liabilities of banking systems, with differences in whether
some exposures are treated as gross or as net of corresponding asset positions. For example,
measures V1 and V2 differ only with respect to treatment of liabilities to banks, taken either as
net or gross positions. V3 also contains net positions of country banks vis-à-vis non-banks, but
only if these positions are liabilities of the banks.
We use the values of these three alternative measures of country-specific dollar
vulnerability calculated at the time right before the onset of the crisis. Basic summary statistics
are provided in Table 3, Panel B, together with the computation of the pair wise correlations
across the three ex-ante measures of banking system dollar vulnerability. The summary statistics
show a substantial degree of cross-sectional variability for each measure. The pairwise
correlations of measures are high, especially across V1 and V2. By construction, V3 is most
different from the other two (reflected also in the lower correlations) and also based on the
strongest assumptions.
13

Definitions of the three gross short term dollar funding need measures.
All three measures are normalized by each country’s total international claims for the
econometric work.
V1: Liabilities to official monetary authorities + International liabilities to non-banks +
Local liabilities to US residents booked by US offices + Liabilities to banks + crosscurrency FX swap (if negative);
V2: Liabilities to official monetary authorities + International liabilities to non-banks +
Local liabilities to US residents booked by US offices + Net Liabilities to banks +
cross-currency FX swap (if negative);
V3 either : Liabilities to official monetary authorities + Net Liabilities to banks + crosscurrency FX swap (if negative) + Net positions vis-à-vis non-banks (if negative), or
Liabilities to official monetary authorities + Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency
FX swap (if negative) (if Net positions vis-à-vis non-banks is positive).

Panel B also provides information of the magnitude of banking system imbalances in
2007, at the outset of the crisis, for a subset of the group of seventeen source countries.13 Using
V2 as the reference measure, the data show that German banks had $865 billion of dollar funding
needs, while Spanish and U.K. banks had needs of $247 billion and $1.5 trillion, respectively.
When these constructions are normalized by the total international claims of banks from these
same countries, Germany had relatively low ex ante dollar vulnerability, at 25.4 percent of
external loans, while the U.K. banks had relatively high funding needs, at 90 percents of
international loans. Based on the distribution of observations across source banking countries,
Germany had low (percentage) banking sector dollar vulnerability, while Spain was moderate,
and U.K. banking system vulnerability was high.

Policy Initiative. Finally, our econometric exercise allows for the possibility of global bank
transmission consequences of the so-called Vienna Initiative that was contracted between banks
and internally active banks in Europe in February 2009 with the goal of preventing a
destabilization of Emerging Europe. This joint international financial institution action plan
13

Due to the confidential nature of the data, we are only authorized to display actual vulnerability figures for a
limited subset of the source countries.

14

resulted in a total of $10.8 billion of support committed to a range of European banks to support
their lending to ten European Union countries, the Western Balkans, and Turkey. Beyond the
private banks participating in this program, the public policy partners included the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Investment Bank Group, and the
World Bank. Appendix Table 2 provides details on reported disbursements through this program
through September 2009, by bank and by destination country.
III.3 Bank transmission from industrialized to emerging markets
A non-parametric illustration. The identification strategy can be appreciated first with a simple,
non-parametric exercise comparing average international lending to emerging markets before
and after the crisis event, between banking systems that were ex ante highly vulnerable to dollar
funding shocks and those that were instead less vulnerable. We defined the pre-crisis period from
2006q2 to 2007q2 and the post-crisis period from 2008q3 to 2009q2. As previously noted, we
purposefully leave out the intermediate period between 2007q3 and 2008q2. Arguably the
Lehman’s events in September 2008 mark the cleanest and most important crisis event, but at the
same time the last quarter of “normal” market functioning goes back to the time prior to August
2007. Alternative datings of the period before the dollar funding shock and following this shock
certainly can be argued and were considered in robustness tests.14
For this first exercise, we divide source banking countries into two groups – those with
high or low ex ante dollar vulnerability. We compute the (log of) lending growth by source
country vis-à-vis each destination country and then take averages across pre- or post- periods,
averages across destinations, and averages across groups of source countries. We defined high
(low) dollar vulnerable countries as those with values of the vulnerability measure V2 above
(below) the median. In the subsequent regression analysis, we make use of the whole information
embedded in the continuous variables V’s, and not just use of the coarse high-low vulnerability
groupings.
Time averages across each of the intervals and broad vulnerability divisions are provided
in Table 4. For cross-border lending, shown in the top panel, countries with high ex ante dollar
vulnerability exhibited higher average lending growth than low vulnerability countries before the
14

In order to address the robustness of the empirics under alternative timing assumptions, we have experimented
with a number of alternative definitions for both the pre and post periods. The choice of alternative dates does not
really have any material impact on the results. Results based on alternative time windows are available upon request.

15

crisis (first row comparison). While these level differences can be attributed to basic countryspecific factors, such differences are not what drive the identification. In the period after the
dollar crisis hit, the data indicates higher average numbers for both sub group of countries and
the same rank order (second row comparison).15 However, even the difference in post crisis
lending levels is not driving the identification. What matters is the comparison of the lending
growth pre to post period between the high and the low vulnerability countries. This comparison,
obtained taking the difference-in-difference value from Table 4 (figure in bold) shows that ex
ante high vulnerability countries displayed ex post about 15 percent lower cross-border lending
growth to emerging markets than low vulnerability countries. Another way to interpret this
result, based on comparing the level difference pre crisis with the level difference post crisis
(figures in the row marginals), is that due to the crisis and the consequent balance sheet liquidity
shocks hitting banks, the countries that ex ante were less exposed to the dollar funding shock
were more able to partially close the cross-border lending gap to emerging markets compared to
the more exposed source countries.
The same exercise performed for the local lending in local currencies by the foreign
banks is shown in the right-most cells of the same rows of Table 4. As with cross border lending,
local lending exhibits similar pre- and post- crisis patterns for both high and low vulnerability
funding source countries. The only difference is in the scale. As the difference-in-difference
comparison shows, low vulnerability countries exhibited a 49 percent higher local lending
growth rate in the crisis aftermath, compared with the high vulnerability countries.
These results for cross-border lending growth and local lending growth are suggestive of
a potentially important lending supply shock from developed country banks to emerging market
economies, with the shock magnified for banks that ex ante exhibited greater balance sheet
vulnerabilities. While suggestive, this non-parametric exercise, however, is limited as it cannot
take into account differences in the lending destinations. It could be that high vulnerability
countries were disproportionately focusing their lending in a particular group of emerging
markets that perhaps experienced stronger credit demand shocks.
15

Higher numbers post crisis are likely driven by a steep increase in the pre-crisis quarters, so that time averaging
yields relatively lower numbers pre than post. We could have chosen the observation right at the quarter before the
crisis and the last quarter in the data set to do the comparison, but the time averages have the advantage of
smoothing out quarter-specific idiosyncratic factors. In any case, as argued in the main text, the identification does
not rely on the simple pre-post comparison on levels but on the comparison in the pre-post growth between the two
sub-group of countries.

16

As another exploratory exercise prior to starting the formal empirical analysis, we
performed a basic check on the reliance of the vulnerability measures. We ran basic regressions
using the post-pre growth measures for both cross-border and local lending as dependent
variables and the whole set of fixed effects for source and destination countries on the right hand
side. If the presumption is correct, that source countries with ex-ante higher dollar imbalances
should be the ones to suffer the largest balance sheet shock and therefore those that reduce
lending the most, it should be the case that the vulnerability measures should be correlated with
the series of estimated coefficients of the source country indicator variables. In other words,
those countries exhibiting larger changes in lending growth around the crisis should also be the
ones with the higher values of the vulnerability measures. This pattern is verified in the data.16

Formal econometric study of transmission. To separate loan demand from loan supply effects we
next turn to the more formal approach involving the estimation of equations (1) with OLS and
equation (2), where destination country differences are taken into account by the destination
fixed effect (FE) indicator variables. Both OLS and FE specifications are informative. While the
OLS estimates are by construction biased, their comparison with the FE estimates provides
insights on the degree of bias associated with the simultaneous shocks to lending demand
experienced by destination markets. Specifications are performed over cross-border lending
growth, with baselines presented in Table 5, and local claims growth, presented in Table 6.
Columns 1-3 of each table focus on the basic OLS specifications, columns 4-6 prove the results
of fixed effects specifications, and columns 7-8 includes consideration of the Vienna Initiative
implemented within Europe. Since we have three alternative measures of ex ante vulnerability,
we run similar regressions using the three measures separately. Moreover, in order to fully
exploit the information contained in the vulnerability measures, in the regression analysis we use

16

The results from these regression checks are reassuring. The V measures exhibit high correlations with the fixed
effect estimated coefficients from both cross-border and local lending regressions. The correlations vis-à-vis the
coefficients from the cross-border lending regression are higher, around 0.6, and highly significant. The correlations
vis-à-vis the coefficients from the local lending regression are smaller, ranging between 0.35 and 0.55 across the
three V measures, and significant for one of the three measures. This pattern of relative strength in the results will be
found in the formal regression analysis as well, in large part probably due to the fact that, as already mentioned
above, the sample size for cross-border lending is much greater than that for local lending. We thank Romain
Ranciere for suggesting running this test.

17

the actual indexes rather than the simpler dummy grouping countries that indicated ex ante
vulnerability above or below the median of the source countries.
First, consider the pre-post shock consequences for cross-border lending growth (Table
5). The coefficients on the vulnerability proxies in the first three columns show the relationship
between ex ante source country vulnerability and the extent of slowed lending growth ex post.
Countries that ex ante had more severe potential exposure to a dollar funding crisis had
significantly lower ex post rates of cross-border lending growth to emerging markets. The results
are consistent across the three different vulnerability measures. A low vulnerability banking
source would have continued lending growth post shock, while high vulnerability was associated
with reversals.
In columns 4 to 6 we report the results from the corresponding fixed effect estimations.17
The estimates of

still are largely negative and significant. As expected, the comparison of 4-6

with the OLS estimates of 1-3 indicates some role played by concomitant changes in demand.
The fixed effect estimates are systematically lower (in absolute value) than the corresponding
OLS ones. At least part of the reduction in cross-border lending activity is attributable to a
simultaneous decline in demand for cross-border loans. The magnitude of this loan demand
shock, however, seems to be relatively small.
Next, consider the impact of the crisis on growth of local claims, with results reported in
Table 6. As before, the OLS estimates using the three distinct measures of vulnerability are
reported in the first three columns. The estimated effects of the shock event are again quite
strong and in the expected direction with loan supply contractions particularly strong when
affiliate banks overseas were ex ante more vulnerable. The model with fixed effects, columns 46, indicates relatively smaller estimated coefficients (in absolute value). By and large, however,
the results confirm that the lower growth in local claims on emerging markets is largely due to
the supply shock from ex ante vulnerable banking systems.
Next, consider the magnitude of effects for local claims growth when controls are
introduced for the Vienna Initiative (columns 7 and 8). These specifications lead to reduced
17

Note that the FE specification is based on the comparison of lending growth by at least two different source
countries with different degrees of dollar vulnerability to the same destination country. Hence, in what follows we
need to restrict the regression analysis by excluding those destination countries that do not maintain flows from at
least two source countries. Of course this set if different in the analysis for cross border lending from that for local
lending, but the differences in sample size with the corresponding OLS regressions is explained by the imposition of
this constraint.

18

significance of ex ante vulnerability in general. Instead, the Vienna countries appear to be
associated with mitigated local lending declines. Such reduced effects of the crisis on local
claims growth, in particular in emerging Europe, were a key goal of the Vienna Initiative.
Also notice that the magnitude of reported coefficients in Table 6 is significantly smaller
(in absolute terms) than in Table 5. The implication is that the role of differences in banking
system vulnerability plays out strongest in the arena of cross border flows. We calculated the
economic significance of the identified supply shocks. Table 7 presents examples of such
impacts, focusing on three source countries for funding that are in the low, median, and high end
of the ex ante vulnerability spectrum across the countries of our sample. Using the specifications
of column (5) of Tables 5 and 6, we observe cross border lending supply growth after the crisis
that was 8.02 percent lower than in the pre-crisis period for Germany, and comparable changes
of 28.44 percent lower for the United Kingdom. Local claims supply adjustments also were
quite large and quantitatively important across the lower and higher ex ante vulnerability
countries.

III.4. Robustness
There are various potential critiques of the methodology we have applied to isolate loan demand
from international loan supply effects of the shock. Such critiques include questioning the
assumption of exogeneity of the shock event, our treatment of ex ante dollar vulnerability as a
defining feature of source country banking systems while instead potentially proxying for other
source country bank characteristics, time trends in lending across destinations, and the inclusion
of United States as a source country. Below, we consider the robustness of our results to each of
these critiques.
Shock endogeneity. The significance of the econometric results is heavily based on the
presumption that the shock event, materializing in a severe shortage of U.S. dollar funding, is
exogenous to the lending dynamics to emerging market countries. We think there is a legitimate
case for the assumed exogeneity of the shock event. First, this particular crisis did not originate
in emerging markets. Second, the accumulation of dollar exposure by developed countries’ banks
was very much driven by investment strategies of the developed economy’s banks and did not
derive in any quantitatively significant way from economic dynamics in emerging markets

19

countries, nor from specific lending policies toward these economies. As McGuire and von Peter
(2009b) clearly state: “…banks’ (particularly European banks’) foreign positions have surged
since 2000 … As banks’ balance sheets grew, so did their appetite for foreign currency assets,
notably US dollar-denominated claims on non-bank entities. These assets include retail and
corporate lending, loans to hedge funds, and holdings of structured finance products based on US
mortgages and other underlying assets. During the build-up, the low perceived risk (high ratings)
of these instruments appeared to offer attractive return opportunities; during the crisis they
became the main source of mark to market losses. …” (p. 1). Consequently, the dollar
vulnerability of different developed countries banking systems in the months prior to the crisis
can be reasonably assumed to be independently determined by the concomitant level of lending
activity to emerging market countries.

Dollar vulnerability as a proxy for other bank balance sheet characteristics. A related concern is
that, in fact, different levels of dollar vulnerability are just the reflection of specific ex-ante
differences across source country banks in other balance sheet characteristics and do not reflect
the relative severity of balance sheet shocks. We can test this alternative hypothesis by
conducting a series of “horse races”, by sequentially controlling for pre-crisis bank balance sheet
characteristics by country in the main fixed effect specification of equation (2). The set of
country-level bank balance sheet variables identified for this purpose are: the ratio of private
credit by deposit money banks to GDP as a measure of the importance of banking activity in
source markets (pcrdbgdp); the ratio of bank's overhead costs to total assets as a measure of
banking efficiency (overhead); the return on equity (roe) and return on assets (roa) as measures
of performance; the equity to asset ratio as a measure of banking capitalization (cap); the z-score
as a measure of risk (zscore); 18 a measure of the share of deposits that are offshore (offdep); and
the log of total international claims as a broad measure of global size (linclaims). Table 8, Panel
A, reports the pairwise correlations among these variables and the measure V2 of dollar
vulnerability. While there are strong correlations across some of these financial variables, for
example between cap with roa or overhead, the correlations are weaker for the V2 variable
(adjusted by international claims).

18

The data is from the World Bank update to Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2000).

20

In Table 8, Panel B, we report the estimation results from a range of alternative
specifications, which are the baseline specifications (columns 5 of Tables 5 and 6) where the V2
measure “competes” against each of these additional variables that are introduced within the
regression. We report only the resulting coefficients and the significance of the variable V2 from
these alternative FE regression specifications, with each cell of Panel B drawn from a distinct
regression specification. The coefficients estimated for V2 remain fairly stable, both for cross
border lending growth and for local claims growth. This finding indicates that the degree of
dollar vulnerability is capturing a specific type of funding fragility exhibited by developed
countries’ banks prior to the crisis and had a direct impact on lending dynamics in emerging
market countries.

Time trends. Another potential critique of our findings is that the accumulation of dollar
liabilities and the subsequent crisis had no effect on changes in lending to EM economies, and
that the difference detected between high- and low-vulnerability source countries is just the
result of pre-existing differences in time trends. Analyses of the time series dynamics in both
cross-border and local lending for high- and low-vulnerability countries do not support this
claim. In Table 9 we report quarterly averages in (log) lending for the two separate groups of
countries. For ease of comparison, both series are depicted as differences between value in each
quarter and value at time zero (set at 2007q2), so that the vertical axis indicates the growth rate
between each respective quarter and time zero. Panel A reports cross-border lending. While there
was a detectable difference in time trends in the pre-crisis quarters, or at least through 2006, the
chart shows that there was a visibly significant change in trend for both series in the quarters
after 2007q2, and certainly an important difference in growth rate trends from 2008q3 and
onward. A similar pattern can be detected for local lending in Panel B. Pre-crisis time series had
a similar trend, but trends changed, even more dramatically in the post-crisis period.

Results driven by the inclusion of U.S. banks. We recognize that the dollar vulnerability measure
may have a distinct interpretation for U.S. banks which can readily access dollar-based liquidity
facilities such as the discount window and special facilities that emerged during the crisis.19 In

19

Goldberg, Kennedy, and Miu (2010) provide details on the availability of dollars to financial institutions outside
the United States via central bank dollar swap facilities that were established.

21

addition, the conversion of investment banks into commercial banks, with data for the latter
included in the post sample of BIS data, may influence the outcomes of the regression analysis.20
We perform regression specifications excluding observations on U.S. lending to the respective
emerging markets and generate qualitatively similar results.

III.5 Domestic lending
The final channel of international transmission through banks was posited to work
through the funding of local, domestic banks. In this section we test whether such banks in
emerging markets experienced a loan supply shock of their own as a result of the changes in
cross-border lending of foreign banks. One component of cross-border lending is lending to local
banks, in which case the original supply shock transmitted into cross-border financing could also
determine a second round lending supply effect through the impact on the balance sheet of the
local banks.21 For this part of the empirical exercise, data at the level of aggregate lending by
domestic banks leaves just the cross-sectional variability of destination countries for analysis.
Moreover, while our full sample of emerging markets covers 94 countries, a significant share of
these countries do not have adequate domestic lending data in the IFS or have totals for domestic
lending that show some inconsistencies with the BIS local claims data. 58 countries are used in
the final regression analysis. For this reason, we can produce qualitative results that can, at best,
provide indications of the existence of this effect.
If local domestic banks experience a lending supply shock as a result of changes in crossborder funding by foreign banks, then one could expect that – all else equal – this shock would
be larger exactly in those emerging markets where cross-border bank borrowing came
predominantly from those banking systems that were ex ante more vulnerable to the original
credit market disruptions. The BIS international banking statistics provide a breakdown of total
cross border claims in cross border lending to banks and cross border lending to non banks
(private and public sectors). Hence, from the cross border lending to banks data by source and
destination country we compute total cross-border lending to banks for each destination country
from all BIS reporting countries during the pre-crisis period. We then compute the fraction of
this total that came from ex ante vulnerable countries, using the same high versus low ex ante
20

We thank Patrick McGuire for pointing this out.
At least for Latin American countries we know of significant tightening in domestic funding sources as a result of
the crisis (Jara, Moreno and Tovar, 2009)
21

22

vulnerability classification used in the non-parametric exercise of Table 4. Subsequently, we
compute for each destination country the fraction of total cross-border bank borrowing from high
vulnerable countries. We also compute the ratio of cross-border bank-to-bank lending into a
destination, relative to the total amount of lending done by domestic banks (share x-border).
This second variable captures the degree of overall “openness” to international funding markets
by banks in EM countries. The dependent variable in our regressions is the pre-post comparison
of lending growth for domestic banks in each emerging market.
If lending of domestic banks in emerging markets was exposed to the financial crisis
through cross-border linkages, is it the case that countries with banks having the highest reliance
on cross-border borrowing overall were the one to suffer the largest declines in domestic
lending? Or is the exposure only through reliance on banking systems with high ex ante
vulnerability? Table 10, column (1), shows that lending contractions by domestic banks in
emerging markets were stronger if they had been especially dependent on cross border
borrowing from ex ante more vulnerable banking systems. Column (2) shows that differences
across countries in the overall openness to cross-border borrowing were instead not significant in
explaining ex post lending growth contractions. If anything, overall openness generated an
opposite, positive effect. Columns (3) and (4) combine these terms in regression specifications,
but continue to support the same suggestive relationships between ex ante exposures to
international capital and ex post adjustments. Hence, openness of emerging market banking
systems to international funding does not seem to have been a source of propagation of the
original shock. Exposure to international funding from source countries that were ex ante more
likely to suffer from the shock instead provided for multiple and independent channels of shock
transmission.
The economic effect of such changes cannot be accurately gauged from these
econometric specifications as we cannot correct for concomitant changes in demand. However,
the results from the regressions on local claims of foreign banks offer information on this issue:
assuming that both local domestic banks and local foreign banks face a similar demand schedule,
we know that the FE regressions on local lending by foreign banks indicated the existence of a
simultaneous demand change, which amounted to a reduction of about 25 percent in the size of
the estimated coefficient of the vulnerability measure (comparing column (2) and (5) of Table 6).

23

Applying a similar correction to the estimated coefficient in column (1) of Table 10 suggest that
the effective supply shock on domestic lending was still substantial.

IV. Concluding Remarks
The opening of capital markets to allow foreign bank participation, either through
expanded cross-border lending activity or via direct entry into local banking markets, produces
significant benefits to emerging markets in terms of enhanced efficiency, liquidity provision,
risk-sharing, and overall superior growth opportunities. Global banks also have been
demonstrably more resilient and better prepared to handle shocks originating in emerging
markets. However, the transmission of a large shock from source countries to emerging markets
has raised concerns about the mechanisms for such transmission and appropriate policy
responses. Our analysis has demonstrated that both foreign-owned banks and local stand-alone
banks are expected to be impacted by foreign liquidity conditions but to differing degrees. These
magnitudes are based on their exposure to cross-border funding and to the internal capital
markets of the broader banking organizations in which they participate.
Direct transmission of the shock is through the cross-border lending of source countries.
Indirect transmission occurs through the internal capital markets of globalized banks,22 where
reduced support of emerging market affiliates or increased outflows from emerging markets
trigger reduced lending at home by these affiliates. Domestically-owned banks in emerging
markets are not immune to transmission and associated lending growth contraction. Reliance on
cross-border funding does not necessarily lead to international transmission of shocks. The ex
ante balance sheets of source countries appear to matter for the ex post consequences.
While cross-border lending and internal capital markets are both conduits for
international shock transmission, both positive and negative, these features are not an argument
for concluding that closed or reduced access to international capital markets is welfareimproving for emerging markets. Instead, the results suggest the importance of addressing the
vulnerabilities in source funding markets so that these funding sources remain a net positive for
the economies in which they operate. The results also highlight a potentially new reality across
markets on the relative importance of respective channels of international transmission. As stated
22

Cetorelli and Goldberg (2008) show that such internal capital markets are activated in U.S. banks in response to
monetary policy conditions.

24

by Donald Kohn, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, “… when liquidity conditions tighten
in one country, globally active banks may attempt to pull liquidity from overseas affiliates,
reducing the liquidity consequences at home but simultaneously transmitting the shock abroad.
What is particularly interesting is that in some cases, financial linkages might now be more
important for transmission than the traditional trade linkages.” 23

23

Kohn (2008).

25

References:
Alessandria, George, Joe Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2010. “The Great Trade Collapse of
2008-2009: An Inventory Adjustment?” manuscript.
Amiti, Mary and David Weinstein, 2009, “Exports and Financial Shocks.” NBER Working Paper
no. 15556, December 2009.
Ashcraft, Adam, 2008, “Are Bank Holding Companies a Source of Strength to Their Banking
Subsidiaries?”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 40, no. 2-3, pp. 273-294.
Ashcraft, Adam and Murillo Campello, 2007, “Firm Balance Sheets and Monetary Policy
Transmission”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1515-1528.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2000, “A New Database on Financial
Development and Structure,” World Bank Economic Review, vol. 14, September 2000, pp. 597605.
Calomiris, Charles, and Andrew Powell, 2001, “Can Emerging Market Bank Regulators
Establish Credible Discipline? The Case of Argentina, 1992-1999,” in Frederic Mishkin, ed.,
Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, Chicago: NBER and University of
Chicago Press, pp. 147-191.
Campello, Murillo, 2002, “Internal Capital Markets in Financial Conglomerates: Evidence from
Small Bank Responses to Monetary Policy”, Journal of Finance, vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 2773-2805.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda Goldberg, 2008, “Banking Globalization, Monetary Transmission,
and the Lending Channel”, NBER Working Paper no. 14101, June 2008 (revised version as
“Banking Globalization and Monetary Transmission” released November 2009).
Chor, David and Kalina Manova, 2009, “Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and
International trade During the Global Financial Crisis,” manuscript.
Coffey, Niall, Warren Hrung, Hoai-Luu Nguyen, and Asani Sarkar, 2009, “The Global Financial
Crisis and Offshore Dollar Markets”, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, vo. 15, no. 6.
Correa, Ricardo and Charles Murry, 2009, “Is there a cross-border bank lending channel?
Evidence from U.S. banks’ international exposure,” manuscript.
Crystal, Jennifer, B. Gerard Dages, and Linda Goldberg, 2001, “Does Foreign Ownership
Contribute to Sounder Banks? The Latin American Experience,” in Robert Litan, Paul Masson,
and Michael Pomerleano, eds., Open Doors: Foreign Participation in Financial Systems in
Developing Countries, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 217-266.
De Haas, Ralph and Iman Lelyveld, 2010, “Internal Capital Markets and Lending by
Multinational Bank Subsidiaries”, Journal of Financial Intermediations, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1-25.
26

Eaton, Jonathan, Sam Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, 2010, “Trade and the Global
Recession”, manuscript.
Goldberg, Linda, 2009, “Understanding Banking Sector Globalization,” International Monetary
Fund Staff Papers, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 171-197.
Goldberg, Linda, Craig Kennedy, and Jason Miu. 2010. “Central bank dollar swap lines and
overseas dollar funding costs”. NBER working paper 15763 (February).
Houston, Joel, David Marcus, and Christopher James. 1997, “Capital market frictions and the
role of internal capital markets in banking?”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 46, no. 2, pp.
135-164.
Imbs, Jean. 2010. “The First Global Recession in Decades” manuscript.
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, April 2009.
Jara, Alejandro, Ramon Moreno, and Camilo Tovar. 2009, “The Global Crisis and Latin
America: Financial Impact and Policy Responses”, BIS Quarterly Review, June 2009, pp 53-68.
Kashyap, Anil and Jeremy Stein. 2000, “What Do A Million Observations on Banks Say About
the Transmission of Monetary Policy?”, American Economic Review, vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 407-428.
Khwaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif Mian, 2008, “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks”,
American Economic Review, vol. 98, no. 4, pp. 1413-1442.
Kohn, Donald L., 2008, “Global Economic Integration and Decoupling,” Speech, 26 June 2008,
International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Frankfurt, Germany.
Levchenko, Andrei, Logan Lewis, and Linda Tesar. 2010, “The Collapse of International Trade
During the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of a Smoking Gun,” manuscript.
McGuire, Patrick and Goetz von Peter. 2009, “The US dollar shortage in global banking”, BIS
Quarterly Review, March 2009, pp. 47-63.
McGuire, Patrick and Goetz von Peter, 2009, “The US dollar shortage in global banking and the
international policy response”, BIS Working Paper, no. 291, October 2009.
Mishkin, Frederic. 2009, “Why We Shouldn't Turn Our Backs on Financial Globalization,”
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 139-170.
Schnabl, Philipp, 2009. Financial globalization and the Transmission of Credit Supply Shocks:
Evidence from an Emerging Market”. NYU working paper no. Fin-08-008.

27

Van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder.2003, “Spillovers through Banking Centers: A
Panel Data Analysis of Bank Flows”, Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 22, no.
4, pp. 483-509.
Yi, Kei-Mu, Rudolfs Bems, and Robert Johnson. 2010. “The Role of Vertical Linkages in the
Propogation of the Global Downturn of 2008” manuscript.

28

Table 1A Number of BIS Countries (of 17) Engaged in Lending to 24 Emerging Markets
International Claims

Emerging Europe

Emerging Asia

Latin America

EM Borrower

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Mexico
Peru
Venezuela
China
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
Slovakia
Russia
Romania
Poland
Hungary
Czech Republic
Croatia

Pre Crisis
2006Q32007q2
17
17
17
16
15
17
15
17
17
17
17
16
17
17
17
16
17
16
17
16
16
17
17
16

Local Claims in Local Currency

Post Crisis
2008q32009q2
17
17
16
16
16
17
16
16
17
17
17
16
16
17
17
16
17
16
17
17
17
16
17
16

Pre Crisis
2006Q32007q2
9
10
8
6
4
7
7
4
10
8
8
9
6
10
10
9
10
9
8
6
13
11
10
2

Post Crisis
2008q32009q2
10
12
9
6
4
8
5
4
12
9
8
9
7
8
11
8
8
8
9
6
13
10
10
3

Table 1B Number of Emerging Market Destinations with Counts of Source Countries
Lending Type

International
Claims
Local Claims
in Local
Currency

Time Frame

# of Destinations with Source Countries

# of Source Countries:
Pre Crisis (2006Q3- 2007 Q2)
Post Crisis (2008Q3-2009Q2)
Pre Crisis (2006Q3- 2007 Q2)

0
0
0
26

1
2
2
19

2
3
5
12

3+
89
87
37

Post Crisis (2008Q3-2009Q2)

24

19

15

36

29

Table 2 Number of Emerging Market Countries (of 94) in BIS Reporting Country Lending

Source Country
United States
Japan
Australia
Belgium
Canada
Switzerland
Germany
Denmark
Spain
France
Great Britain
Ireland
Sweden
Portugal
Netherlands
Luxembourg
Italy

International Claims (Cross-Border)

Local Claims in Local Currency

Pre Crisis
2006Q3-2007q2
72
50
33
72
63
80
82
59
70
86
86
46
64
52
79
37
66

Pre Crisis
2006Q3-2007q2
41
15
1
11
21
23
19
13
16
34
37
2
6
5
29
0
20

Post Crisis
2008q3-2009q2
76
47
32
71
65
79
81
58
67
82
86
43
63
49
78
38
72

Post Crisis
2008q3-2009q2
42
15
3
14
22
23
23
1
17
43
35
1
7
5
29
0
19

30

Table 3A Summary statistics on Lending Growth
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Pre-post cross-border lending growth
To EM Europe
To EM Latin America
To EM Asia

1032
303
346
383

0.263
0.459
0.207
0.159

0.968
0.919
0.892
1.049

-6.031
-5.524
-3.105
-6.031

4.727
4.054
4.727
4.094

Pre-post local lending growth
To EM Europe
To EM Latin America
To EM Asia

267
88
85
94

0.394
0.688
0.243
0.254

0.889
0.921
0.760
0.907

-6.788
-0.766
-2.100
-6.788

5.215
5.215
3.379
2.197

Pre-post domestic lending growth

62

0.409

0.306

-0.755

1.023

Std. Dev.
0.506
0.447
0.207

Min
0.064
0.051
0.009

Max
1.674
1.455
0.831

Table 3B Summary statistics on ex ante dollar vulnerability
Obs
Mean
correlations
17
0.780
V1
0.992
17
0.611
V2
0.702 0.710
17
0.208
V3

V1
V2
V3

Examples of ex ante dollar vulnerability values and scale
Germany
Spain
$billion
share
$billion share
1,165
0.342
294
0.693
865
0.254
247
0.578
311
0.091
72
0.169

United Kingdom
$billion
share
1,797
1.060
1,524
0.900
265
0.156

Lending in the “pre” crisis period is defined as the time average between 2006q2 and 2007q2. Lending in the “post” crisis
period is defined as the time average between 2008q3 and 2009q2. Cross-border lending is lending of foreign banks to an EM
destination country originated in the source country. Local lending is the lending of local offices of foreign banks in local
currency in each EM country. Domestic lending is the aggregate lending by domestic banks in each EM country. Pre-post
lending growth is calculated as the log change between the post- and the pre-crisis periods. Twenty-six of the 94 countries
had missing or incomplete domestic claims data (IFS), and six other emerging markets had domestic claims data (IFS)
exceeded by total local claims data.
The measures of ex-ante dollar vulnerability are calculated using country-specific gross and net US Dollar aggregates. The
definitions of the three measures are as follows. V1: Liabilities to official monetary authorities + International liabilities to
non-banks + Local liabilities to US residents booked by US offices + Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if
negative); V2: Liabilities to official monetary authorities + International liabilities to non-banks + Local liabilities to US
residents booked by US offices + Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if negative); V3 either : Liabilities to
official monetary authorities + Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if negative) + Net positions vis-à-vis nonbanks (if negative), or Liabilities to official monetary authorities + Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if
negative) (if Net positions vis-à-vis non-banks is positive). Shares are presented in the correlations and summary statistics
cells. These shares are the raw values of the vulnerability measures divided by country international claims.

31

Table 4

Non-Parametric Comparisons of Lending Growth
Cross-Border Lending

Pre-Crisis
Post-Crisis

Low
Vulnerability
4.16
4.53

High
Vulnerability
4.41
4.63

0.37

0.22

Post-Pre

Local Lending
LowHigh
-0.25
-0.10
0.15

Low
Vulnerability
5.39
6.13

High
Vulnerability
6.34
6.59

0.74

0.25

LowHigh
-0.95
-0.46
0.49

Low vulnerability countries are those source countries with a measure of vulnerability V2 below the median. High vulnerability
countries have a measure V2 above the median. The “pre” crisis period is defined as the time average between 2006q2 and
2007q2. The “post” crisis period is defined as the time average between 2008q3 and 2009q2. The figures reported in the table are
time averages of quarterly log lending data.

Table 5
VARIABLES
V1

Di
proxy

Cross-border lending growth to emerging markets
(1)
OLS

(2)
OLS

(3)
OLS

-0.307***
(0.063)

V2

(4)
FE

(5)
FE

(6)
FE

-0.354***
(0.0711)

-0.316***
(0.0689)
-0.778***
(0.176)

-0.417*** -0.380***
(0.081)
(0.078)
-0.605***
(0.172)

Vienna

-0.113
(0.227)
-0.049
(0.650)

V2·Vienna

Observations
R-squared

(8)
FE

-0.271***
(0.0606)

V3

Constant

(7)
OLS

0.508***
(0.058)

0.486***
(0.054)

0.410***
(0.045)

1,032
0.023

1,032
0.024

1,032
0.019

-0.037
(0.218)
-0.309
(0.625)

0.561***
(0.070)
1,029
0.249

1,029
0.250

1,029
0.243

1,032
0.026

1,029
0.253

The measures of ex-ante dollar vulnerability are calculated using country-specific gross and net US Dollar aggregates. The definitions of
the three measures are as follows. V1: Liabilities to official monetary authorities + International liabilities to non-banks + Local liabilities
to US residents booked by US offices + Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if negative); V2: Liabilities to official monetary
authorities + International liabilities to non-banks + Local liabilities to US residents booked by US offices + Net Liabilities to banks +
cross-currency FX swap (if negative); V3 either : Liabilities to official monetary authorities + Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX
swap (if negative) + Net positions vis-à-vis non-banks (if negative), or Liabilities to official monetary authorities + Net Liabilities to banks
+ cross-currency FX swap (if negative) (if Net positions vis-à-vis non-banks is positive). The first three columns report results from OLS
regressions. The next three columns are from fixed effect regressions. Fixed effect coefficients not reported. The final two columns
introduce a dummy variable, Vienna, indicating source countries involved in the Vienna initiative. Standard errors are in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

32

Table 6. Local claims lending growth in emerging markets
(1)
OLS

VARIABLES
V1

Di

(3)
OLS

(4)
FE

-0.291***
(0.111)

V2

proxy

(2)
OLS

(5)
FE

(6)
FE

-0.364***
(0.126)

-0.271*
(0.147)
-1.184***
(0.347)

267
0.025

-0.269
(0.189)

-0.865** -0.927**
(0.404)
(0.420)
3.304*** 3.070***
(1.090)
(1.131)
0.529***
(0.170)

V2.Vienna

Observations
R-squared

-0.256
(0.166)
-1.050***
(0.384)

Vienna

0.674***
(0.120)

(8)
FE

-0.206
(0.126)

V3

Constant

(7)
OLS

0.675***
(0.111)
267
0.030

0.636***
(0.0889)
267
0.042

245
0.395

245
0.397

245
0.409

267
0.073

245
0.421

The measures of ex-ante dollar vulnerability are calculated using country-specific gross and net US Dollar aggregates. The
definitions of the three measures are as follows. V1: Liabilities to official monetary authorities + International liabilities to nonbanks + Local liabilities to US residents booked by US offices + Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if negative); V2:
Liabilities to official monetary authorities + International liabilities to non-banks + Local liabilities to US residents booked by US
offices + Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if negative); V3 either : Liabilities to official monetary authorities +
Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if negative) + Net positions vis-à-vis non-banks (if negative), or Liabilities to
official monetary authorities + Net Liabilities to banks + cross-currency FX swap (if negative) (if Net positions vis-à-vis non-banks
is positive). The first three columns report results from OLS regressions. The next three columns are from fixed effect regressions.
The final two columns introduce a dummy variable, Vienna, indicating source countries involved in the Vienna initiative. Fixed
effect coefficients not reported. Standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 7 Quantitative significance of ex ante vulnerability on lending
Cross-Border Lending
Pre-Crisis
Bilateral
Quarterly
Average
($ millions)
Germany
Spain
United
Kingdom

Post-Pre %
Change

Local Lending
Pre-Crisis
Bilateral
Quarterly
Average
($ millions)

Post-Pre %
Change

9,233

-8.02%

5,136

-6.88%

1,454

-18.26 %

14,417

-15.66%

3,644

-28.44%

8,547

-24.39%

The Post-Pre % change figures are obtained using the values of V2 for the three countries, as reported in the bottom
panel of Table 3B, and the estimated coefficients of the V2 variable from column (5) regressions in table 5 (for CrossBorder Lending) and 6 (for Local Lending).

33

Table 8 Robustness Test Details
Panel A. Correlations among Country Control Variables

pcrdbgdp
overhead
roa
roe
zscore
offdep
cap
lintclaims
V2

pcrdbgdp

overhead

roa

roe

zscore

offdep

cap

lintclaims

v2_adj

1.000
0.040
0.304
0.107
0.212
0.347
0.271
-0.262
-0.138

1.000
0.417
-0.168
-0.555
-0.174
0.695
0.605
0.183

1.000
0.608
-0.340
-0.079
0.812
-0.112
0.185

1.0000
-0.202
0.149
0.068
-0.501
0.189

1.000
0.090
-0.231
-0.318
-0.464

1.000
-0.155
-0.097
-0.324

1.000
0.195
0.078

1.000
0.027

1.000

Panel B. Regression Coefficients on V2 in specifications that control for banking variables
pcrdbgdp

overhead

roa

roe

zscore

offdep

cap

lintclaims

All bank
variables

X-border -0.315*** -0.303*** -0.313*** -0.320*** -0.362*** -0.290*** -0.312*** -0.314*** -0.336***
(0.069)
(0.067)
(0.069)
(0.069)
(0.077)
(0.070)
(0.070)
(0.069)
(0.091)
Local

-0.269*

-0.271*

-0.267*

-0.272*

-0.208

-0.280*

-0.264*

-0.246

-0.367

(0.148)

(0.147)

(0.147)

(0.147)

(0.161)

(0.154)

(0.146)

(0.149)

(0.259)

The source-country controls are defined as follows: pcrdbgdp is private credit by deposit money banks and other financial
institutions to GDP; overhead is accounting value of a bank's overhead costs as a share of its total assets; roa is net bank income
over total bank assets; roe is net bank income over total equity; zscore is (roa+equity/assets)/standard deviation(ROA; offdep is
offshore bank deposits relative to domestic deposits; cap is equity to asset ratio; lintclaims is the log of total international claims.
The estimated coefficients in Panel B are those of the V2 measure in fixed effects regressions including the country control(s) listed
in each column. Standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

34

Table 9 Time Trends by Ex-Ante Dollar Vulnerability

Growth in Cross‐Border Lending
0.4

Quarterly lending growth

0.2

0

‐0.2

‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.8
2005

2006

2007
High V2

2008

2009

2008

2009

Low V2

Growth in Local Lending
0.4

Quarterly Lending Growth

0.2
0
‐0.2
‐0.4
‐0.6
‐0.8
‐1
‐1.2
2005

2006

2007
High V2

Low V2

The charts depict quarterly averages of log cross-border and local lending for source countries with low or high V2.
Figures on the vertical axis are rescaled so that they are both equal to zero at time zero. Time zero is 2007q2.

35

Table 10 Domestic Lending Supply Growth Shock
VARIABLES
High V2 share in
cross border (H)
Cross border
share in funding (X)
(H)·(X)

(1)
-0.370***
(0.135)

Constant

Observations
R-squared

(2)

0.431*
(0.243)

(3)
-0.348**
(0.135)
0.311
(0.238)

0.654***
(0.093)

0.370***
(0.044)

0.610***
(0.098)

(4)
-0.453***
(0.160)
-0.174
(0.467)
0.818
(0.678)
0.677***
(0.112)

58
0.118

58
0.050

58
0.145

58
0.167

The dependent variable is domestic bank lending growth pre-post crisis for each emerging market country. Lending in the “pre” crisis
period is defined as the time average between 2006q2 and 2007q2. Lending in the “post” crisis period is defined as the time average
between 2008q3 and 2009q2. High V2 share in cross border is the share of cross border interbank funding obtained from source
countries with V2 values above the median value across source countries. Cross-border share in funding is the ratio of total crossborder interbank funding to total domestic lending. Standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 .

36

Chart 1

USDbn

Private Capital Flows to Emerging Markets
By Region
USDbn

500

500
Emerging Asia
Emerging
Europe

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100
Latin America

0

0

-100

-100
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Chart 2
Private Capital Flows to Emerging Markets
USDbn

USDbn

550

550

FDI
Bank Loans

450

450

350

350

250

250

150

150

50
-50
-150
1998

50

Net Debt Securities

-50

Portf olio Equity

-150
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Source for Charts 1 and 2: BIS Locational Banking Statistics, Bank Loans (Table 7c), Net Bond Issues (Table 11);
Foreign Direct Investment from the Global Development Fund; Portfolio equity data from CEIC; also Federal
Reserve Bank of NY staff estimates. Annual data.

37

Appendix Table 1. Sample of Developing Countries
Latin America (30)
Emerging Europe (21) Emerging Asia (43)
Argentina
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Falkland Islands
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Peru
St. Lucia
St. Vincent
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos
Uruguay
Venezuela

Albania
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Crotia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Poland
Romania
Russia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Turkey
Ukraine

Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Fiji
French Polynesia
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Kazakhstan
Kiribati
Kyrgyz Republic
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
New Caledonia
North Korea
Pakistan
Papau New Guinea
Philippines

Solomon Islands
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Timor Leste
Tonga
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Wallis and Futuna
Western Samoa

38

Appendix Table 2 Delivery on EIB’s Commitments under the Joint IFI Action Plan
By Institution up to end-September 2009 (Euro millions)
Bank
Available
Disbursed
951
204
UniCredit Group (Italy)
446
280
Erste Bank Group (Austria)
393
59
Société Générale (France)
265
139
Intesa Sanpaolo (Italy)
226
117
Dexia Group (Belgium)
242
100
Bayern LB (Germany
315
35
EFG Eurobank (Greece)
300
30
BNP Paribas / Fortis (France)
230
8
RZB (Austria)
110
63
KBC Group (Belgium)
3,478
1,035
Total
4,051
682
Other Banks
7,529
1,717
Grand Total
By Country up to end-September 2009 (Euro millions)
Country
Available
Disbursed
169
25
Bulgaria
591
269
Czech Republic
25
50
Estonia
679
409
Hungary
115
30
Latvia
25
23
Lithuania
1,023
211
Poland
424
65
Romania
260
22
Slovakia
709
40
Slovenia
4,019
1,144
Total EU – 10
0
0
Albania
291
37
Bosnia Herzegovina
540
34
Croatia
110
0
FYROM
132
0
Montenegro
583
44
Serbia
1,655
115
Total Western Balkans
1,855
459
Total Turkey
7,529
1,717
Total

2009 pipeline
75
0
40
50
100
100
0
0
40
100
505
1,005
1,510

2009 pipeline
60
0
0
0
145
0
275
50
100
100
730
20
120
40
0
0
100
280
500
1,510

Total
1,230
726
492
454
443
442
350
330
278
273
5,018
5,738
10,756

Total
254
860
75
1,088
290
48
1,509
539
382
849
5,893
20
449
613
110
132
727
2,050
2,813
10,756

“Progress Report on the Joint IFI Action Plan,” European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
European Investment Bank Group, and World Bank Group, October 2009, pp. 14-15.

39

