                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE SHAPE OF TEMPTATION:
                 IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ECONOMIC LIVES OF THE POOR

                                             Abhijit Banerjee
                                           Sendhil Mullainathan

                                          Working Paper 15973
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15973


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2010




We are grateful to Doug Bernheim, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Esther Duflo, David Laibson, Dilip Mookherjee,
Adriana Lleras-Muney, Ben Polak, Matthew Rabin and seminar participants at BREAD, Cornell, Columbia,
Bocconi, Stanford, Warwick, Yale, Princeton, UCLA, Harvard, MIT, Pompeu Fabra, Unviversidad
Carlos III de Madrid, The Trento Summer School on Behavioral Economics, and Boston University
for extremely helpful comments. We are particularly grateful to Daniel Benjamin and Ted O'Donoghue
for posing challenges on an earlier draft that led to significant changes in this one and to Arun Chandrasekhar
and Emily Breza for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Abhijit Banerjee and Sendhil Mullainathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the Economic Lives of the Poor
Abhijit Banerjee and Sendhil Mullainathan
NBER Working Paper No. 15973
May 2010
JEL No. D03,D91,O12

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper argues that the relation between temptations and the level of consumption plays a key role
in explaining the observed behaviors of the poor. Temptation goods are defined to be the set of goods
that generate positive utility for the self that consumes them, but not for any previous self that anticipates
that they will be consumed in the future. We show that the assumption of declining temptations, which
says that the fraction of the marginal dollar that is spent on temptation goods decreases with overall
consumption, has a number of striking implications for the investment, savings, borrowing and risk-taking
behavior of the poor, which would not arise if temptations were either non-declining or entirely absent.
Moreover the predicted behaviors under the declining temptation assumption can help us explain some
of the puzzling facts about the poor that have been emphasized in the recent literature.


Abhijit Banerjee
MIT
Department of Economics
E52-252d
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu

Sendhil Mullainathan
Department of Economics
Littauer 208
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mullain@fas.harvard.edu
 The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the
         Economic Lives of the Poor
                             Abhijit V. Banerjee
                         MIT, BREAD, CEPR, NBER
                           Sendhil Mullainathan
                    Harvard University, BREAD, NBER
                                      April 2010


                                        Abstract
          This paper argues that the relation between temptations and the level
      of consumption plays a key role in explaining the observed behaviors of
      the poor. Temptation goods are de…ned to be the set of goods that gen-
      erate positive utility for the self that consumes them, but not for any
      previous self that anticipates that they will be consumed in the future.
      We show that the assumption of declining temptations, which says that
      the fraction of the marginal dollar that is spent on temptation goods de-
      creases with overall consumption, has a number of striking implications for
      the investment, savings, borrowing and risk-taking behavior of the poor,
      which would not arise if temptations were either non-declining or entirely
      absent. Moreover the predicted behaviors under the declining temptation
      assumption can help us explain some of the puzzling facts about the poor
      that have been emphasized in the recent literature.
          JEL Codes D03, D91, O12


1     Introduction
The poor often behave as if they are very myopic. For example, they borrow
repeatedly at extremely high interest rates,1 which, at least under the standard
     We are grateful to Doug Bernheim, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Esther Du‡o, David Laibson,
Dilip Mookherjee, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Ben Polak, Matthew Rabin and seminar partici-
pants at BREAD, Cornell, Columbia, Bocconi, Stanford, Warwick, Yale, Princeton, UCLA,
Harvard, MIT, Pompeu Fabra, Unviversidad Carlos III de Madrid, The Trento Summer School
on Behavioral Economics, and Boston University for extremely helpful comments. We are par-
ticularly grateful to Daniel Benjamin and Ted O’Donoghue for posing challenges on an earlier
draft that led to signi…cant changes in this one and to Arun Chandrasekhar and Emily Breza
for superb research assistance.
   1 For example, Aleem (1990) in a survey of money lenders …nds an average interest rate

of 78.5% per year. Even formal micro-…nancial institutions charge extremely high rates. In


                                             1
model of consumption decision-making, suggests a strong preference for con-
suming today rather than tomorrow. For example, if individuals are consuming
at steady state levels, the Euler inequality

                                    u0 (ct )    Ru0 (ct+1 )
                   1
implies that       R , which, if R is high, puts a rather stringent upper bound on
 . Of course, the steady state assumption may be incorrect. Out of steady state,
a high R would be consistent with a close to 1, but only if consumption is
growing fast–in other words, if the poor are rapidly becoming non-poor. This,
however seems counterfactual–for example, Karlan and Mullainathan (2009)
provide evidence that small-time fruit vendors in Chennai. India, pay interest
rates of 5% per day to …nance their business, have been doing so for nine years on
average and remain very poor.2 The same fact is reinforced by evidence from
the investment domain. Estimates of returns to capital for very small …rms
suggest high rates of return for divisible investments. (See de Mel, McKenzie,
and Woodru¤ (2008) on returns to capital in micro-enterprises in Sri Lanka,
Lee, Kremer and Robinson (2009) on returns to holding more inventories in
Kenya, Du‡o, Kremer and Robinson (2009) on using fertilizer in Kenya and
Udry and Anagol (2006) on crop choices in Ghana). Once again, the decision
to consume today rather than take up these high return investment activities
suggests a high discount rate.
    It is theoretically possible explain these phenomena based on non-standard
assumptions about the form of the utility function, but these alternative ex-
planations do not seem to be particularly empirically plausible. For example,
one could argue that the poor cannot cut back on consumption because they
are against some sort of “minimum consumption” constraint. This, however,
appears implausible given (a) that consumption actually shows substantial high
frequency variation (Collins et. al. (2009)) and (b) the direct evidence (see
Banerjee and Du‡o (2007)) that even the very poor spend a signi…cant part
of their income on what are clearly not survival necessities (cigarettes, alcohol,
expensive but not especially nutritious foods). Another argument is that the
realized discount factor is a consequence of high mortality. The problem is that
death rates for a very poor person at age 30 or 40 is not substantially di¤erent
from that of someone richer. A very di¤erent alternative is to argue that the
interest rates are not realized because of high default rates. In fact however
default rates for both formal and informal institutions that actually lend to the
Mexico and other countries, for example, prominent micro-…nance institutions charge 90%+
per year. The fact that people are borrowing at these rates repeatedly is reported for the
case of agricultural …nance by Dreze, Lanjouw and Sharma (1997), the case of daily working
capital by Karlan and Mullainathan (2009) and for payday loan usage in the United States by
Skiba and Tobacman (2007). See Banerjee (2004) for a survey of the evidence of high interest
borrowing in developing countries.
   2 This example also rules out the possibility that the high interest rate borrowing is simply

emergency borrowing, i.e. borrowing in unusual states of the world when the marginal utility
of consumption is especially high. Much of the litarature on how interest rate borrowing also
emphasizes the fact that such borrowing is entirely routine for many low income borrowers
(see survey of the evidence in Banerjee (2004)).


                                               2
poor are extremely low (Banerjee (2004)). Default rates for all the lenders in
Aleem’s study are below 10% and the median is less than 5%. This is also the
shared experience of Micro…nance Institutions.
    In this paper, we provide an alternative approach. We builds on a growing
literature which models myopic behavior as part of a broader set of time in-
consistent preferences (Shefrin and Thaler (1981), Laibson (1997), O’Donoghue
and Rabin (1999)) and points out that for many people, myopia about some de-
cisions coexists with being farsighted about others. The poor are no di¤erent in
this regard: The same people that borrow at very high rates also engage in vari-
ous far-sighted behaviors, from the purchase of burial insurance to participation
in ROSCAs (Collins et. al. (2009)).
    At the core of our model of self-control is the assumption that there are two
types of goods–goods that generate utility both when consumed but also before
they are consumed (i.e. in anticipation) and goods which, to a much greater
extent, generate utility only at the point of consumption. We may take great
pleasure from smoking a cigarette today or eating a whole box of donuts, but
knowing that we will consume them in the future even though they are bad for
us does not make us happy (and indeed, may even serve to get us depressed).
    In our framework, the donut or the cigarette represents a temptation good.
In the moment we would spend money on it. But we would like future selves to
not spend money on it. Temptation goods give us utility in the moment but it
is not utility we care for when considering future selves.3 This is in alternative
to other goods where present and future selves agree: in the moment we spend
on them and we would like future selves to spend on them as well. These are
goods like a good education for our child, our a nice house to retire in.
    The link to poverty within this framework comes from assuming that the
fraction of the marginal dollar that is spent on temptation goods can depend
on the level of consumption. In particular we distinguish between the case
where temptation is declining in the sense that the above-mentioned fraction
goes down as total consumption goes up and the case where it either stays the
same or goes up (the non-declining temptation case). We postpone a more
detailed discussion of why temptation might be declining (or not) till the next
section. However one motivating example might help to see why temptations
do not have to scale with income: Suppose that donuts that cost $0.25 form a
visceral temptation that tempt all people equally. Giving in to this temptation,
however, has di¤erent budgetary impacts for the rich and the poor. The $0.25
will be far more costly to someone living on $2 a day than to someone living on
$30 a day. In other words, the same self-control problem is more consequential
for the poor. This example generalizes even if the rich face new temptations
so long as the temptations they face do not rise proportionally with income,
which may be the case, for example, because temptation goods are better at
satisfying primitive consumption urges–fat, sugar, and other visceral pleasures–
than other forms of consumption. It is not implausible that such urges may
  3 As discussed below, a very similar formulation can arise from a model of family decision-

making with divergent preferences.



                                             3
(after a certain wealth level) be easily satis…ed and that further expenditure is
unlikely to produce much more pleasure.4 As a practical matter, donuts can
only get so expensive (and even then only gain very little in "temptingness").
When the availability of temptations do not increase proportionally with income,
then the poor will spend a bigger share of their marginal dollar on "temptation
goods"5
    Of course in the end, whatever assumption we make about the shape of
temptations must be judged by how well it …ts the data. The main point of this
paper is that the assumption of declining temptation has a number of striking and
novel implications that are relevant to understanding the savings, credit, risk-
taking and investment choices made by the poor and how the poor get treated in
asset markets. This contrasts with the case of non-declining temptation, where
the standard intuitions mostly continue to hold, despite the fact this is a model
that allows for self-control problems in the decision process.
    To formalize these idea that some goods are more tempting than others, 6 we
expand the standard hyperbolic model–which focuses on time inconsistency in
the level (not composition) of consumption ct arising from discount factors which
vary by horizon–to consider the case where there are two goods. Consumption
ct has two components; xt and zt . The …rst, xt , re‡ects consumption spending
on which there is no temptation: xt has prospective value for all periods s t.
The second, zt , re‡ects consumption where there is temptation; only the t self
values zt , i.e. there is no prospective valuation of z consumption. We refer to x
as a non-temptation good and z as a temptation good.7
    Interestingly, time inconsistency now arises even without horizon-varying
discount factors. Simply allowing the di¤erent goods to have di¤erent discount
rates already produces time inconsistency because these di¤erent discount fac-
tors generate disagreement over the two selves about the composition of con-
sumption. In other words, our framework extends the logic of the hyperbolic
model to the case of multiple goods–with an emphasis on good-speci…c rather
than horizon-speci…c discount factors.8
   4 In fact data from India on spending on oils, fats and sugars in fact suggests that while

they are an increasing share of food expenditures, they are actually a decreasing share of total
expenditures (see for example Subramanian and Deaton (2006)).
   5 Of course some might argue that at least a part of the lack of self-control is intrinsic

to being poor: perhaps lack of health or human capital investments at an early age reduces
development of the facility of self-control. For example, Becker and Mulligan (1997) pro-
vide a framework to understand the endogenous determination of discount rates, though not
necessarily self-control. This is however not the approach we take.
   6 Experimental evidence for the idea that some goods are more tempting can be found in

among others Read, Loewenstein and Kalyanraman (1999). See also O’Donoghue and Rabin
(2006).
   7 Such good-speci…c temptations could also be captured in a hyperbolic model by allowing

goods to deliver di¤erent types of consumption at di¤erent points in time (as in Gruber and
Koszegi (2001) on cigarettes). While an excellent framework for understanding situations
where the main issue is the long-run consequences of a good (e.g. health e¤ects), such an
appraoch is less appealing when we are interested purely in how the consumption of temptation
goods a¤ects savings etc.
   8 In Section 4.2, we examine in what way a more standard hyperbolic model, without

consideration of good-speci…c discount factors, could generate income-dependent self-control



                                               4
    This disagreement over composition also generates disagreement over the
level of consumption. Formally, consumption choices in this model are deter-
mined by a modi…ed Euler equation:

                           u0 (xt ) = Ru0 (xt+1 )[1      z 0 (ct+1 )]

where z(c) quanti…es the amount of total consumption that goes to temptation
goods. So spending tomorrow is subject to a "temptation tax": a dollar spent
tomorrow is partly dissipated on temptation goods. Since today’s self does not
value tomorrow’s temptation spending, any temptation spending tomorrow is a
waste. As a result, today’s self would prefer to consume more today rather than
save, producing what appears to be a high discount factor.9
    A number of conclusions follow directly from this simple equation and the
reasoning that goes into it. For example, it can explain why the poor may much
appear much more patient in the purchase of durable goods than in their savings
decisions, and why "sin" taxes may have undesirable e¤ects on decision-making
by the poor. However the most important value added of our framework comes
from being able to precisely de…ne what we called the declining temptation case:
This is the case where z 0 (c) is decreasing and hence z(c) is concave. The paper
is primarily about the implications of this assumption, some of which are listed
below
    First, it is evident from the Modi…ed Euler Equation and the fact that z(c)
is concave, that if we use the traditional Euler equation to back out discount
factors, the poor will appear to be more myopic than the non-poor even if they
are not.10 What appears to be myopic behavior amongst the poor is as much a
result of their poverty as it is a cause.
    Second, a concave temptation tax alone can generate a behavioral poverty
trap. In this case, there will exist a critical initial wealth level w > 0 such that
long run consumption discontinuously jumps up around w. Those individuals
with wealth just below w will save very little or dissave, while those who are
slightly wealthier will save a lot more. Note that this poverty trap arises even
though we have no lumpy investments or even credit constraints, the usual
ingredients of models of poverty traps. Intuitively, in our model, individuals
face an added incentive to save because if they get richer, the temptation tax
goes down. On the other hand, at low enough wealth, this added incentive
is o¤set by the level of the temptation tax. Put another way, the moderately
well-o¤ can save in the hopes of being su¢ ciently wealthy to avoid a large tax.
The poor cannot save enough to accomplish this (or in a multi-period model it
would take them too long do so); hence they simply dissave. People are present-
biased because they are poor, but that in turn keeps them poor. More generally,
giving people some reason to be hopeful about the future makes them act more
factors.
    9 In our formal model, the temptation tax is central. Our model could be reinterpreted also

as arising from some family-con‡ict models. We do not attempt to make a distinction from
this interpretation.
  1 0 In the economics literature, the fact that the poor appear ro be myopic was remarked

upon as early as Irving Fisher (1932).


                                              5
forward-looking in the present, which might actually end up partially justifying
the hope (this therefore has the ‡avor of an aspiration e¤ect (Ray (2002)). This
e¤ect and hence the poverty trap cannot exist under non-declining temptations.
    Third, a concave temptation tax a¤ects individuals’responses to uncertainty:
Individuals may hold very little bu¤er stock savings relative to the shocks they
face. This is because they fear that the future selves will spend liquid savings on
temptation goods. The model also has surprising implications for precautionary
savings behavior: an increase in variance can actually reduce precautionary
savings. This is true even if the utility functions (both u(x) and v(z)) exhibit
prudence.
    Fourth, investment behavior in this framework will be constrained not just
by returns and the minimum admissible scale associated with the project, but
also by the maximum possible scale: a small high return investment may not be
as attractive as a larger opportunity with lower returns. This, we feel, can help
explain phenomena such as why individuals fail to undertake very high return
non-lumpy investments that are available to them (we already mentioned Du‡o,
Kremer and Robinson’s work on fertilizer and Lee, Kremer and Robinson’s re-
search on working capital). Once again this cannot happen as long temptations
are non-declining.
    The model also has implications for the demand for credit. While predicting
that there will be a desire for commitment (a cap on loan sizes) as in any
model of time inconsistency with sophistication, it also notes this desire is not
monotonic: people may prefer their future selves to take a bigger loan over a
smaller one if temptations are declining but not otherwise
    Finally, this model allows us to think about why, even in the absence of
enforcement problems or asymmetric information, a lender who has full market
power may refuse to …nance a borrower who has a pro…table investment op-
portunity that generates a net surplus over the cost of capital. Speci…cally, we
show that given these preferences, monopolistic money-lenders might have the
incentive to deny certain individuals otherwise pro…table loans in order main-
tain their power over the borrower. As pointed out by Srinivasan (1979), this is
not possible with standard preferences–nor with non-declining temptations, as
we show.11
    The next section presents our model, explains the modeling of the self-control
problem and derives its basic properties. In particular we derive and the ex-
plain the Modi…ed Euler Equation. The next section presents implications of
the Modi…ed Euler Equation, without introducing the declining temptation as-
sumption. Section 4 introduces, explains and motivates the declining temptation
assumption. Section 5 derives a series of consequences of the declining tempta-
tions assumption and contrasts them with the non-declining temptation case.
Each sub-section of section 5 is an application of this assumption to a di¤er-
ent problem of saving, investment or credit. Finally, while these results are
qualitative and the primary value of this paper is its ability to deliver a num-
ber implications from a simple assumption, section 6 discusses some potentially
 1 1 The   idea of trying to formalize this debt trap goes back to Bhaduri (1977).



                                                6
quantitative tests of the model.


2     Model
2.1     Modeling Temptations
Before setting up the model in full generality, we describe a simple version that
captures the main intuitions. Suppose that an individual lives for two periods
t = 1; 2. Each period, he can consume xt and zt , two di¤erent components of
consumption.12 If individuals were time consistent and had separable utility
functions, they would maximize U (x1 ) + V (z 1 ) + U (x2 ) + V (z 2 ). The two
goods produce di¤erent utility and the two time periods have di¤erent value:
today’s self favors today over tomorrow. But the two selves agree on how to
weight the di¤erent goods. By contrast, in our model, temptation goods are
exactly those goods about which today’s self and tomorrow’s self disagree. A
stark way to model this is to assume that the period 1 self maximizes
                                U (x1 ) + V (z 1 ) + U (x2 ):
In other words, he values his own spending on temptation goods but does not
value tomorrow’s self’s spending on them. One rationale for this is that he-
donic experiences can be multi-dimensional. Some hedonic experiences provide
visceral, immediate pleasures. For example, sugary or fatty foods may provide
such instant grati…cation. Other experiences provide di¤erent more lasting plea-
sures. For example, eating a more healthy meal may provide a sense of fullness
and some pleasurable tastes but not the same instant grati…cation. If we value
instant grati…cation more in the moment than we do for future selves, then a
self-control problem arises.13 Others have argued that the neurological evidence
favors a two-self model in which one self is tempted by visceral pleasures and the
other is focused on longer term consumption (Fudenberg and Levine (2006)).
Our work can be thought of as a particular way to model this disjunction.
    A di¤erent rationale comes from the nature of social pressures: People often
feel obliged to subsidize certain relatives but take no pleasure in doing so. For
someone who takes no enjoyment in anticipating that she will subsidize a par-
ticular relative in the future, the maximization is exactly the one above, with
money for the relative modeled as a z good. More generally consider a family (or
an extended family) where savings decisions are controlled by one member but
the division of total consumption spending across di¤erent goods is negotiated
among the various di¤erent constituents. In this case the x good is the part of
total family consumption that the person who is in charge of the savings values,
while the rest is are z goods. We do not aim to distinguish from this form of
family con‡ict from intra-personal con‡icts.
  1 2 Note in what follows these two components will be two di¤erent amounts of money spent

on consumption.
  1 3 This interpretation is bolstered by recent neurological research which argues that imme-

diate pleasures and the resulting self-control problem may be localized in di¤erent parts of
the brain (see McClure et. al. (2004)).


                                              7
    The particular modeling approach we take o¤ers three main advantages. It
allows us to introduce between-good variation in the extent of the self-control
problem associated with the goods. Second, it allows us to capture the idea
that self-control problems vary by the level of consumption in a very simple
way. Third, it allows us to introduce self-control problems in a two period
model, unlike in the standard hyperbolic discounting     P model      (where individuals
                                                            t
maximize a utility function of the form u(c0 ) +          t   u(c t )).
    We do not claim that these ideas cannot be captured in other, more stan-
dard, models of time inconsistency. As we discuss in section 3.1, the idea that
temptations vary with the level of consumption, for example, can be captured
in the hyperbolic discounting framework but the conditions required to get the
property are signi…cantly less transparent than the conditions we need to impose
and therefore harder to judge.
    The more general version of our model simply recognizes that when there are
several goods, one can form an index of spending on temptation goods and an
index of spending on non-temptation goods.14 To capture these ideas, suppose
there are n goods consumed in each of two time periods.15 Denote the amount
consumed of good i = f1; 2:::::m; m + 1; ::::ng in time t = f1; 2g by xti . At time
2 individuals maximize:
                                 EfUe (x21 ; :::; x2m )g                             (1)
            ~
where the U is increasing and concave, and Ef g is the expectations operator
de…ned in terms of the uncertainty in the model, as de…ned below.
    At time 1, we assume individuals have decision utility equal to:
                 e (x11 ; :::; x1m ) + Ve (x1m+1 ; :::; x1n ) + EfU
                 U                                                e (x21 ; :::; x2m )g                (2)
To understand this utility, it is useful to contrast equation (2) with the equivalent
in a traditional discounted utility model:
     e (x11 ; :::; x1m ) + Ve (x1m+1 ; :::; x1n ) + EfU
     U                                                e (x21 ; :::; x2m ) + Ve (x2m+1 ; :::; x2n )g

The key di¤erence with our formulation is that the term EfVe (x2m+1 ; :::; x2n )g is
omitted. Thus for goods i = 1; ::; m, the time 1 self uses the same utility function
as the time 2 self and discounts the future by the same rate, . However, the
time 1 self places no weight on the utility derived from goods i = m + 1; :::; n
in period 2. Thus, goods m + 1; :::; n; are the goods that the future self values
but which today’s self assigns zero weight. We will refer to these goods as
"temptation goods".
    Considerable simpli…cation is possible if we make use of within period opti-
mization. Choosing units so that all good prices are 1, we de…ne the indirect
utility functions
                                                          m
                                                          X
                                 e (x11 ; :::; x1m );
                   U (xt ) = max U                              xti = xt ; t = 1; 2
                               x1 :::xm
                                                          i=1
 1 4 In  the appendix we consider a model where goods have both temptation and non-
temptation components and in this case the indices are merely a measure of the dollars spent
on temptations.
  1 5 This setup can be obviously extended to more periods.




                                                   8
and
                                                                   n
                                                                   X
                   V (z ) = Ve (x2m+1 ; :::; x2n )
                        t
                                                       max ;              xti = z t ;
                                                     xm+1 :::xn
                                                                  i=m+1

The key insight is that the total amount spent on any subset of goods must be
spent optimally within that subset, even when the consumer is actually deciding
over a larger set. We can therefore write the above maximand in the compact
form
                         U (x1 ) + V (z 1 ) + EfU (x2 )g:                   (3)
          For most of this paper, this is the utility function we will use. In
essence, x denotes the index of spending on non-temptation goods, while z
denotes the index of spending on temptation goods, much in the same way
that c denotes the spending on total consumption in traditional and hyperbolic
discounting models.16 That both U and V should be increasing and concave
follows from the corresponding assumptions about U    e and Ve : Furthermore we
will assume in everything we do that U is at least three times di¤erentiable
everywhere. We refrain from making the corresponding assumption for the V
function to accommodate certain special cases.
    An even more general formulation, which allows all goods to be desired both
for their present and their future value, but with di¤ering weights, is developed
in the appendix. We show that it is possible to construct a U (x) function and
a V (z) function such that the choices made under these preferences are exactly
the same as those made under the original more complicated preferences. This
ought to be intuitive: essentially, x captures the part of the expenditure that
aligns with what the forward-looking self wants, while z is the part that is
wasted from the forward-looking self’s point of view, and it should not matter
that the wasted expenditure takes the form of excess spending on goods that
the forward-looking self also values (just not enough to justify that level of
spending).

2.2     Maximization
Individuals maximize this utility subject to their budget constraints. In the
…rst period they earn a deterministic "labor" income y 1 . They can save a part
of the income and invest it in some income generation function f (w1 ; ) where
w1 = y 1 x1 z 1 is the amount saved and is some random shock and f ( ; ) is
the future income generated. We call this an income generation function (rather
than a production technology) because we want to allow for the possibility that
the person may borrow or lend and may invest all or part of the money in a
production technology. Moreover he may or may not be constrained in terms
of how much he can borrow or lend (and at what rates). It is easily checked
that an f ( ; ) function that is increasing in w1 accommodates all these cases.
We will assume, in addition, that f ( ; ) is di¤erentiable and concave in w1 (but
   1 6 As a result, there are several underlying good-speci…c utility functions that can generate

the index utility described in (3). Thus while the separable utility formulation in (2) generates
it, other more complicated utility functions can also give rise to it.


                                                 9
not necessarily strictly concave). This rules out poverty traps that arise from
non-convexities in production (as in Galor-Zeira (1993)) or in the credit supply
function (as in Banerjee-Newman (1994)).
     In the second period, the person also gets a potentially uncertain "labor"
income y 2 ( 0 ): We assume that and 0 are independent random variables and
that 0 is realized in the second period before consumption decisions are taken.
     As de…ned above, maximizing U (x2 ) + V (z 2 ) subject to a budget constraint
x + z 2 = c2 ; and the conditions (x2 0; z 2 0) gives us functions x2 (c2 ) and
  2

z 2 (c2 ): Under the standard assumption that both U and V are strictly concave,
x2 (c2 ) and z 2 (c2 ) will be non-decreasing in c2 : If V is also di¤erentiable (in
addition to U being di¤erentiable), then x2 (c2 ) and z 2 (c2 ) will be di¤erentiable
and strictly increasing everywhere except perhaps where the non-negativity con-
straint binds. Using the fact that c2 = f (w1 ; ) + y 2 ( 0 ), we can write this as
x2 (f (w1 ; ) + y 2 ( 0 )): Also for future use, de…ne z 2 (x2 ) to be the function that
is de…ned by the …rst order condition for maximizing U (x2 ) + V (z 2 ) subject to
a budget constraint x2 + z 2 = c2 ; i.e. by the equation V 0 (z 2 ) = U 0 (x2 ); and de-
…ne W (c) to be the indirect utility function de…ned by maximizing U (x) + V (z)
subject to a budget constraint x + z = c; and the conditions (x               0; z    0):
Since both U and V are increasing and strictly concave, so is W (c):
     The decision-maker in the …rst period is assumed to be sophisticated and
therefore takes this function into account in making his …rst period choices. We
assume that in the …rst period he gets an income/endowment y 1 :
     Therefore in the …rst period, the decision problem is to maximize

                U (x1 ) + V (z 1 ) + E    ;       0   fU (x2 (f (w1 ; ) + y 2 ( 0 )))g

subject to
                                   w1 = y 1                 x1        z1
and
                                     x1               0; z 1         0:

2.3     First order conditions
                                              2             1
                                                                               dV (z 1 )
If an interior optimum exists and dxdf(f(w(w1 ; ;) )) and                       dz 1       exist at the optimum,
then the following conditions must hold.

                              dU (x1 )
                         =
                                dx1
                              dV (z 1 )
                         =
                                dz 1
                                        dU (x2 (f (w1 ; ) + y 2 ( 0 )))
                         =     E ; 0f
                                                    dx2
                                dx (f (w ; ) + y 2 ( 0 )) df (w1 ; )
                                   2       1
                                                                        g
                                         df (w1 ; )            dw1
                    w2   = f (w1 ; ) + y 1                      x1        z1


                                                       10
When the di¤erentiability condition fails something similar holds with appro-
priately de…ned left-hand and right-hand derivatives.
    These conditions can be rewritten in the more compact form:

                                                                  dU (x1 )                     dV (z 1 )
                                                                                       =
                                                                    dx1                         dz 1
                                                2 2         1      2 2
                                           dU (x (c )) df (w ; ) dx (c )                       dU (x1 )
                            E       ;   0f                               g             =                                     (4)
                                               dx2        dw1      dc2                          dx1

2.4       The Modi…ed Euler Equation
The condition
                                    dU (x2 (c2 ( ; 0 )) df (w1 ; ) dx2 (c2 ( ; 0 ))    dU (x1 )
                 E      ;   0   f             2               1             2
                                                                                    g=                                       (5)
                                          dx               dw            dc             dx1
where c2 ( ; 0 ) = f (w1 ; ) + y 2 ( 0 ) ought to be reminiscent of the standard
Euler equation in dynamic consumer maximization problems. Indeed, the only
                                                       2 2
di¤erence comes from the presence of the term dxdc(c2 ) : In our setting the
standard Euler equation would take the form

                                                     dU (x2 (c2 ( ; 0 ))) df (w1 ; )    dU (x1 )
                                    E    ;   0   f             2                1
                                                                                     g=          :
                                                            dx               dw          dx1
The di¤erence comes from the fact that there is some "dropped utility"— only
part of the total expenditure on period 2 goods is valued by the period 1 self.
           2 2
               ( ; 0 )))           1                                   2 2
Since dU (x (c
            dx2          and df (w
                                dw1
                                     ; )
                                         are always non-negative and dxdc(c2 ) 1; this
has the immediate implication that an observer who uses the modi…ed Euler
equation to estimate the decision-maker’s discount factor as if it was the stan-
                                                                                                      dU (x1 )

dard Euler equation (i.e. proxying it by the ratio b =                                                  dx1
                                                                                               dU (x2 (c2 ( ; 0 ))) df (w1 ; )
                                                                                                                                   );
                                                                                      E   ; 0f        dx2              dw1
                                                                                                                               g

would think that the person is more impatient than he actually is (b              ).
Moreover, it does not matter whether he uses an x or a z good to estimate
                                                                    2 2
                                                                        ( ; 0 )))
the discount factor since, from the within period maximization dU (x (c
                                                                     dx2          =
dV (z 2 (c2 ( ; 0 )))                            1             1

        dz 2   and dUdx(x1 ) = dVdx(x1 )
    In essence, the tempted consumer faces a temptation tax: he knows that
future resources will be wasted on consumption that he does not care about–
                   2 2
only a fraction dxdc(c2 ) of the marginal dollar that he pushes into the future
will be spent exactly as he wants. Sophistication about his own susceptibility
to temptations then leads him to incorporate this tax on spending now and in
particular, pushes him to be less forward-looking than he would be under full
commitment.17
  1 7 If people were entirely naive about their temptations, many of the e¤ects we emphasize

here would not go through, though it is possible that the mistakes that naive decision makers
make would sometimes have similar consequences. However our reading of the evidence is
that consumers are at least partially sophisticated about their self control problems–for one
they demand commitment devices. Indeed we believe most of our results would go through in


                                                                     11
   While our two period framework makes the derivation of the Modi…ed Euler
Equation easier, the basic insight behind it is very general, and it can be shown
that the T period version of our model, where in each period s the consumer
maximizes
                             XT
                                  t s
                                      U (xt ) + V (z s )
                                         t=s

subject to an intertemporal budget constraint similar to the one above, generates
a necessary condition

                              dU (xs+1 (cs+1 )) df (ws ; ) dxs+1 (cs+1 )     dU (xs )
              E   ;   0   f                                              g =          ;
                                   dxs+1           dws        dcs+1           dxs
which is of course exactly the period s version of the Modi…ed Euler Equation.18


3     Implications of the Modi…ed Euler Equation
The focus of this paper, as we say in the introduction, is on the implications
of the declining temptations. However some of the broader implications of the
Modi…ed Euler equation are interesting in themselves, even before we introduce
ideas relating to the shape of temptations and are this subject of this short
section. Some of the intuitions we develop in this section, like those on durables,
can be obtained, albeit perhaps less straightforwardly, from other models of self-
control problems. Others, like the discussion of "sin" taxes, is more unique to
our framework.

3.1     Demand for durables
One implication of the self-control problem that is at the heart of our paper is
that there may be some willingness to pay extra for illiquid durables. To see
this, let’s return to our original framework where there were multiple x goods,
each with an associated separable utility function. Assume now that there are
two x goods, x1 ; which is non-durable and x2 , which represents a durable. The
utility from x is u(x1 ); increasing and concave. On the other hand assume
that each unit of the durable purchased at time 1 pays ud units of additively
separable x utility in both periods 1 and 2 (constant marginal utility). In this
case, an individual would be willing to pay up to u0u(xd1 ) (1 + ) in x1 terms for
this one unit; because it is committed x consumption, it is discounted at rate .
On the other hand, he will make his savings decision based on a discount rate
 (1 z 0 (ct )). In other words, people appear to be more patient when we try to
infer their patience from their purchases of durables than if we focus on their
somewhat modi…ed versions if people were partially sophisticated in the sense that they have
moments of lucidity when they see their self-control problems clearly and try to act on them.
Examining these conjectures about partially sophisticated consumers analytically is left for
future work.
  1 8 Proof available from the authors. The only important caveats have to do with the di¤er-

entiability of the xs (cs ) function.


                                                     12
generic savings decisions. In other words, people who seem too impatient to
save even at high interest rates may still invest in consumption durables. The
logic is simple: income is taxed by temptations, consumer durables provide an
implicit commitment to x consumption.19

3.2     Demand for commitment
Empirical evidence suggests that individuals may be interested explicitly in
commitment devices. Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2004) provide a very nice il-
lustration of this. They show that individuals who already have bank accounts
take up and utilize a second "SEED" account whose primary advantage is illiq-
uidity: individuals cannot withdraw deposits at will but can only do so when a
(personally set) predetermined date or target amount is reached.
    Demand for commitment savings accounts is a natural consequence of self-
control problems. Understanding the exact structure of this account however,
requires an additional analytical step. In our model with constant tempta-
tions and a concave production technology, the ideal commitment device is
one which provides maximal consumption smoothing. On the other hand the
SEED accounts only permit withdrawals either when the amount in the ac-
count reaches a certain level or after a certain …xed date. In particular 70% of
savers set date-based goals and pick dates like Christmas, someone’s birthday
or graduation. The most obvious way to make this consistent with consumption
smoothing within our model is to assume that these are times when the value of
                                U 0 (x)
non-temptation consumption ( V t0 (z) ) is particularly large, which would imply,
                                  t
interestingly, that spending on festive occasions and “parties”is not temptation
spending.
    Amount-based goals, on the other hand, are naturally understood as an
implication of the declining temptation assumption that we will introduce in
the next section: To make sense of this case, we need to assume that there is
relatively less temptation when the amount being spent is larger. Absent such
an assumption, it is unclear why individuals would value transforming small
amounts of cash into a large amount. Relatedly there is now a literature that
argues that ROSCA’s should be interpreted as a way to commit to save (Gugerty
(2007) and Basu (2008)). This interpretation makes sense once again only with
declining temptations.

3.3     The e¤ect of "sin" taxes
As we observed, the key element that distinguishes this approach from the
standard Euler Equation based approach to savings is captured by the term
dx2 (c2 )                 dx2 (c2 )
  dc2 : A lower value of    dc2     corresponds to a bigger wedge between what
the period 1 self wants and what the period 2 self will choose and therefore less
savings.
  1 9 Note that this relies on our assumption that consumer durables provide additively sepa-

rable utility. To the extent that durables provide utility that can be substituted for by future
consumption choices, they would provide less commitment value and be demanded less.


                                              13
    In this environment, suppose the government announces a tax on goods like
cigarettes and alcohol, which is what is typically called a "sin" tax, and assume
that these are also temptation goods as we have de…ned them (i.e. z goods).
                                       2 2
What is the e¤ect of such a tax on dxdc(c2 ) and hence on savings, etc.?
    To introduce the idea of a tax, let the price of z goods in terms of x goods
be denoted by p: However since the price of x goods is still "one" in both peri-
ods, the Modi…ed Euler Equation is una¤ected by this change and the e¤ective
                                          2 2
discount factor is still determined by dxdc(c2 ) : To study the e¤ect of a "sin" tax
                                                                             2   2
we want to know how an increase in p in period 2, a¤ects dxdc(c2 ) :
   To get at this, observe that the within second period budget constraint
should now be written as x2 + pz 2 = c2 : As a result, the allocation of c2 between
x2 and z 2 ; will be determined by the condition

                                    dU (x2 )   dV (z 2 )
                                p            =           :
                                     dx2        dz 2
Di¤erentiating this condition with respect to c2 ; gives us:

                                          dx2              dz 2
                            pU 00 (x2 )     2
                                              = V 00 (z 2 ) 2
                                          dc               dc
where U 00 and V 00 are the second derivatives of U and V; and from the budget
constraint we have that
                                 dx2     dz 2
                                     + p      = 1:
                                 dc2     dc2
Solving these two together we get

                             dx2         00 2
                                     2 U (x ) dx
                                                     2
                                 + p                   =1
                             dc2       V 00 (z 2 ) dc2

which tell us that
                     dx2         1                               1
                       2
                         =          00 (x2 ) =
                                                        RU pU 0 (x2 ) pz 2
                     dc    1 + p2 U
                                  V 00 (z 2 )  1+       RV V 0 (z 2 ) x2

where RU and RV are the coe¢ cients of relative risk-aversion corresponding to
                                  0
                                    (x2 )
U and V at x2 and z 2 : Since pU                    2
                               V 0 (z 2 ) = 1; and x = c
                                                         2
                                                           pz 2 this simpli…es to

                               dx2                 1
                                   =            RU pz 2
                                                             :
                               dc2   1+         RV c2 pz 2

Now assume that both U and V represent CRRA utility functions, though the
coe¢ cients of risk aversion do not have to be the same. Then the only place p
                               2                     pz
enters the expression for dxdc2 is through the term x : It follows that a sin tax
(which raises p) will reduce savings in this model as long as the demand for z 2
is less than unit elastic (so that pz 2 goes up when p goes up).


                                              14
    It has long been argued that "sin" taxes tend to be regressive. Here we
suggest that they may also increase the level of present bias in people’s choices
and therefore possibly also a¤ect savings behavior. The key insight is that
sin taxes in this model have two e¤ects. On the one hand they can reduce the
amount spent on the temptation good. This makes sense if the temptation good
has intrinsic ill e¤ects–such as long run health consequences–something we do
not have in our model. On the other hand they can also increase temptation
good’s share of expenditure and thereby generate e¤ects on savings.


4    The Shape of Temptation
The key new idea in our framework is that temptation might have a speci…c
shape. This shape of the temptation is captured by the shape of the z(c) (or
x(c)) function. The next result shows that for any given U (x) function, the z(c)
function can in principle take any shape that we happen to pick for it, as long
as it is increasing, non-negative and z(c) c:

Proposition 1 Assume that the U function is known and …xed. Let z(c) and
x(c) be a pair of non-negative valued, strictly increasing functions de…ned on c 2
[0; C] for some C > 0; such that z(c)+x(c) = c: Then there exists an increasing,
di¤ erentiable and strictly concave function V de…ned on [0; z(c)] such that the
assumed z(c) and x(c) functions are the result of maximizing U (x)+V (z) subject
to a budget constraint x + z = c; and the conditions (x 0; z 0)
Proof. De…ne the function g(z) = x(h(z)) where the function h(z) is the inverse
of the function z(c);which exists because of the strict monotonicity of z: Then
de…ne                                 Z    z
                             V (z) =           U 0 (g (y))dy
                                       0

Clearly V 0 (z) = U 0 (g(z)) > 0. It is concave because when z increases g(z)
increases and U 0 (g(z)) decreases.

    Note that we did not require that z(c) be di¤erentiable, and for that reason,
V may not be twice di¤erentiable.
    With this result in hand, the rest of the paper studies the implication of
di¤erent shapes for the z(c) function in the model of consumption and savings
introduced above. The key distinction, it turns out, is between z 0 (c) decreasing
and z 0 (c) constant or more generally, non-decreasing. Constant z 0 (c) means
that irrespective of income, individuals face the same tax. Since z(0) = 0;
this means that the availability (and utility) of temptation goods scales linearly
with the consumption bundle. Decreasing z 0 (c) on the other hand means that as
individuals consume more, temptations are a smaller fraction of consumption:
z(c)
  c is declining with income.




                                           15
4.1       Declining and non-declining temptations
The key advantage of our framework is precisely its ability to easily capture
temptations that vary with the level of income and in particular, the declining
temptation case. In the Modi…ed Euler Equation (5), the temptation tax is em-
            2 2           2 2                                 2 2
bodied by dzdc(c2 ) = 1 dxdc(c2 ) : for every dollar spent, dzdc(c2 ) is the tax imposed
by the period 2 self. Whether the tax declines with overall consumption there-
                              2 2
fore depends on whether dzdc(c2 ) decreases or increases with income. Speci…cally
      2   2
if dzdc(c2 ) decreases with total consumption, that is to say if z 2 (c2 ) is concave,
the impact of the tax decreases as consumption rises. Put di¤erently, this o¤ers
an intuitive way to model the idea that self control problems scale slower than
incomes. In the rest of the paper we will contrast this case which we will call the
diminishing temptation case (DTC) with the alternative case where temptation
                        2 2
does not decline ( dzdc(c2 ) is constant or increasing with c2 ) which we will call
the non-diminishing temptation case (NDTC). Note that NDTC includes the
case where z 2 (c2 ) = 0; i.e. there are no temptations. Obviously there are many
other cases where z 2 is neither convex nor concave everywhere which fall into
neither of these categories. Our results would then apply for local changes in
incomes/consumption but not otherwise.
    What does it mean for z 2 (c2 ) to be concave? The following result o¤ers an
alternative and perhaps more intuitive characterization:

Proposition 2 Assuming that V and U are three times di¤ erentiable every-
where and z 2 (c2 ) is twice di¤ erentiable everywhere. Then z 2 (c2 ) is strictly
(weakly) concave everywhere if and only if Ve (x2 ) = V (z 2 (x2 )) is a strict (weak)
concave transform of U (x2 ):
Proof. In appendix.

     In other words our condition is equivalent to assuming that V is more concave
than U in this speci…c sense: So, for example, if both of them are CRRA, then
we are asking the coe¢ cient of relative "risk-aversion" on V to be greater than
that on U:
     Why should we believe that z 2 (c2 ) is concave or equivalently V is more
concave than U ? It is probably worth saying to start out that to simplify the
exposition we are ignoring the one obvious case where this assumption probably
fails–that is for the people who are at the margin of starvation. For those people
it is plausible that the …rst units of an x good like nutritious food are probably
much more valuable than anything else, and for that reason it is natural to think
of z 2 (c2 ) being convex around zero consumption. By ignoring this possibility we
are focusing on people who are slightly above the starvation threshold. For such
people there are a number of arguments for why z 2 (c2 ) should be concave.20
     The …rst is based on the idea that most temptations are essentially visceral,
re‡ecting desires that are rooted in our physiology (things like the the desire
  2 0 Which amounts to saying that the overall z 2 (c2 ) function is probably S-shaped, with a

point of in‡exion near zero.



                                             16
for sex, the craving for sweets and the love of fatty foods), and for that reason,
relatively insensitive to the variety and range of quality that modern market
economies o¤er (this should be true, for example, if the relevant physiological
structures evolved in a world where the set of consumption choices was quite
limited). As a result it is hard to spend a lot of money on temptation goods
without hitting satiation.
    Second, a lot of the goods that people look forward to owning tend to be
indivisible and therefore relatively expensive (televisions, means of transporta-
tion, a house). In other words, a lot of the most attractive x goods are only
available to those who can spend enough on them, whereas z goods are usually
divisible and therefore available to everyone. Therefore it is possible to spend
much larger amounts on x and still not reach satiation.21
    Third, for the family decision-making example suggested above, it may be
easier for a rich person to say no to a relative who wants a few hundred dollars
for starting a new business, than for a poor person to refuse one who wants just
a couple of dollars for a meal.22
    Finally one can make the case that for most really expensive goods, like
a sports car or a house, are not really available for an impulse purchase in
the same sense in which a cup of sugary tea or a trinket is— there are always
multiple options that need to be examined and weighed, and processes to go
through (have someone check out the deed for the house, inspection) and all
of that ensures that there is time for re‡ection and reconsideration. In other
words, there is a stage in the purchase of a house or a car that involves paying
a cost now (talk to lawyers, arrange credit) for a future bene…t. In this sense
they have to be in part x goods.
    In any case, whether this assumption holds is an empirical question. One
tantalizing piece of evidence comes from Deaton and Subramanian’s (1996) work
on food expenditures. They show that in rural Maharashtra, the poorest decile
of rural households spends 12.2% of their total expenditures on sugar, oils and
fats. These are goods that could plausibly be thought to have some temptation
component23 (or at very the least to have more temptation value than cereals
or pulses). For the richest decile, who are also by no means rich, even by Indian
standards, this number is 8.7%. While there surely are other temptation goods,
  2 1 Note that this is not inconsistent with U ( ) being concave. Formally we assume that

there are a continuum of indivisible x goods indexed by k; such that good xk costs x(k) and
generates utility u(x(k)). We then de…ne U (x) = maxk fu(xk ); x(k) x) to be the utility from
x expenditures. It is easy to specify conditions under which U (x) will be concave. Of course,
our framework could be extended to the case where the U (x) function is in fact non-convex
(which would be the case if there only a few isolated goods that are worth buying) but our
results do not rely on the non-convexity. Also see the discussion of non-convexities in the next
section.
  2 2 It is true that there is a countervailing force: The richer the person is, the more relatives

probably descend on him, and even all his is willing to give them is a few pennies, they do
add up. However the point when the list of everyone who can legitimately make a claim on
him cannot take too long to be exhausted, and thereafter the fraction of the marginal dollar
going to them will diminish.
  2 3 In Section 6 we return to the central issue of how one might be able to determine which

goods are temptation goods.



                                                17
this declining fraction illustrates our core assumption. Another interesting cat-
egory is leisure, which is plausibly, at least in part, a z good: There is some
evidence that leisure hours decrease with income (Banerjee and Du‡o (2007)).
For example, in rural Indonesia, those living at less than a $1 a day work 34:6
hours a week while those living on 2 to 4 dollars a day work 40:8 hours.24
    There are two other ways to test the framework. First, in the next sections we
present a set of direct and testable consequences of z 2 (c2 ) being concave. Testing
them is a way to jointly test our model and this assumption. A second approach,
which we take up in Section 6 is more direct. We describe how, using household
consumption data and a set of choice experiments, one could plausibly determine
the set of goods that are relatively more tempting. Examining whether these
goods are a decreasing share of the budgets of the rich allows us to directly test
the assumption that z 2 (c2 ) is concave.

4.2     Relation to hyperbolic discounting
There are two distinct ways to understand how this model is related to the
hyperbolic discounting model. The …rst is to start with the hyperbolic dis-
counting model and to extend it to the case of two goods. A simple model
with two goods and good-speci…c hyperbolic discounting assumes that the …rst
period self maximizes
                                    2                          0                0 2
         U (x1 ) +     U (x2 ) +        U (x3 ) + V (z 1 ) +       V (z 2 ) +         V (z 3 );

while the second period self maximizes
                                                               0
                        U (x2 ) +       U (x3 ) + V (z 2 ) +       V (z 3 ):

Notice that time inconsistency here comes from two sources: The conventional
hyperbolic e¤ect, captured by the fact that the weight that period 2 self puts
on period 3’s consumption ( and 0 ) is less than the weight that period 1
would like him to place ( for both goods); but also a new e¤ect, represented
by the fact that while period 2 self places the same weight on U (x2 ) and V (z 2 );
period 1 self puts unequal weights on them, since is not equal to 0 :25 But
that makes it obvious that to generate time inconsistent behavior we do not
need the third period, since the new e¤ect makes no reference to period 3.
Since we want to emphasize goods speci…c discount factors in any case, this
o¤ers us a convenient short-cut–we can drop the third period and analyze the
problem in a two period setting. In addition, in the appendix we show that for
speci…c U and V functions, with three or more periods, we can exactly recreate
the horizon-speci…c discount factors of the hyperbolic model solely from good
speci…c discount factors.
    Another way to understand how our model relates to the hyperbolic model
is to ask the reverse question. Suppose one did not explicitly model that some
  2 4 While these di¤erences are large, they are obviously not large enough for hours di¤erences

alone to produce the income di¤erences.
  2 5 There is a third e¤ect, which is the equivalent of the second e¤ect in period 3.




                                                18
goods are more tempting than others. Instead, suppose one asks directly in
a standard hyperbolic model “What condition generates greater time inconsis-
tency for the poor?” In other words, what is the analogue of the declining tax
for the hyperbolic discounting model?
    To answer this question we need a model with three periods, since the hy-
perbolic part only kicks in when there are more than two periods. Therefore let
the decision maker maximize
                                                                 2
                                    U (c1 ) +       U (c2 ) +        U (c3 )

subject to the budget constraint

                                          c1 + c2 + c3 = w:26

As is well-known (from Harris-Laibson (2001) for example), the optimal con-
sumption path for this decision-maker is characterized by the following …rst
order condition
                      U 0 (c1 ) = U 0 (c2 )[1 c02 (w2 )]
where c2 (w2 ) is de…ned by the second period decision maker’s …rst order condi-
tion
                          U 0 (c2 (w2 )) = U 0 (w2 c2 )
and w2 = w c1 :
   The equivalent of what we called the tax before is the term 1     c02 (w2 ): We
                                               0
are interested in the conditions under which c2 (w2 ) is decreasing in w2 : From
the second period decision-maker’s …rst order condition,

                                                             U 00 (c3 )
                                    c02 (w2 ) =                           :
                                                  U 00 (c2 ) + U 00 (c3 )

Di¤erentiation again yields

                c002 (w2 )
                                1
           =                                 f U 000 (c3 )(1 c02 (w2 ))[U 00 (c2 ) +         U 00 (c3 )]
                [U 00 (c    + U 00 (c3 )]2
                           2)
                     U (c3 )[U 000 (c2 )c02 (w2 ) + U 000 (c3 )(1 c02 (w2 ))]g
                           00

                    U 000 (c3 )(1 c02 (w2 ))U 00 (c2 )      U 00 (c3 )U 000 (c2 )c02 (w2 )
           =                            00              00
                                      [U (c2 ) + U (c3 )]2
                                                   000                000
It follows that, c002 (w2 ) < 0; i¤ [UU00 (c(c33)])2 < [UU00 (c2(c)]22) : The hyperbolic model
equivalent of U utility being less concave than V utility is a property regarding
how U 000 (c) changes relative to the square of U 00 (c). Not only is this condition
harder to interpret, it is harder to imagine how one would empirically validate
it. In the rest of the paper we therefore focus on good-speci…c temptations.
  2 6 In   other words we assume that the gross interest rate is 1.




                                                         19
5      Implications of declining temptations
5.1     Attributions of Impatience
A simple observation trivially follows from our key assumption. Recall that
in subsection 2.4 we had de…ned b to be the discount factor that an observer
would (mistakenly) attribute to our decision-maker, if he assumes a model with
no dropped utility. In the case where there is no uncertainty,

                                     b = [1    dz 2
                                                    ]:
                                               dc2
Since z 2 is assumed to be concave as a function of c2 , this tells us that those who
are richer, in the sense of consuming more in the second period, will appear to
be more patient to the observer despite the fact that everyone has the same :
As will be shown later, second period consumption is monotonic in …rst period
total income, and hence this could also be stated in terms of …rst period income
(and also in terms of second period income).27
    This framework, therefore, suggests an intuitive re-interpretation of the com-
mon observation that the poor seem to be more myopic than the non-poor that
goes back at least to Irving Fisher (1932). This is a direct consequence of declin-
ing temptations, which, it is worth emphasizing, does not say that the poor are
more tempted. Indeed the amount spent on temptation goods over the lifetime
is strictly increasing in initial wealth; it is just that it takes a smaller fraction
of total consumption to satisfy one’s temptations at high levels of consump-
tion, which is why the same failures (giving in to temptations) have greater
consequences when poor.28

5.2     Chaining
For simplicity, we have focused on the two-period case, but having two periods
masks a magni…cation that happens when the horizon is longer. This magni…-
cation, which we refer to as chaining, is especially important for quantifying the
importance of temptation. Here we add a third period to illustrate this chaining
e¤ect. The model extends to 3 periods in the most obvious way; in addition, to
keep thing simple, we assume that the person starts with an endowment of w1
and can only save at at the gross interest rate of 1:
    We solve through backward induction. The third period self simply maxi-
mizes U (x3 ) + V (z3 ) subject to x3 + z3 = w3 = w2 c2 : This de…nes x3 (w3 ) =
x3 (w2 c2 ). The second period self now maximizes U (x2 (c2 )) + V (z2 (c2 )) +
 U (x3 (w2 c2 )); which gives us c2 (w2 ). Given the solution to this problem, the
…rst period decision maker maximizes
                                                            2
    U (x1 (c1 )) + V (z1 (c1 )) + U (x2 (c2 (w1   c1 )) +       U (x3 (w2   c2 (w1   c1 )))
  2 7 We put it in terms of second period consumption because, as will emerge, …rst period

consumption is not necessarily monotonic in …rst period wealth.
  2 8 Note that although we do not model it here, one could include a self-control technology

here. In that language, we would say that the poor require greater self-control since they
would need to resist giving into the same temptations more than the rich.


                                             20
   In deciding how much to consumer, period 1 self trades o¤ utility today from
consumption (U (x1 (c1 )) + V (z1 (c1 )) and the future utility that savings would
provide. De…ne Wu ( ) to be this future utility:

         Wu (w1     c1 ) = U (x2 (c2 (w1         c1 )) + U (x3 (w2          c2 (w1        c1 )))

The marginal bene…t of savings is given by di¤erentiation:

                         Wu0 (w1       c1 )
                    =    U (x2 )x2 (c2 )c02 (w1 c1 )
                           0        0

                         + U 0 (x3 )x03 (c3 )[1 c02 (w1 c1 )]
                    =    U 0 (x3 )x03 (c3 )
                         [ U 0 (x3 )x03 (c3 ) U 0 (x2 )x02 (c2 )]c02 (w1          c1 )

where c3 = w2 c2 (w1 c1 ):
   But from the …rst order condition for the period 2 self’s maximization,

                                  U 0 (x2 ) = U 0 (x3 )x03 (c3 )

which means the above expression can be rewritten as

               Wu0 (w1     c1 )    =        U 0 (x3 )x03 (c3 )
                                            U 0 (x2 )(1      x02 (c2 ))c02 (w1     c1 )

Compare this to the case where there is only one future period in the slightly
arti…cial sense that the period 1 self controls c2 (as well as c1 ) but not x2 or x3 :
In this case, the reward to saving is given by the function

                  Wu (w1       c1 ) = max U (x2 (c2 ) + U (x3 (w2                c2 ))
                                       c2

    From the envelope theorem we have the reward for an extra dollar of saving
in this case is
                        Wu0 (w1 c1 ) = U 0 (x3 )x03 (c3 ):
Comparing this expression with the previous one makes clear that the reward
for saving is less in the case where the period 1 self faces two independent future
decision-makers than in the case where he faces one.
    This is the sense in which there is "chaining" of temptations: the period 1
self is more tempted in the three period case because he knows that the period
2 self is also tempted, and will "waste" some of the resources that reach him
before they get to the period 3 self.

5.3    Consumption smoothing
One of the most robust predictions of the standard model of savings is that an
increase in future earnings (y 2 ) that leaves the return on investment una¤ected
will reduce today’s savings and increase today’s consumption (c1 ): This is the


                                                 21
direct result of the desire for consumption smoothing, induced by diminishing
marginal utility. An increase in future income generates a desire to spend more
both today and tomorrow. In our model, however, this need not be the case
                                                                              2
because there is a natural countervailing force. Notice that as y 2 rises, dx
                                                                            dc2
goes up and as a result, the right-hand-side of the Modi…ed Euler equation
could potentially even go up: The increased spending by the future self on x2
increases today’s self’s desire to transfer income to the future and may even
outweigh the e¤ect of diminishing marginal utility.

Proposition 3 Assume that second period income, y 2 ; is deterministic. Under
                                                         dc1
NDTC, consumption today is increasing in future income: dy 2 > 0: Under DTC
                                                          1
                                                dc                           2
this need not be the case i.e. we might observe dy 2 < 0 over some range of y :

Moreover we will only observe this pattern for people for whom y 1 and y 2 are
su¢ ciently small.
Proof. Take the Modi…ed Euler equation for this case

                       df (w1 ; ) dU (x2 (c2 ( ))) dx2 (c2 ( ))
                 E f                                            g = U 0 (x1 )
                          dw1          dx2             dc2
where c2 ( ) = f (y 1 x1 z 1 ; )+y 2 : In the NDTC, for any value of an increase
in y 2 keeping c1 = x1 + z 1 …xed, increases x2 = c2 ( ) and therefore depresses
                                                                            2 2
U 0 (x2 (c2 ( ))) for every realization of : Moreover it either depresses dx dc
                                                                             (c ( ))
                                                                               2
                                                                          1
or leaves it unchanged, for every realization of : Since df (w   dw1
                                                                    ; )
                                                                         is unchanged
for each realization of , the left hand side is now less than the right hand side.
Therefore x1 has to go up to restore equality, and since U 0 (x1 ) = V 0 (z 1 ); z 1
must follow suit. Therefore a higher y 2 must be associated with a higher c1 :
                               2 2
    In the DTC, i.e. where dx dc(c ( ))
                                  2     is increasing; the basic logic is very similar
except that it is no longer obvious that the right hand side goes down. To see
this, take this case where U (x) = log x: In that case, the product

                                   dU (x2 (c2 ( ))) dx2 (c2 ( ))
                                          dx2           dc2
                                                 2 2
                                        1      dx (c ( ))
                              =                           :
                                   x2 (c2 ( ))    dc2
                                                                      2   2
                                                            1    dx (c )
Whether x1 goes up or goes down turns on whether x2 (c        2)   dc2   is increasing or
decreasing as a function of c : A su¢ cient condition for this is that x2 (c2 ) is log-
                                 2

convex for c2 max f (y 1 ; ) + y 2 ; where y 2 is the ceiling of the relevant range
of y 2 : It is easy to check that there are log-convex functions that are non-negative
valued and satisfy x2 (c2 ) c2 on any given …nite range of c2 : Therefore from
proposition 1 we can …nd a V (z) function which makes x2 (c2 ) is log-convex. In
such cases c1 will be decreasing in y 2 :
    Finally it is clear from the argument above that in order for c1 to be decreas-
ing in y 2 , x2 (c2 ) has to be su¢ ciently convex to outweigh the natural concavity
of the utility function. However since x2 (c2 ) is bounded above by c2 ; there is


                                             22
a limit to how convex x2 (c2 ) can be on a unbounded domain— for large enough
values of c2 ; x2 (c2 ) must be approximately linear. Therefore c1 can only be de-
creasing in y 2 for su¢ ciently low values of y 1 and y 2 (since c2 is increasing in
y 1 and y 2 ):
    This is a striking conclusion. It tells us that those who are su¢ ciently poor
might actually react to the prospect of future income growth by beginning to
save more. Conversely savings may actually be lower in exactly those times when
cash will be needed the most in the future: faced with falling future incomes,
people may boost consumption. This o¤ers a possible interpretation of the idea
that aspirations matter (Ray (2002) makes the case that economists need to
take aspirations more seriously).
    This result can be understood from a di¤erent angle, one that o¤ers an
intuition that helps us understand other results below. Consider an individual
with a time-consistent utility function u(c1 ) + u(c2 ). Suppose however, that
instead of a investment technology that earns f (w1 ), he has only access to a
technology that pays a return f (w1 )x0 (f (w1 ) + y 2 ). Consider now the impact
of an increase in y 2 . There is the usual consumption smoothing motive that
encourages an increase in c1 . But here, however, there’s an additional motive:
the investment technology becomes more attractive: If the latter motive is strong
enough, we might see the opposite of consumption smoothing.
    Note that this is a result we could also get from a model where there are no
self-control problems but there are non-convexities in consumption: It comes
from the fact that from the point of view period 1 self, the marginal utility of a
dollar tomorrow goes up when he spends more tomorrow. On the other hand,
when there are self-control problems it can happen absent any non-convexities in
consumption, The same applies to the next two set of results–on poverty traps,
precautionary savings and investment, which are essentially applications of the
logic developed in this section–but not the results in the last two sub-sections,
which are on the supply and demand for credit, where the self-control plays an
essential role.

5.4    Poverty Traps
This link between future income and savings has implications for …rst period
income as well. First period income determines how much can be left for future
selves. But since the savings invested for future consumption at time 1 (w1 ) and
income at time 2 (y 2 ) have similar e¤ects, it is clear that a rise in y 1 could, in
principle, have the same e¤ect as an increase in y 2 : If individuals start out with
more income/wealth (which in this model are the same thing), they will be able
to leave more to future selves. But this potentially creates a feedback e¤ect:
more wealth for time 2 means that x0 is higher in that period, which creates an
even greater desire to leave wealth to time 2. This feedback e¤ect can be the
source of a poverty trap:
Proposition 4 Assume that there are no shocks i.e. that both 1 and 2 are
constants. Then as long as we are in NTDC, c2 will be a continuous function


                                         23
of y 1 : On the other hand in DTC, there may exist a y 1 , 0 < y 1 < 1 such that
c2 jumps discontinuously upward at y 1 :

   Before we come to the main result, it is useful to observe that c2 is always
monotonic increasing with respect to y 1 and therefore the fact that c2 jumps
upwards if it jumps is automatic.

Lemma 5 c2 is monotonically increasing as a function of y 1 :

Proof. (of Lemma 5) To see this, suppose to the contrary that there exists y01
and y11 such that c2 (y01 ) > c2 (y11 ) but y01 < y11 : Let the values c1 corresponding
to this strategy be c1 (y01 ) and c1 (y11 ): Clearly c1 (y01 ) < c1 (y11 ): Now consider
an alternative consumption strategy for the person at y01 where he consumes
                                                             c2 (y01 ) c2 (y11 )
c2 (y11 ) in the second period and sets e  c10 = c1 (y01 ) +          R          : This must be
dominated by what he actually chooses which implies that

                                  c10 )
                               W (e         W (c1 (y01 ))
                                 U (x2 (c2 (y01 )))           U (x2 (c2 (y11 )))

Where
                             W (c) = max U (x) + V (c                     x)
                                            x

On the other hand, the person at y11 clearly prefers the pair fc1 (y11 ); c2 (y11 )g to
                                                c2 (y01 ) c2 (y11 )
the alternative of consuming e  c11 = c1 (y11 )          R          in the …rst period and
c2 (y01 ) in the second. Therefore

                               W (c1 (y11 ))         c11 )
                                                  W (e
                                 U (x2 (c2 (y01 )))           U (x2 (c2 (y11 )))
                                  c10 )
                               W (e         W (c   1
                                                       (y01 ))
                                                         c2 (y 1 ) c2 (y 1 )
However since ec10 c1 (y01 ) = c1 (y11 ) e
                                         c11 = 0
                                                 R
                                                   1
                                                     and c1 (y01 ) < c1 (y11 ); this
contradicts the strict concavity of W:
Proof. (of Proposition 4) Consider the maximization problem:

                   U (x1 ) + V (z 1 ) + U (x2 (f (y 1             x1       z 1 ) + y 2 ))

subject to
                                       x1       0; z 1       0:
    As long as we are in NDTC, so that x2 (c2 ) is weakly concave, the strict
concavity of U ( ) and the weak concavity of f ( ) (and the fact that these are all
strictly increasing functions) guarantees that U (x2 (f (y 1 x1 z 1 ) + y 2 )) is a
strictly convex (and decreasing) function of x1 and z 1 : U (x1 ) and V (z 1 ) are also
strictly concave. These conditions together guarantee that we have a strictly
convex maximization problem, which tells us that the maximizers, x1 and z 1 ;
are always unique and vary continuously as a function of the parameters of the
problem, y 1 and y 2 : Hence the result.


                                                 24
    In DTC, on the other hand, this may not be true. To simplify the construc-
tion assume that f (y 1 x1 z 1 ) = R(y 1 x1 z 1 );with R > 1: Also set
y 2 = 0:
    The way we will analyze this problem is by looking at how c2 c1 behaves as
a function of y 1 : Clearly if c2 is a continuous function of y 1 ; so is c1 and c2 c1 :
    Choose an x2 (c2 ) function which is convex (corresponding to the fact that
                                                                               2
we are in DTC) such that there exists a c ; 1 > c > 0, with R dxdc(c2 ) = 1:
                     2
Because R dxdc(c2 ) = 1; if c2 (y 1 ) = c ; then c1 (y 1 ) = c2 (y 1 ) = c : However for
this to be true, x1 = x2 (c ); must satisfy the second order condition

                                                  dx2 (c ) 2             d2 x2 (c )
           U 00 (x1 ) + R2 U 00 (x2 (c ))[             2
                                                          ] + RU 0 (x1 )                 0
                                                    dc                    d(c2 )2
                                        2
Since x1 = x2 (c ) and R dxdc(c2            )
                                                = 1; this expression can be rewritten as

                                     U 0 (x2 (c )) 2       U 00 (x2 (c ))
                         0                        [fx (c )                g( + 1)
                                        x2 (c )            U 0 (x2 (c ))
                                                    d2 x2 (c )
                                     x2 (c )         d(c2 )2
                                   +         fc     dx2 (c )
                                                                 g]
                                       c
                                                       dc2
            00   2
 x2 (c ) UU 0 (x
              (x (c
                2 (c
                         ))
                         ))   is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion of the U function and
                                                  d2 x2 (c )
                                                    d(c2 )2
measures its degree of concavity. c                dx2 (c )
                                                               is a similar measure of convexity for
                                                     dc2
x2 (c ): This condition therefore requires that the x function is not so convex as
to overwhelm the concavity of U:
    It is also clear that we can choose the x2 (c2 ) function such that it satis…es
the conditions of proposition 1, but violates the second order condition above
at c2 = c : Which means that the maximization problem has a local minimum
at c : c cannot be the value of c2 (y 1 ) for any y 1 :
    Therefore since c2 (y 1 ) is an increasing function, either c2 is discontinuous
or c2 (y 1 ) ! c < c as y 1 ! 1: But the latter case is impossible as long as we
assume that
                              dx2 (c2 )
                                        > " > 0 for c2 c
                                dc2
and
                                U 0 (x) ! 0 as x ! 1:
This follows from the fact that if c2 remains bounded above by c; x1 ! 1 as
y 1 ! 1; and therefore the right hand side of the modi…ed Euler equation goes
to 0 (because of our assumption that U 0 (x) ! 0 as x ! 1) while the left hand
side remains bounded away from zero.
    It follows that under these conditions, c2 (y 1 ) must have a discontinuity and
"jump over" c :
    This result reinforces the discussion earlier about the myopia of the poor.
Notice that here two individuals with identical discount rates but with di¤erent


                                                      25
initial wealth levels can end up with very di¤erent levels of apparent patience:
the initially poor agent will appear to be impatient and the initially rich one
will appear to be patient.

5.5     Precautionary savings
With standard preferences, it is well-known that an increase in income uncer-
tainty in the second period (i.e. a mean preserving spread in the distribution of
y 2 ) will increase savings in a safe asset as long the single-period indirect utility
function exhibits prudence. In our environment the single-period indirect utility
function would be given by

                              W (c) = max U (x) + V (c          x):
                                          x

If we were to assume that there is a safe technology for transferring wealth
across time (f 2 (w1 ; ) = Rw1 , where R is a constant), the condition for there to
be precautionary savings would be W 000 (c) > 0: A su¢ cient condition for that
is that both U and V have non-negative third derivatives (and at least one of
them is strictly positive).
    With our kind of preferences this condition is no longer su¢ cient. To see
this, recall the modi…ed Euler equation for this case:

                              dU (x2 (c2 ( 0 ))) dx2 (c2 ( 0 ))
                     RE 0 f                                     g = U 0 (x1 ):
                                   dx2               dc2
Following the logic of precautionary savings in the standard model, it is clear
that in this case, a mean preserving spread in c2 will lead to lower x1 if the
function
                                     dU (x(c)) dx((c))
                             H(c) =
                                        dx        dc
is convex as a function of c: Taking derivatives twice (assuming di¤erentiability)
we can write
             d3 U (x) dx((c)) 3 d2 U (x(c)) d2 x((c)) dx((c)) 2 dU (x(c)) d3 x((c))
H 00 (c) =           [       ] +3                    [       ] +                    :
               dx3      dc          dx2        dc2      dc         dx        dc3
Several things become clear from this expression. First we do have the standard
precautionary savings e¤ect coming in as long as dU (x(c))
                                                        dx   is convex as a function
of c : this is captured by the …rst term in the above expression, which is positive if
dU (x(c))
   dx     is convex. However, there are two additional, potentially countervailing
e¤ects. One comes from the fact that dx(c) dc may not be convex as a function of c:
This is what the last term says. The other comes from the correlation between
dU (x(c))
   dx     and dx(c)
                  dc which may not be positive: This is the middle term above.
    Indeed under DTC, dU (x(c))
                              dx     and dx(c)
                                           dc   move in opposite directions when c
goes up and hence the middle term is always negative. This has a very intuitive
explanation: The whole point of precautionary savings is to raise x consumption
levels in the state of the world when c2 is particularly low. But in the DTC,


                                               26
dx(c)
 dc   is particularly low when c is low, and as a result, saving more does not
help very much in terms of raising x consumption in when c is low. Therefore,
the DTC partially defeats the purpose of saving more to protect against low
c2 states.29 Notice that the discussion so far has presumed di¤erentiability of
x(c):In particular we will focus on the case where there is no poverty trap. Hence
the failure of NDTC consumers to hold precautionary savings is independent of
the poverty trap proposition above.
    To summarize, we have the following Proposition:

Proposition 6 Assume that the distribution of y 2 is described by a family
G(y; ) which has support on [y,y], with increases in the scalar representing
mean preserving spreads in the distribution of y: De…ne x1 ( ) to be the optimal
choice of x1 for each value of ; and assume that in an open neighborhood of ;
N ; x1 is di¤ erentiable as a function of : De…ne c2 (y 2 ; ) = R(y 1 x1 ( ))+y 2
and assume that for 2 N ; the values of c2 (y 2 ; ) fall into the non-empty in-
                                                                        3
terval [c; c]: Then under NDTC, as long as U 000 (x(c)) 0 and d x((c))    dc3     0 for
c 2 [c; c]; for any 2 N > ; x1 ( ) < x1 ( ); i.e. a mean preserving spread
in the distribution of y 2 reduces x1 . On the other hand under DTC, even if
d3 x((c))
   dc3       0; U 000 (x(c)) 0; and V 000 (z(c)) 0 for c 2 [c; c];it is possible that a
mean preserving spread in the distribution of y 2 raises x1 :

Proof. The proof that under NDTC, …rst period consumption goes down when
y 2 becomes more uncertain, is exactly the same as the proof of a precautionary
demand for savings as long as the function H(c) = dU (x(c))
                                                     dx
                                                            dx((c))
                                                              dc ; de…ned above,
                                                                                        3
is convex. From the expression derived above, this is always true when d x((c))
                                                                         dc3
0 for c 2 [c; c]:
    To prove that this condition does not guarantee the same result under DTC,
consider the following example.
    Let U (x) = ln x and x(c) be described

                        x(c)   =      c; c        c; 0 <       <1
                                          c
                        x(c) =      Ae ; c > c > c
                        x(c) =      ec    ; c c; 0 < e < 1;         >0

   To ensure x(c) is di¤erentiable, continuous and increasing everywhere, as-
sume that
                                                           c
                                       c = Ae
                                                               c
                                              =         Ae
                                                           c
                                     e c = Ae
                                                               c
                                      e       =         Ae
 2 9 On   the other hand, the presence of this term also means that in the NDTC, we can get a
                                          d3 U (x)                       d2 U (x(c))         d2 x((c))
precautionary savings e¤ect even when dx3 = 0; since under NDTC              dx2
                                                                                       and      dc2
are both negative and hence the product is positive.



                                                   27
which together imply that c has to be equal to 1 and that                            < e : Under these
assumptions
                         dx(c)
                                = x for c < c2 < c:
                           dc
             2   2
Therefore dxdc(c2 ) is increasing as long as c2 is between c < c2 < c; and constant
otherwise. We assume that at          the distribution of y 2 is such that c < c2 < c:
                          0
for all realizations of : Then this will continue to be true for a small pertur-
                                                                    2 2
bation in the distribution of y 2 and we can assume that dxdc(c2 ) = x2 (and
therefore DTC) everywhere in the relevant range. Moreover

                                         dx3 (c)           dx2 (c)
                                                 =                   0
                                          dc3               dc2
as required by the condition of the Proposition.
    Substituting this in the modi…ed Euler equation gives us
                                           1
                             RE 0 f                  x2 (c( 0 ))g    =   U 0 (x1 )
                                       x2 (c( 0 ))
                                                                         or
                                                                R    =   U 0 (x1 )

In other words, the right hand side is now a constant: Shifts in the distribution
of y 2 (mean-preserving or otherwise) have no e¤ect on the decision to save as
long as c2 remains in the relevant range.
    To complete the proof we need to show that U 0 and V 0 are convex. Now,
U (x) = ln x; so U 000 > 0: V (z) has to be de…ned to generate the chosen x(c)
function:                            Z z
                             V (z) =     U 0 (g (y))dy
                                                      0

where x = g(z) is the relationship between the optimizing values of x and z for
the same value of c: Therefore

                      V 0 (z)     =       U 0 (g(z))
                        00
                     V (z)        =       U 00 (g(z))g 0 (z)
                     V 000 (z)    =       U 000 (g(z))[g 0 (z)]2 + U 00 (g(z))g 00 (z)
            dx                    dz
Now since   dc   = x and          dc     =1      x;

                                      dx      x
                               g 0 (z)   ==
                                      dz   1    x
                                      and
                               00     dx              x
                              g (z) =    =         2
                                      dz   (1    x) 1   x




                                                          28
Therefore
                                          2         x2 2
                     V 000 (z 2 )   =          (         )
                                        (x2 )3 1      x2
                                             1                  x2
                                          (x2 )2 (1     x2 )2 1   x2
                                                  2
                                                                        1
                                    =                          [2                ]
                                        x2 (1          x2 )2        1       x2

This is positive in the relevant range as long as
                                            1
                                                        < 2:
                                        1       x(c)

    Moreover for c2 outside the range [c; c] z is linear in x; and therefore V 000 has
the same sign as U 000 : Therefore the condition for precautionary savings with
conventional preferences (that both U 000 and V 000 are strictly positive) holds
everywhere. Yet there is no precautionary savings.
    A few points about this result are worth emphasizing. First, the condition
that x1 ( ) is di¤erentiable is imposed for expositional purposes. Under NDTC,
we know that x1 ( ) is always continuous as a function of the underlying parame-
ters and therefore it is always possible to establish a variant of this proposition
for that case without any di¤erentiability. Under DTC, we are only trying to
…nd a counterexample, and allowing for the possibility that x1 ( ) can be discon-
tinuous only makes easier to construct such an example. Second, the condition
      3
that d x((c))
        dc3      0 is necessary to get the NDTC result. It is possible to construct
                  d3 x((c))
examples where       dc3      < 0, and there is no precautionary savings even under
NDTC.

5.6    Implications for the Structure of Investments
Standard utility theory has some clear and useful implications about the nature
of investment demand. Speci…cally, it tells us that while the minimum scale of
a project is a consideration (because of credit constraints), in addition to the
rate of return (we assume there is no risk), the maximum scale of investment
is not a consideration. You may not go all the way up to the maximum scale,
but the fact that there is a maximum scale is irrelevant as long as the project
has a high enough mean return. This is no longer necessarily true in our model
of temptations: Individuals facing declining temptations will be unwilling to
invest in high returns investments if the scale is too small. This captures the
lay intuition that investments may be unimportant unless they signi…cantly
change one’s circumstances.
    Assume that the period one self has been o¤ered access to a set of new
investment technologies (in addition to what was already available to him).
We are interested in whether he would take it up. These new investments are
described by three features. Assume that each investment is described by its


                                                29
return R( ), minimum size s( ), and maximum size S( ).30 If he undertakes
the investment , he can choose an investment level I between s( ) and S( ).
Period 1 self will then have I units less to spend but period 2 self will receive
R( )I returns. In this highly abstract setup, we can examine the rank-ordering
of investments. If individuals are willing to undertake what can we say about
any other 0 that they would also be willing to undertake?
    To analyze this rigorously we focus on a setting where both y 1 and y 2 are de-
terministic, borrowing is ruled out (allowing some borrowing would not change
anything essential, but makes some of the arguments more tedious) and there
is "base" investment technology, f (w1 ) = R0 w1 ; R0 > 1: The investor is now
o¤ered the option of investing in one additional technology with the under-
standing that he still has the option of investing as much as he wants in the
base technology (subject, as before, to the constraint that he cannot borrow).

Proposition 7 In this setting under N DT C; if the investor is willing to un-
dertake an investment = fR( ); s( ); S( )g then he will always be willing to
undertake an investment 0 = fR( 0 ); s( 0 ); S( 0 )g as long as R( 0 ) R( ) and
s( 0 ) s( ): In other words, minimum scale and returns summarize the invest-
ment. In contrast, if S( ) > S( 0 ); under DTC there exist situations where this
is not true even if R( 0 ) > R( ) and s( 0 ) < s( ) :
Proof. De…ne W (c1 ; c2 ) to be the period 1 self ’s maximand, i.e.

                           W 1 (c1 ; c2 ) = W (c1 ) + U (x2 (c2 )):

In the NDTC, since x2 is a concave function of c2 ; W 1 (c1 ; c2 ) is a strictly
concave function of the vector (c1 ; c2 ):
    Suppose period 1 self ’s optimal choice when o¤ ered the option is to invest
an amount I > 0 in and to consume an amount c1 in period 1. The amount
he invests in the base technology is therefore y 1 I c1 : Clearly in the absence
of credit y 1 I c1 must be non-negative. c2 in this case is given by

                          c2 = IR( ) + (y 1            I    c1 )R0 + y 2

If instead he had chosen not to invest in ; he would have consumed an amount
c1 in period 1 and invested y 1 e
e                                c1 in the base technology. Therefore

                                 c2 = (y 1
                                 e               c1 )R0 + y 2 :
                                                 e

By the fact that the investor chose to invest

                                  W (c1 ; c2 )           c1 ; e
                                                      W (e    c2 )

Now consider the vector ( c1 + (1     c1 ; c2 + (1
                                     )e               c2 ); 1 > > 0 : Clearly,
                                                     )e
                                   1           1   2
by the strict concavity of W; W ( c + (1     )e
                                              c ; c + (1       c2 ) > W (e
                                                              )e         c1 ; e
                                                                              c2 ):
  3 0 The model also has implications for the timing of investment which we do not investigate

in this current version.




                                                 30
The only constraint is whether ( c1 + (1                  c1 ; c2 + (1
                                                         )e                      c2 ) is in the option
                                                                                )e
set. Note however that we can write

                                  c2 + (1          c2
                                                  )e
                         =        (IR( ) + (y 1         I      c1 )R0 + y 2 )
                                 +(1         )((y 1     c1 )R0 + y 2 )
                                                 1
                         =        IR( ) + (y             I     c1 )R0 + y 2

In other words the investor can choose the vector ( c1 +(1   c1 ; c2 +(1
                                                            )e              )ec2 )
by investing an amount I in asset : Now by investing an amount I in asset 0
with R( 0 ) R( ) the investor can generate a vector ( c1 + (1      c1 ; IR( 0 ) +
                                                                  )e
   1         1       2
(y     I c )R0 + y ), which has the same …rst element and a second element
which is no smaller than what he gets by investing I in . In other words,

                 W ( c1 + (1              c1 ; IR( 0 ) + (y 1
                                         )e                             I   c1 )R0 + y 2 )
                 W ( c1 + (1              c1 ; c2 + (1
                                         )e                      c2 )
                                                                )e
            >       c1 ; e
                 W (e    c2 ):

In other words as long as we can make sure that the amount invested in asset 0
is feasible, i.e. set I between s( 0 ) and S( 0 ), then there will be investment in
 0
   : But since s( 0 ) s( ); it will always be possible to set so that s( 0 )   I
S( 0 ): Therefore there will always be some investment in 0 :
     Under DTC, W (c1 ; c2 ) is not necessarily concave. To see where things might
break down when W (c1 ; c2 ) is not concave, consider the following special pref-
erences:

                      V (z)      = az; z c;
                                 = ac; z > c
                                        and
                      U (0)      =      0; 0 < U 0 (0) < a; U 00 (x) < 0

In the second period, these preferences imply that

                                     z 2 (c2 )   =    c2 ; z     c
                                                 =    c; z > c:

Given these preferences, anyone with y 1 and y 2 such that R0 y 1 + y 2 < c; will
not save as long as the base technology is the only available technology, because
he faces a z 0 (c) of 1. Moreover, given that R0 > 1; y 1 must be less than c and
therefore period 1’s self will consume all of y 1 in the form of the z good. His
two period utility is therefore ay 1 :
    Next, assume that he is willing to invest the entire amount y 1 in technology
 : This requires that
                                  R( )y 1 + y 2 > c
that
                                 U (R( )y 1 + y 2         c) > ay 1 :


                                                 31
and that
                          R( )U 0 (R( )y 1 + y 2   c) > a:
Clearly we can …nd a R( ) large enough for which these conditions hold.
   Finally assume that there is an 0 such that R( 0 ) > R( ), s( 0 ) < s(i) and
   0
S( ) < S( ): Now if
                             R( 0 )S( 0 ) + y 2 < c
there will obviously not be any investment in 0 ;even though it has a higher per
dollar return and lower minimum scale. The logic of this construction makes
clear that it can easily be extended to the case where both V and z 2 (x2 ) are
di¤ erentiable functions.

    This result is important, we feel, for two reasons. First, some of the high
return investments which have been brought up in the literature as instances of
a puzzling unwillingness to invest are naturally capped. Fertilizer, for example,
may earn very high rates of return (Du‡o, Kremer and Robinson (2009)) and
has no obvious minimum scale but the maximum scale at which it can be applied
is capped by the amount of land you own. Similarly, Kremer, Lee and Robinson
(2009) argue convincingly that stocking behavior on phone cards is an example
of an unexploited high return investment, but once again these are investments
that are limited in terms of maximum scale: The optimal stocking pattern would
involve holding a few more cards, but not a lot more. Second, even when projects
have no natural maximum scale, the presence of credit constraints makes them
have one. Therefore, even if land is a constraint on how much the farmers
studied by Du‡o, Kremer and Robinson (2009) invest in fertilizer, credit might
be: Farmers might prefer to consume everything they have, because given the
credit constraints, any interesting projects are beyond their reach. For both of
these reasons, empirical work on investment decisions should also pay attention
to the maximum feasible scale.

5.7    Demand for Credit
Declining temptations also have implications for the bene…ts and costs of credit.
In the traditional model, access to credit is clearly good: it increases the op-
portunity set. In models with self-control problems, credit can potentially hurt.
Speci…cally, today’s self could be made worse o¤ if tomorrow’s self has access to
credit. This general feature of self-control models has more speci…c implications
if we focus on declining temptations.
    To fully capture commitment bene…ts in this context, we need to introduce
a third (“zero”) period. In the existing two period model, commitment has
bene…ts only if the …rst period can restrict the type of consumption (x goods
rather than z goods) in the second period. But in this section and those that
follow, we will be interested in what is e¤ectively a much cruder commitment
mechanism: the restriction of overall level of consumption. In two periods, this
would be a meaningless concept since the second period self would consume all



                                        32
the wealth in any case. In a three period model, however, the zero period self
can undertake actions that restrict the …rst period self’s ability to consume.
    Since we are interested only in the investment and commitment demands of
this period zero self, we assume this self has no consumption. Instead he or she
merely maximizes U (x1 ) + U (x2 ).31 The other two periods are as before.
    In this subsection, we focus on the case where the zero period self has a
single decision: whether or not to allow the period one self to have access to
consumption credit. The period 1 self has no automatic access to credit markets
but the period zero self may give him speci…c types of access. The point of credit
is to allow period 1 self to move consumption from period 2 to period 1; there
are investment opportunities or opportunities for lending. We are interested in
the types of access that the period zero self would be willing to allow his future
selves. Suppose that a loan is de…ned by two characteristics: r( ), the interest
rate and a maximum loan size L( ). If the period one self is allowed a loan of
type , he can choose to borrow some amount between 0 and L( ) and have the
period two self repay r( ) times that amount.
    We then ask question of the type: if the zero period self allows a loan of
type , will he allow a loan of type 0 ? The key insight is that the shape of
temptation places structure on the demand for commitment. It is well-known
that the presence of temptations that cause the period 1 self to over-consume
would make the period zero self interested in placing a limit on how big the
maximum loan size L( ) can be. What is more surprising is that in the presence
of declining temptations the zero period self might have an additional interest
in placing limits on how small it can be.

Proposition 8 Under NDTC, if the period zero self is willing to allow a loan
  = fr( ); L( )g, he will always willing to allow loan 0 = fr( 0 ); L( 0 )g as long
as r( ) = r( 0 ) and L( 0 ) L( ): Under DTC there will exist situations where
he is willing to allow a loan = fr( ); L( )g, but not a loan 0 = fr( 0 ); L( 0 )g
where r( ) = r( 0 );but L( 0 ) < L( ).
Proof. NDTC: In this case since x1 (c1 ) and x2 (c2 ) are both concave, Period
0’s utility function

                      0 (L)    = U (x1 (y 1 + L)) + U (x2 (y 2      Lr( ))))

is concave as a function of L, the actual loan amount: Assume that period 0
self permits a loan product = fr( ); L( )g, but not a loan 0 = fr( 0 ); L( 0 )g
where r( ) = r( 0 ) = r;but L( 0 ) = L0 < L( ) = L.: This means that

                         e
                       0 (L)
                                                e + U (x2 (y 2
                                 = U (x1 (y 1 + L))                       e
                                                                         rL))
                                     U (x1 (y 1 )) + U (x2 (y 2 )) =    0 (0)
  3 1 In what follows, what matters is that the period 0 self is e¤ectively more patient than

period 1 self, so technically the period 0 self could also maximize U (x1 ) + cV (z 1 ) + [U (x2 ) +
cV (z 2 )] for some c > 0 without changing our analysis in any sign…cant way.




                                                33
but
                     e0
                  0 (L )
                                          e 0 )) + U (x2 (y 2
                           = U (x1 (y 1 + L                                e 0 ))
                                                                          rL
                                        1      1                 2   2
                           <     U (x (y )) + U (x (y )) =               0 (0)


where L; e L
           e 0 are the loan amount actually chosen under ; 0 : Now any loan
amount that is less than L0 could have been chosen both under under                and
  0                e L0 ; there is no reason why a decision maker who allows
    : Therefore if L
would be unwilling to allow 0 since L    e will be chosen under both: The interesting
case is where L  e   L0    e 0 : In this case L
                           L                   e 0 is between L e and a loan size of 0.
But then, by the concavity of 0 (L); 0 (L     e 0 ) has to be no less than 0 (0); which
directly contradicts what we said above. This contradiction proves that 0 will
be allowed if is allowed.
      DTC: To show that this is not necessarily true in DTC, consider the example
from the previous sub-section where

                      V (z)    = az; z             c;
                               = ac; z > c
                                      and
                      U (0)    =      0; 0 < U 0 (0) < a; U 00 (x) < 0

In the second period, these preferences imply that

                                   z 2 (c2 )       =    c2 ; z       c
                                                   =    c; z > c:

Also set r ( ) = 1. Therefore

                              x1 + z 1 + x2 + z 2 = y 1 + y 2

Assume that y 1 = c (0           1), y 2 = c + k and there is no borrowing allowed.
Call this scheme of (1; 0) = 0 . Under this scheme, the period 1 self spends
his entire income on z while the period 2 self spends his …rst c on z but the
remaining k goes to x: Therefore 0 ( 0 ) = U (k)
    Now assume that there exists a loan 1 = (1; L ( 1 )), where L ( 1 ) < (1     )c <
k. For simplicity call this c, < 1           . Given the assumed preferences, the
period 1 self will want to borrow as much as he can and spend it all on z: The
period 2 self spends the k      c that remains after satisfying his appetite for z
on x: Hence 0 ( 1 ) = U (k           c) < U (k).Therefore, the period 0 self does
not stand to bene…t (and actually is hurt by) any loan with a maximal loan size
until the threshold of (1    ) c and will refuse all of those:
    A necessary condition for any loan he would allow is therefore L ( ) >
(1     ) c. Assume L ( 2 ) = (1          ) c + ". Now the period 1 self actually
spends an amount " on x because he can satiate his desire for z: Therefore
  0 ( 2 ) = U (") + U (k    (1     ) c ") :



                                                   34
    Now U (")        [U (k) U (k (1       ) c ")], for  su¢ ciently close to 1
since U is strictly concave. Therefore we have shown that there exists

             2   = (r (   2 ) ; l ( 2 ) ; L ( 2 ))   and    1   = (r (   1 ) ; l ( 1 ) ; L ( 1 ))

with
                     r(   1)   = r(    2) ; l ( 1)   = l(   2) ; L ( 1)    < L(     2)

where period 0 accepts          2   but not     1.

    The intuition behind this result is simple. When temptations are constant,
the only concern for the zero-period self is over-borrowing. Over-borrowing hurts
the period zero self in two ways: (i) Exaggerating the di¤erence in consumption
between the period one and two selves and (ii) Engaging in borrowing at a higher
rate than the period zero self would want.32 Self zero must weigh these costs
against the potential for borrowing to facilitate investments. As a result, person
zero can only want to limit the possibility for borrowing. When temptations
are declining, however, there is an o¤setting force. When the period one self
borrows a small amount, all of it might go into z, but when he gets to borrow
more, declining temptations kick in and he spends more of the loan proceeds on
x.33
    These results, we feel, are helpful in helping us parse credit contracts that
we observe. Consider two di¤erent contracts: micro…nance and credit cards.
Micro-…nance o¤ers only larger loans while credit cards only o¤er small loans.
In the model with constant temptations, and no lumpy investment, the period
zero self may accept to get a credit card but refuse a micro…nance loan, but
never the other way around. Declining temptations can explain why we may
observe the opposite: resistance to credit cards (or the equivalent) while support
for micro-credit.34 35
   3 2 Period zero self discounts at rate while period one self discounts at (1 z 0 (c)): Interest
rates between those two bounds would induce ine¢ cient borrowing.
   3 3 Given that the problem comes from 1 taking a small loan and spending it mainly on z it

might seem that putting a ‡oor on loan size would achieve the same goal in this environment.
This is however not true: In this case a ‡oor only matters if it is binding; if the period 1 self
wants to borrow less, then the period 0 self would also want him to borrow less and would want
to lower the ‡oor. A minimum loan size would help if, on the other hand, there were a lumpy
investment opportunity (or a consumer durable) that period 1 self could, in principle, carry
out, but even with the biggest available loan, carrying out the investment would require him to
consume less today. In that case, since he values consumption today relative to consumption
tomorrow more than the period zero self, he may be reluctant to carry it out even when period
zero would want him to. In this situation o¤ering the option of borrowing a small amount
may not be in period zero’s interest because period 1 is already overconsuming. On the other
hand, a larger loan is useful to 1 only if he complements it by saving more, which is what 0
wants. However the logic of this e¤ect makes it clear that it would also arise in the constant
temptation case.
   3 4 However it may be useful to add lumpy investment opportunities to our model since that

combined with time inconsistency would explain why micro-…nance loans have a minimum
size.
   3 5 We do not explore here a di¤erent commitment feature of debt: the forced repayment that

it implies. We conjecture that on this dimension as well, contracts which appear as micro-
…nance contracts (big lump sum, combined with small repayment installments) help solve


                                                     35
5.8    Supply of Credit
So far we have focused on the demand side: We now turn to the supply side of
credit and investment opportunities. Consider an individual who is borrowing
from a monopolistic money lender. Suppose a new investment arises that earns
a rate of return higher than the money lender’s cost of capital. If the money
lender could price discriminate and o¤er a rate speci…cally for this investment,
would the investment get made? Simple Coasian logic suggests it should. Yet
there is a long tradition of arguing that the money lender has an incentive to
block this investment either directly or by refusing to …nance it, in order to
maintain his power over the borrower (Bhaduri 1973). The logic is that the
technological improvement will raise the earnings of those who used to borrow
from the money-lender which in turn hurts the lender’s pro…ts through reduced
borrowing. In short, the money-lender prefers to have his clients caught in a
debt trap.
    Clearly, if the technological innovation were to change the time structure
of the borrower’s earnings (so that his earnings become more present biased
and therefore his incentive to borrow goes down) the money lender has every
reason to feel threatened. However, as pointed out by Srinivasan (1994), if the
investment requires spending in the present to increase future earnings, there is
no reason why borrowing would go down and therefore the money lender should
want to promote the innovation.
    In the rest of this sub-section we will see that while the intuition proposed in
the previous paragraph continues to hold under NDTC, the possibility of declin-
ing temptations reintroduces the possibility that Bhaduri had emphasized: The
money-lender may indeed want block progress to keep the borrower in his thrall.
    Assume that there is a time-inconsistent agent, who, as in previous sub-
section, lives for 3 periods but consumes x goods and z goods only in the last
two periods. However the period 0 self only values x consumption. Finally to
limit the number of free parameters assume both the borrower and the lender
do not discount future utilities, i.e., = 1
    The individual earns y in each of the last two periods and the period 1 self
has the option of saving at a gross interest rate of 1 and borrowing additional
resources from a money lender at an interest rate R1 set by the money lender:
Then the period 1 self will choose his borrowing L1 to maximize
                           W (y + L1 ) + U (x(y     R1 L1 )):
Assume that this is maximized by choosing L1 (R1 )
    Suppose the agent borrows from a pro…t maximizing monopoly lender who
can only set the interest rate (i.e. he cannot set the amount borrowed as well)
and whose (gross) opportunity cost of capital is > 1 per period: The lender
therefore chooses R1 to maximize (L1 (R1 )R1      L1 (R1 )): Let R1o be the interest
rate that maximizes this expression. 1 = (L1 (R1 )R10 L1 R10 ) is the maximized
                                        0         0

level of pro…t.
temptation problems more so than credit card like contracts (small trickles of borrowing,
combined with a big repayment).


                                           36
    Now suppose an investment opportunity becomes available to the agent. It
requires an investment of I in period 0 and an action taken in period 0, which
has a utility cost of E. The purpose of introducing this cost is to make sure that
the agent’s lifetime earnings go strictly up if he undertakes the investment–in
other words, the interest rate the lender charges cannot be so high that the
agent ends up with the same income after the investment than he had before,
because in that case he would prefer not to put in the e¤ort that the investment
requires. The investment, if undertaken, generates a revenue of I in period 2:
    Now given that the agent has no resources in period 0, the investment re-
quires a loan L0 = I in period 0. Suppose the money lender o¤ers a loan of I
at interest rate R0 in period 0 to be repaid when the investment pays o¤, i.e.
in period 2:
    However knowing that he will be richer in period 2, the agent may want to
increase his consumption in period 1 by borrowing more from the money lender
(he may also want to do the opposite, which is to prepay the loan he had taken
out in period 0, but assume that the money-lender can block prepayment).
    Consider the decision of how much to borrow in period 1. If the interest rate
set by the money lender in period 1 is R1 ; the agent will maximize
                   W (y + L1 ) + U (x(y + (             R0 )I       R1 L1 ))
which yields L1 (R0 ; R1 ): Period 0 takes this decision as given and chooses be-
tween investing and not investing: He invests if
           U (y + L1 (R0 ; R1 )) + U (x(y + (            R0 )I      R1 L1 (R0 ; R1 )))       E
           U (y + L1 (R1o )) + U (x(y         R1o L1 (R1o )))
The problem is interesting only if the investment is worth doing. As a feasibility
condition we assume that
             U (y + L1 ( ; R1o )) + U (x(y + (             2
                                                               )I   R1o L1 ( ; R1o )))   E
             U (y +   L1 (R1o ))   + U (x(y     R1o L1 (R1o )))
In other words, as long as the second period interest rate remains the same as
what it is in the absence of investment, but the …rst period rate is set at the
(two period) cost of capital, the project is worth doing. A necessary condition
for this to be true is that      > 2 ; since E > 0: Note that this feasibility
condition is exactly the thought experiment at the beginning of the section: the
new technology is pro…table relative to the money lender’s cost of capital.
    Under this feasibility condition, the lender always has the option of o¤ering
the agent an interest rate in period 0, and an interest rate R1o in period 1 and
getting him to do the project. He can also always block it by setting R0 = 1:
The following result establishes that he will never want to block under NDTC
but this is not true under DTC.
Proposition 9 In this setting under N DT C the moneylender will always be
willing to lend the investor money to make the new investment possible. Under
DTC there exist situations where this is not true:


                                              37
                                                      2
Proof. As noted above, under NDTC U (x(y + (            )I R1o L1 ( ; R1o ))) is an
                                                      2
increasing and strictly concave function of y + (       )I R1o L1 ( ; R1o ), while
W ( ) is always increasing and concave. We use this to …rst show that when
I goes up from 0, keeping the interest rates unchanged, the borrower cannot
strictly prefer to borrow less.
    Suppose, to the contrary, the borrower borrows L1 in period 1 when there
is investment I and L01 when there is no investment; and L01 > L1 : By revealed
preference it must be that
                                                                      2
                         W (y + L1 ) + U (x(y + (                         )I   R1o L1 ))
                         W (y + L01 ) + U (x(y + (                    2
                                                                          )I   R1o L01 ))

and

                                W (y + L01 ) + U (x(y                 R1o L01 ))
                                W (y + L1 ) + U (x(y                  R1o L1 ))

It follows from these two inequalities that
                                2
                U (x(y + (           )I     R1o L1 ))       U (x(y + (             2
                                                                                       )I   R1o L01 ))
                U (x(y   R1o L1 ))        U (x(y        R1o L01 )):
            2
Since   >       ; this contradicts the concavity of U (x( )) unless
                                2
                U (x(y + (           )I     R1o L1 ))       U (x(y + (             2
                                                                                       )I   R1o L01 ))
         = U (x(y        R1o L1 ))        U (x(y        R1o L01 )):

which would imply that
                                                                      2
                         W (y + L1 ) + U (x(y + (                         )I   R1o L1 ))
                     = W (y +    L01 )     + U (x(y + (               2
                                                                          )I   R1o L01 ))

Therefore the agent cannot strictly prefer to borrow less.
   Since the lender’s revenue is
                                            2
                               (R0              )I + (R1          )L1

This means that the lender can make himself at least as well o¤ when there is
investment as when there is no investment, by setting R0 = 2 ; R1 = R1o (our
feasibility condition guarantees that the borrower will invest when o¤ered these
rates); since he gets to lend more (or at least no less). He will therefore lend
money to the borrower for investment.
    To see what changes under DTC assume that

                              V (z)        = az; z c; a > 1
                                           = ac; z > c
                                                 and
                              U (x)        = x


                                                   38
Assume also that c > y. Therefore, in the absence of the investment, it is
always optimal for the period 1 self to borrow the full amount of y if he borrows
anything at all, since he gains nothing from leaving any amount less than c for
period 2 to consume. However period 1 does have the option of saving his period
1 income and spending it in period 2 – assume that the gross interest rate on
savings is 1. By borrowing and consuming everything, he gets a utility of
                                                   y
                                           a[y +      ]
                                                   R1
                                      y
under the assumption that y +         R1   < c:36 If he saves he gets

                                            [2y        c]

This puts an upper bound on R1 implicitly given by

                                    y        [2y        c]
                                                             y
                                    R1             a

which only binds if [2ya c] y > 0: But since c > y and a > 1; [2ya c] y must
be negative, and therefore there is no constraint on how high R1 can be. A
monopolistic lender will set it to be in…nite, and extract the borrower’s entire
second period income, i.e., L1 ' 0: Therefore the lender will earn an amount y
in this case.
     If the investment does take place the borrower faces a similar choice: He can
either save his period 1 earnings and get utility 2y + (     R0 )I c in period 2,
in which case L1 = 0; and the lender makes no money from L1 , though he may
still make money from the zero period loan. We will return to this option in a
few paragraphs.
     The alternative for the lender is to make sure that the borrower borrows in
period 1. By the way the preferences have been speci…ed, only the marginal
units of spending in period 2 go into x consumption, which is all that period 1
cares about. Moreover the marginal utility of x spending is constant. Therefore
if the period 1 self is prepared to move one unit of spending from period 2 to
period 1, he will want to do so for all the the other units of spending. In other
words, if he borrows at all, he will borrow the entire amount y+( R1R0 )I :
     Given that there is no x consumption in period 2, the only value from the
investment from the point of view of the period 0 self comes from period 1
consumption of x: Therefore it must be the case that there is some period 1
consumption of x (otherwise the period 0 self will never agree to put in the
e¤ort). In other words, we must have

                                      y+(          R0 )I
                                 y+                              c:
                                              R1
  3 6 As we will show in the next few lines the solution to the monopolist’s problem has R = 1
                                                                                          1
and as a result this condition is implied by y < c:




                                              39
Therefore the utility period 1 self gets from consuming his entire discounted
income in period 1 has to be

                                       y+(             R0 )I
                              [y +                                  c] + ac:
                                               R1
To make him willing to borrow, it must be that

                          y+(          R0 )I
                                                 + ac          y+(             R0 )I
                                  R1
Note that since R1 > 1; increasing R0 relaxes this constraint and makes it
possible to raise R1:
   The lender’s net earnings from L0 and L1 in this case are given by
                                  2
                   IR0        I       +y+(                  R0 )I          (y + (      R0 )I)
                                                                     R1
                          2
               =      I       +y+ I                    (y + (            R0 )I):
                                               R1
For any …xed value of R1 , this expression is clearly increasing in R0 : Moreover
as observed above, raising R0 allows the lender to raise R1 : This gives the lender
a double incentive to raise R0 : However in setting R0 he has to consider period
zero’s incentive constraint. Period zero will only put in the necessary e¤ort in
this scenario if
                             y+(      R0 )I
                        [y +                  c] E 0:
                                   R1
which tells us that
                                  y+(        R0 )I
                                                               c+E          y
                                        R1
Using this in the expression for the lender’s pro…ts gives us the following upper
bound for the lender’s pro…ts
                                             2
                              y+(                )I          (c + E        y):

Can this be less than y; which was the lender’s pro…t in the absence of invest-
ment? Clearly this depends on how large E can be. The constraint on E comes
from feasibility. Since R1o = 1; the agent does not borrow in period 1, and the
feasibility constraint is simply
                                                   2
                               2y + (                  )I      c     E      0

Suppose this constraint is only just satis…ed, so that
                                                       2
                                   2y + (                   )I = c + E

Substituting this into the upper bound on the lender’s pro…ts, we get

                                  c+E          y            (c + E        y)


                                                       40
which is negative. Clearly there is a range of values of parameters for which the
lender would never choose this option.
   Finally consider the case where the lender gives up trying to lend in period
1 and simply tries to extract enough using R0 : In this case the lender’s pro…t is
simply
                                           2
                                   (R0       )I:
The constraint on R0 comes from period zero’s incentive constraint, which is

                         2y + (     R0 )I    c   E        0
                                                          or
                                  2y + I     c   E        R0 I

Obviously in the case where the feasibility constraint is just satis…ed, this re-
                                2
duces to the constraint R0 I      I: The lender makes no money. Hence he would
prefer to block the investment by setting R0 very high.
    A simple corollary follows immediately from this the proof of this proposi-
tion:

Corollary 10 Suppose the investment does not cost any money i.e. I = 0:
However the money-lender can somehow block the agent’s access to the invest-
ment (by using his political power for example). Under N DT C he will never
exercise this option. However under DTC there exist situations where he will
choose to block access to the investment.


6     Empirical Tests of the Model
The above propositions provide qualitative predictions. However, the model
also lends itself to a few speci…c quantitative tests. Here we outline how those
tests might work.
    First, it may be possible to use observational data to test some of the as-
sumptions of the model. In particular, we could use exogenous income shocks
to look at which goods are the most income elastic and how the elasticities vary
for the rich and the poor. Then we can ask whether the goods for which the
income elasticities are systematically higher for the poor than for the rich are
the same goods that in surveys, people claim to want to give up.
    Second, we can actually test whether temptation is in fact declining. To
do this, suppose there are several goods gi . Suppose that each good has an
x component and a z component. Speci…cally, suppose that one unit of good
i provides xi fraction of the non-temptation and zi fraction of the temptation
good. Moreover, suppose that what constitutes x and z goods is common across
individuals.37 Now consider the following experiment. Suppose that we o¤er to
a set of individuals a choice between 1 unit of good i and di units of good i in
one period. Assume, as is common in all discount rate experiments, that there
  3 7 A weaker assumption that would still work is to assume there is a common component

with individuals varying in an iid way around this common component.


                                            41
is non-fungibility across time and goods so that individuals view this o¤er as a
genuine increase of either 1 unit today or di units tomorrow.38 De…ne di to be
the average di that makes individuals indi¤erent to this trade-o¤, i.e. half the
individuals choose 1 unit today and half choose di units in one period. These
experiments allow us to array goods according to how much temptation they
provide. Goods that provide more temptation should show larger di : one would
need a large quantity in the future to induce one to give up one unit today. The
key assumption of our model can be empirically tested by looking at the Engel
curve for each good: declining temptations implies that the Engel curve should
be steeper for goods with lower di . Note that this is not mechanically true: The
Engel curve captures how demand for a particular good varies with income,
whereas di measures the discount rate associated with a particular good.
    A …nal quantitative test of our model is based on our assertion that the
apparent patience di¤erence between poor and rich is due to the composition of
consumption rather than genuine di¤erences in patience. To test this, we would
o¤er trade-o¤s of 1 unit of money today versus dm units tomorrow and use
this to back out an apparent discount rate for money m . We would then o¤er
(again, under the assumption of fungibility), 1 unit of an x good (identi…ed as
above) today versus d0 units tomorrow. This allows us to back out an apparent
discount rate for x goods x . We then predict that m     x
                                                           is declining in income:
the poor are much more impatient in money than in x goods and this gap closes
as income increases.
    Note that these procedures do not just provide a test of the model. They
provide an important discipline to this approach. A key judgment needed to
operationalize this model is the identi…cation of temptation goods. Such iden-
ti…cation can be particularly di¢ cult since there are often large inter-personal
di¤erences in preferences. The above procedure provides a way to elicit an
individual’s own judgments about what constitutes a temptation good. Such
judgments, we feel, will sometimes yield counterintuitive valuations. For exam-
ple, when Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2004) provide commitment savings accounts,
they ask individuals what they are saving up to buy. Since one would only save
up to buy x goods, it is interesting to see that the second most common stated
purpose for savings is festival and party expenditures. This might contrast with
our intuitive sense that the poor “waste” their money on these expenditures.39
This example highlights the need for judicious use of experiments of the type
above to determine what is a temptation good and what is a genuine oasis of
pleasure.
  3 8 This  assumption is common in all discount rate experiments that are undertaken for
money, e.g. one dollar today or two dollars in one month. Such experiments are meaningless
if money were fungible in time for example.
   3 9 Of course, to the extent that they generate a conspicuous consumption externality, there

can still be an argument for social waste.




                                              42
7    Conclusion
We feel that understanding the structure of temptations (“wasted expendi-
tures”) is essential to understanding the lives of the poor. Our framework high-
lights one important structural feature of temptations: whether their impact is
declining in income. The results in this paper illustrate that declining temp-
tations can help to explain a large range of phenomena, from poverty traps to
credit and investment behavior. Though we do not focus on these issues in this
paper, they may also be helpful in answering a broader set of questions. First,
we mentioned brie‡y the idea that understanding the structure of temptation
may help in classifying and designing commitment savings products. Should
these products force savings or limit withdrawals? Should they put a ceiling on
withdrawals (so that there is always something left against emergencies or limit
withdrawals until a minimum amount is reached (so as to enable the accumu-
lation of a large lump sum)? We understand little empirically or theoretically
about these questions. Second, while our model focuses on expenditures, many
of the important choices of the poor are not fully captured by a pure expen-
diture focus. For example, the labor leisure choice is an important component
of overall income and wealth accumulation. Understanding how these choices
integrate into a temptation framework seems particularly important.Third, our
model generates a non-convexity in the second period utility function as viewed
from the perspective of the …rst period self. This might can provide a foundation
for the utility function proposed by Friedman and Savage (1948) to rationalize
the demand for lotteries among the poor. More generally the implications of
our framework for the relation between measured and actual risk aversion seem
potentially interesting and important. Finally, a deeper understanding of cer-
tain potentially addictive social behaviors, for example drinking and smoking,
have the potential to be interesting but would require a greater investment in
exploring the relation between the technology of addiction and aspects of the
shape of temptation emphasized here. While the present model makes some
progress, much interesting work remains to be done.




                                       43
8       Appendix
8.1        Proof of Proposition 2
                                                                                         dz 2                 U 00 (x2 (c2 ))
Proof. Since U 0 (x2 (c2 )) = V 0 (z 2 (c2 )); and x2 (c2 )+z 2 (c2 ) = c2 ;             dc2    =   V 00 (z 2 (c2 ))+U 00 (x2 (c2 ))
       dx2             V 00 (z 2 (c2 ))
and    dc2 = V 00 (z 2 (c2 ))+U 00 (x2 (c2 )) :   Taking derivatives and substituting the values
     dx2     dz 2
of   dc2 and dc2 gives us

                                    d2 z 2    (V 00 )2 U 000 (U 00 )2 V 000
                                       2  2
                                            =
                                   d(c )             (U 00 + V 00 )3

Now de…ne H such that Ve (x2 ) = V (z 2 (x2 )) = H(U (x2 )): Taking derivatives
                        dz 2   U 00
and using the fact that dx 2 = V 00 gives us that


                                                            V 0 U 00
                                              H 0 (U ) =             :
                                                            U 0 V 00
Taking derivatives again gives us that
                                                             2                       2
                                                        dz                          dz
                      1 U 0 V 00 (V 0 U 000 + V 00 U 00 dx 2)   V 0 U 00 (U 0 V 000 dx      00 00
                                                                                       2 + U V )
       H 00 (U ) =      0
                          [                                  0 00 2
                                                                                                  ]:
                      U                                  (U V )
Since V 0 = U 0 ; this reduces to
                                              V 0 (V 00 )2 U 000 (U 00 )2 V 000
                               H 00 (U ) =         [                            ]:
                                              V 00         (U 0 V 00 )2
Since (U 00 + V 00 )3 has the same sign as V 00 , the result follows.

8.2        A Derived Hyperbolic Model
To see the similarities, therefore, consider a T-period extension of our model.
Under assumptions that gave us (3), the intertemporal maximand for this case
can be written in the form
                                                           T
                                                           X
                                                                  t
                                  U (x1 ) + V (z 1 ) +                EfU (xt )g
                                                           t=1

Maximizing U (x) + V (z) subject to a budget constraint x + z = c; and the
conditions (x 0; z 0) gives us a function x(c):
                                             e (c)
                                             U        = U (x(c))
                                                            and
                                             Ve (c)   = V (z(c))
Then the above expression becomes
                                                           T
                                                           X
                                   e (c1 ) + Ve (c1 ) +
                                   U                              t     e (ct )g
                                                                      EfU
                                                           t=2


                                                       44
When Ve (c) = U e (c); this is the standard - utility function with          =    1
                                                                                 1+   :
One case where this condition holds is when
                                              x1t
                                 U (xt )    =         and
                                              1
                                                 z1
                                 V (zt )    = A t     :
                                                1
In other words two essentially identical CRRA functions: Under these assump-
                                                                             1
tions, within period choice between x and z will give us zt = qxt where q = A .
Substituting this into our maximand gives us

                           x10             (q)1 x10    X x1
                                                           t t
                                     +               +
                           1                    1           1
                                               x10   X   x 1
                                                        t t
                      =    (1 + q 1         )[     +           ]
                                               1         1

where = 1+q11 ; which is exactly in the hyperbolic form.
    More generally, the models will be distinct, since they represent di¤erent
assumptions about temptation. The hyperbolic model focuses on disagreements
about the level of consumption whereas our model focuses on disagreements
about the composition of consumption. There are two ways to understand this
di¤erence. First, we could start by assuming that our model is the more accurate
model of temptation–that temptation in fact occurs at the level of individual
goods. In this case, the hyperbolic model should be seen as a convenient ap-
proximation to the T-period version of our model and in those models is an
approximation to a more endogenously determined myopia factor (such as the
temptation tax in our model). Alternately we could start from the premise
that the hyperbolic model is the right framework but in util space: individuals
value more utils today than the long-run self would want them to. Di¤erent
goods provide di¤erent time-pro…les of hedonic ‡ows. Hence some goods are
more tempting because they provide more present utils relative to the long-run
utils they provide. Our model then is a reduced form that abstracts from the
di¤erential time-‡ow of utils. In this paper, we do not attempt to distinguish
between these alternative positions and simply work with our U (x) and V (z)
framework for the rest of the paper.

8.3    Generalizing the idea of the temptation good
So far we have operated on di¤erent preferences for two index goods. A more
realistic assumption would be that people have di¤erent preferences over a set
of goods. To get at this idea, denote by uF (x1 ; :::; :xn ) the utility function that
represents the preferences of the forward-looking self over any future outcomes,
and by uT (x1 ; :::; xn ) the utility of the current self over current outcomes; both
utility functions are now de…ned over the same set of goods. uT is where the
temptations come in (hence the superscript).


                                                45
      Let xT (c) be the vector of goods that maximizes uT (x1 ; :::; xn ) subject to
P
n
      xi = c: De…ne wT (c) to be the indirect utility of the tempted utility function:
i=1
w (c) = uT (xT (c)): Given this de…nition it is easy to write the maximization
  T

problem of the forward-looking decision-maker as one of choosing (c1 ; c2 ) to
maximize
                          uT (xT (c1 )) + uF (xT (c2 ))
subject to the intertemporal budget constraint. It is clear that the slope of the
uP function relative to the slope of the of uT function plays a role similar to the
discount factor. We impose the assumption that this does not cause any bias
towards the future:
            X @uT (xT (c)) @xT (c)            X @uP (xT (c)) @xT (c)
                       i          i                          i             i
                                                                                       ; for all c:
              i
                     @xi         @c               i
                                                           @xi             @c

Note that both sides of this inequality are evaluated at the same value of c:
   Assume for the sake of the exposition that the decision maker has a …xed
endowment y that he gets in the …rst period, no second period earnings, and
can lend at the rate r. Then the …rst order condition for this maximization
problem will be

                       dwT (c1 )     X @uP (xT (c2 )) @xT (c2 )
                                             i          i
                                 = r                            :
                         dc          i
                                           @x  i        @c

    It turns out that this decision maker would behave exactly like a U -V deci-
sion maker with appropriately chosen U and V functions. To see this, note that
this would require that the U (x) function and the x(c) function satisfy
                                              X @uP (xT (c2 )) @xT (c2 )
                                                             i                 i
                     U 0 (x(c2 ))x0 (c2 ) =
                                                  i
                                                           @xi                 @c
and
                                        @wT (c1 )
                                  U 0 (x(c1 )) =
                                            @c
   Putting these together gives us that x(c) needs to satisfy the di¤erential
equation:
                                P @uP (xTi (c)) @xTi (c)
                                              i        @xi            @c
                              x0 (c) =                 @wT (c)
                                                         @c
which pins down x(c) if we impose the boundary condition x(0) = 0: x(c)
is clearly an increasing function and therefore has an inverse function c 1 (x):
Moreover since
            @wT (c) X @uT (xTi (c)) @xTi (c)                     X @uP (xT (c)) @xT (c)
                                                                                   i          i
                   =
              @c     i
                          @xi         @c                          i
                                                                           @xi               @c

by our above assumption, x0 (c)          1 for all c:


                                                      46
                    1
   And given c          (x), U (x) can be de…ned according to:
                                               @wT
                                  U 0 (x) =        (c    1
                                                             (x))
                                                @c
along with the boundary condition
                                       U (0) = wT (0):
    It is true that we have not yet de…ned V (z) but this is not an issue because
Proposition 8.3 below tells us that as long as x(c) is increasing and less than
or equal to c for all values of c (both properties that have already been veri…ed
above for the x(c) function we constructed),40 there is always an increasing and
concave V (z) function, such that maximizing U (x) + V (z) subject to x + z = c
will give us that particular x(c) function:
    To summarize, the model where both selves care about all the goods (but
not to the same extent) is observationally equivalent to a model with U -V
preferences (as long as we only observe total expenditures in each period, as
opposed to the amount spent on each good), for an appropriate choice of U and
V: This ought to be intuitive: essentially, x captures the part of the expenditure
that aligns with what the forward-looking self wants, while z is the part that is
wasted from the forward-looking self’s point of view, and it should not matter
that the wasted expenditure takes the form of excess spending on goods that
the forward-looking self also values (just not enough to justify that level of
spending).
    An implication of this reformulation is that the same good may end up
being a temptation good in some contexts but not in others. For example, it is
not implausible that for some poor people, calorie-rich food is a necessity and
fancy exercise machines are temptation goods, while the reverse is true of some
wealthy and overweight people.


References
 [1] Aleem, Irfan (1990). "Imperfect Information, Screening, and the Costs of
     Informal Lending: A Study of a Rural Credit Market in Pakistan", World
     Bank Economic Review, 4 (3): 329-349.
 [2] Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan and Wesley Yin (2006). "Tying Odysseus to the
     Mast: Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines",
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (2): 635-672.
 [3] Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Du‡o (2006). "The Economic Lives of the
     Poor", Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21 (1): 141-167.
 [4] Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew F. Newman (1993). "Occupational Choice
     and the Process of Development", Journal of Political Economy, 101 (2):
     274-298.
 4 0 x(c)                                  dx(c)
            c follows from the fact that    dc
                                                    1 and x(0) = 0:


                                                   47
 [5] Becker, Gary S and Casey Mulligan, (1994). "On the Endogenous Deter-
     mination of Time Preference," mimeo, University of Chicago.
 [6] Douglas Bernheim, Debraj Ray and Sevin Yeltekin, (1999), "Self Control,
     Saving and the Low Asset Trap", mimeo, New York University.

 [7] Bhaduri, Amit (1977). "On the formation of usurious interest rates in
     backward agriculture", Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1 (4): 341-352.
 [8] Collins, D., J. Morduch, S. Rutherford, and O. Ruthven (2009). Portfolios
     of the Poor: How the World’s Poor Live on $2 a Day, Princeton: Princeton
     University Press.

 [9] de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christoper Woodru¤ (2008). "Re-
     turns to Capital in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment",
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (4): 1329-1372.
[10] Dreze, Jean, Peter Lanjouw, and Naresh Sharma (1997). "Credit in Rural
     India: A Case Study", LSE STICERD Research Paper, DEDPS06.

[11] Du‡o, Esther, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2009). "Nudging
     Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Evidence from Kenya", Working Paper.
[12] Fisher, Irving (1932). Booms and Depressions, Some First Principles, New
     York: Adelphi Company.

[13] Friedman, Milton and Leonard Savage, (1948) " "Utility Analysis of
     Choices Involving Risk" with Leonard Savage, 1948, Journal of Political
     Economy Vol. 56, No. 4, Aug, pp. 279-304
[14] Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine (2006). "A Dual Self Model of
     Impulse Control", American Economic Review, 96 (5): 1449-1476.

[15] Galor, Oded and Joseph Zeira (1993). "Income Distribution and Macro-
     economics", Review of Economic Studies, 60: 35-52.
[16] Gruber, Jonathan and Botond Koszegi (2001). "Is Addiction “Rational”?
     Theory and Evidence", Quarterly Journal Economics, 116 (4): 1261-1303.

[17] Gugerty, Mary K. (2007). "You Can’t Save Alone: Commitment in Ro-
     tating Savings and Credit Associations in Kenya", Economic Development
     and Cultural Change, 55: 251-282.
[18] Harris, Christopher and David Laibson (2001). "Dynamic Choices of Hy-
     perbolic Consumers", Econometrica, 69 (4): 935-957.

[19] Karlan, Dean and Sendhil Mullainathan (2009). "Debt Cycles", Work in
     Progress.
[20] Laibson, David (1997). "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting", Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 112 (2): 443-477.


                                     48
[21] Lee, Jean, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2009). "The Return to
     Capital for Small Retailers in Kenya: Evidence from Inventories", Working
     Paper.
[22] McClure, S. M., D. I. Laibson, G. Loewenstein and J. D. Cohen (2004).
     "Separate Neural Systems Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary Re-
     wards", Science, 306 (5695): 503-507.
[23] Katherine L. Milkman, Todd Rogers, Max H. Bazerman (2010), I’ll have
     the ice cream soon and the vegetables later: A study of online grocery
     purchases and order lead time, Marketing Letters 21(1), 17-36.

[24] Katherine L. Milkman, Todd Rogers, Max H. Bazerman (2009), Highbrow
     …lms gather dust: Time-inconsistent preferences and online DVD rentals,
     Management Science, 55(6), 1047-1059
[25] O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (1999). "Doing it Now of Later",
     American Economic Review, 89 (1): 103-124.

[26] O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (2006), "Optimal sin taxes", mimeo,
     Cornell University.
[27] Ray, Debraj, (2002), "Aspirations, Poverty and Economic Change", mimeo,
     New York University.

[28] Daniel Read; George Loewenstein; Shobana Kalyanaraman (1999), "Mix-
     ing virtue and vice: Combining the immediacy e¤ect and the desire for
     diversity", Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,12(4), 257-273.
[29] Skiba, Paige M. and Jeremy Tobacman (2007). "Measuring the Individual-
     Level E¤ects of Access to Credit: Evidence from Payday Loans", Proceed-
     ings Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May: 280-301.
[30] Srinivasan, T. N. (1979). “Agricultural Backwardness Under Semi-
     Feudalism,” Economic Journal 89(354), June: 416-19
[31] Subramanian, Shankar and Angus Deaton (1996). "The Demand for Food
     and Calories", Journal of Political Economy, 104 (1): 133-162.

[32] Thaler, Richard H. and H. M. Shefrin (1981). "An Economic Theory of
     Self-Control", Journal of Political Economy, 89 (2): 392-406.
[33] Udry, Christopher and Santosh Anagol (2006). "The Return to Capital in
     Ghana", American Economic Review, 96 (2): 388-393.




                                     49
