                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE LABOR MARKET IN THE GREAT RECESSION

                                         Michael W. Elsby
                                           Bart Hobijn
                                          Aysegul Sahin

                                       Working Paper 15979
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15979


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




The views expressed in this paper solely reflect those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, nor those of the Federal
Reserve System as a whole, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are especially
grateful to Bruce Fallick, Larry Katz, Ryan Michaels, David Romer, Rob Shimer, Gary Solon, and
Justin Wolfers for particularly detailed comments and suggestions. Thanks also to Mary Daly, Steve
Davis, Hank Farber, Bob Hall, John Haltiwanger, Marianna Kudlyak, Simon Potter, and Jon Willis
for constructive comments. We would like to thank Regis Barnichon for providing us with the Composite
Help-Wanted Index, and Joyce Kwok, Joseph Song, and Theodore Wiles for their outstanding research
assistance. This version is based on data through April 7th 2010.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Michael W. Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market in the Great Recession
Michael W. Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin
NBER Working Paper No. 15979
May 2010
JEL No. E24,E32,J6

                                              ABSTRACT

From the perspective of a wide range of labor market outcomes, the recession that began in 2007 represents
the deepest downturn in the postwar era. Early on, the nature of labor market adjustment displayed
a notable resemblance to that observed in past severe downturns. During the latter half of 2009, however,
the path of adjustment exhibited important departures from that seen during and after prior deep recessions.
Recent data point to two warning signs going forward. First, the record rise in long-term unemployment
may yield a persistent residue of long-term unemployed workers with weak search effectiveness. Second,
conventional estimates suggest that the extension of Emergency Unemployment Compensation may
have led to a modest increase in unemployment. Despite these forces, we conclude that the problems
facing the U.S. labor market are unlikely to be as severe as the European unemployment problem of
the 1980s.


Michael W. Elsby                                     Aysegul Sahin
University of Michigan                               Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Department of Economics                              Research & Statistics Group
238 Lorch Hall                                       33 Liberty Street
611 Tappan Street                                    New York, NY 10045
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                             Aysegul.Sahin@ny.frb.org
and NBER
elsby@umich.edu

Bart Hobijn
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research Department, Mailstop 1130
101 Market Street, 11th floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
bart.hobijn@sf.frb.org
2                                                                              The Labor Market in the Great Recession



Since December 2007, labor market conditions in the United States have deteriorated dramatically.
The depth and duration of the decline in economic activity have led many to refer to the downturn
as the Great Recession. In this paper, we document the adjustment of the labor market during the
recession, and place it in the broader context of previous postwar downturns. What emerges is a
picture of labor market dynamics with three key recurring themes:

1. From the perspective of a wide range of labor market outcomes, the 2007 recession represents
      the deepest downturn in the labor market in the postwar era.
2. Until recently, the nature of labor market adjustment in the current recession has displayed a
      notable resemblance to that observed in past severe downturns.
3. During the latter half of 2009, however, the path of adjustment has exhibited important
      departures from that seen in prior deep recessions.

These broad conclusions arise from a detailed investigation of the behavior of labor market stocks
and flows over the course of the downturn. 1 Our point of departure in section 1 is to document the
evolution of key labor market indicators—unemployment, employment, labor force participation,
and hours—during the recession. No matter what indicator of labor market activity we consider, the
deterioration of labor market conditions during the 2007 recession is the worst on record since the
late 1940s. Rates of unemployment among all the major subgroups of the labor market have reached
postwar highs. From the perspective of the labor market, the 2007 recession is truly a Great
Recession.
      As noted above, we nonetheless observe that many dimensions of the evolution of these key
indicators mirror those seen in past recessions. Labor force participation has declined, reflecting the
modest procyclicality observed in many postwar recessions; the relative contributions of the
intensive and extensive margins to the decline in total labor input typify the conventional one third
hours to two thirds bodies split observed in the past; and the constellation of demographic groups
most affected—young, male, less-educated, workers from ethnic minorities—is reminiscent of
previous downturns.

1
    A drawback of the real-time nature of our analysis is that a detailed treatment of the cyclical behavior of wages in the current
    recession is infeasible. While aggregate compensation data are available in a timely fashion, such data are plagued by
    countercyclical composition biases, as low-skilled workers are more likely to lose their jobs in time of recession. As emphasized
    by Solon, Barsky and Parker (1994), obtaining an accurate sense of real wage cyclicality requires the use of longitudinal microdata
    that are available in a less timely manner.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                        3



   It is well-known that changes in aggregate unemployment in the United States mask substantial
variation in underlying worker flows, a point emphasized by Blanchard and Diamond (1990).
Reflecting this, in section 2 we investigate the sources of increased unemployment by analyzing the
behavior of unemployment flows. This reveals that both increased unemployment inflows as well as
declines in the rate at which workers flow out of the unemployment pool play crucial roles in
accounting for the recent upswing in unemployment. As in previous severe recessions, the initial
ramp-up in unemployment was accompanied by a sharp rise in inflows. In contrast to the claims of
recent literature on unemployment flows (Hall, 2005; Shimer, 2007), elevated rates of inflow in
times of recession appear not to be a relic of past downturns, but rather a distinctive feature of
severe recessions, both old and modern. The behavior of the outflow rate also mirrors that observed
in past deep recessions: As the wave of inflows has receded in the latter stages of the current
recession, the outflow rate has continued to fall. Reflecting the distinctive severity of the downturn,
recent data has seen the outflow rate reach a postwar low.
   Measures of unemployment flows among labor force groups yield an important message on the
sources of disparate trends in unemployment across labor force groups: Greater levels and cyclical
sensitivity of joblessness among young, low-skilled minority workers, both in this and in previous
downturns, are driven predominantly by differences in rates of entry into unemployment across
these groups. In sharp contrast, a striking feature of unemployment exit rates is a remarkable
uniformity in their cyclical behavior across labor force groups—the declines in outflow rates during
this and prior recessions are truly an aggregate phenomenon.
   In the remainder of section 2, we take advantage of a unique opportunity to assess the role of
labor turnover in the recession. This is the first full upswing in unemployment covered by the new
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), which reveals some stark findings. In contrast
to the behavior of unemployment inflows, rates of separation of workers from employers have not
risen in the 2007 recession. This is suggestive of a hypothesis noted by Hall (2005): increases in
unemployment inflows may have little to do with increased rates of job loss, but merely are a
symptom of declining rates of job finding among potential job-to-job movers. Our analysis of
JOLTS data points to a different story: Increased inflows into unemployment are driven
predominantly by a change in the composition of separations toward layoffs, which are likely to
4                                                         The Labor Market in the Great Recession



result in unemployment, and away from quits, which often involve people who flow to a new job
upon separation. Job loss has played a key role in driving increased unemployment in the recession.
    We close our analysis in section 3 with an assessment of the outlook for the recovery of the
labor market in the wake of the current downturn. Motivated by the recent subsidence of inflows
into unemployment and the historic declines in the exit rate from unemployment, we emphasize the
importance of a rebound in the outflow rate for future reductions in unemployment and highlight a
potential cause for concern that has developed in recent data. The postwar U.S. labor market has
been characterized by two remarkably stable aggregate relationships: the negative comovement of
unemployment and vacancies—the Beveridge curve—and the positive association between the
outflow rate from unemployment and the vacancy-unemployment ratio, a point noted by Shimer
(2005). The latter half of 2009 has witnessed a break from these relations, with unemployment
rising higher than implied by the historical Beveridge curve, and the outflow rate from
unemployment falling significantly below the path implied by the past relation with the vacancy-
unemployment ratio.
    The resemblance of these trends to the similar breakdown in match efficiency that accompanied
the European unemployment problem of the 1980s raises the concern of persistent unemployment,
or hysteresis, in U.S. unemployment going forward. We consider a range of possible sources that
might lead to hysteresis, including sectoral mismatch, extension of unemployment insurance (UI)
benefits, duration dependence in unemployment outflow rates, and persistence in unemployment
brought about by reductions in the rate of worker flows, what Blanchard (2000) has termed
sclerosis. Recent data point to two warning signs going forward. First, the historic decline in
unemployment outflow rates has been accompanied by a record rise in long-term unemployment.
We show that this is likely to result in a persistent residue of long-term unemployed workers with
relatively weak search effectiveness, depressing the strength of the recovery. Second, conventional
estimates of the impact of UI duration on the length of unemployment spells suggest that the
extension of Emergency Unemployment Compensation starting in June 2008 is likely to have led to
a modest increase in long-term unemployment in the recession. Nonetheless, we conclude that,
despite these adverse forces, they have not yet reached a magnitude that would augur a European-
style hysteresis problem in the U.S. economy in the long run.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                            5



            1. Basic Facts about the Labor Market in the 2007 Recession
The recession that started in December 2007 has been severe according to many measures, not least
in terms of its effect on the labor market. In this section, we review the recent behavior of some of
the main aggregate measures of labor market outcomes, and place the deterioration in labor market
conditions of the current downturn in the broader historical context of previous postwar recessions.


          1.1 Unemployment, Employment, Labor Force Participation and Hours
The main labor market indicator that we will focus on for much of this paper is the unemployment
rate. To set the stage, Figure 1 displays the published time series for the civilian unemployment rate
from Current Population Survey (CPS) data. The current recession is a very prominent feature of
this series. Unemployment rose from a pre-recession minimum of 4.4 percent to reach 10.1 percent
in October 2009. This increase—5.7 percentage points—is the largest postwar upswing in the
unemployment rate. It dwarfs the rise in joblessness in the two most recent recessions in 1990 and
2001, when in each case unemployment rose by approximately 2.5 percentage points. It dominates
even the severe recession of 1973/4 (4.25 percentage points) as well as the combined effects of the
double recession of the early 1980s (5 percentage points). There is little doubt that the present
downturn is the deepest postwar recession from the perspective of the labor market.2
       In what follows, we will closely examine the rise in unemployment in the present downturn. But
it is helpful at this point to place the increase in joblessness in the broader context of other related
labor market indicators. We consider two sets of measures: First, the relation between the rise in
unemployment and the decline in employment during the downturn; and second, the role of declines
in employment relative to hours per worker in accounting for the contraction in total labor input.
       The decline in employment. The unemployment rate at a given point in time                                     can be related to
the level of employment                 , and the labor force            , via the simple identity                                 . This
identity suggests a simple metric for gauging the relative roles of variation in employment and labor
force participation in accounting for the upswing in unemployment, since

2
    While the current Great Recession is the most severe postwar recession, it is important to note that, as is true of all recent
    recessions, the current ramp-up in the unemployment rate is overshadowed by that witnessed during the Great Depression: In
    1929, the unemployment rate stood at 3.2 percent, rising to 25.2 percent by 1933, a 22 percentage point rise in four years. Indeed,
    such is the extremity of the Great Depression that adding it to any plot renders the postwar variation in joblessness very difficult to
    perceive.
6                                                                              The Labor Market in the Great Recession



                                                                                                   ,                (1)

where           denotes the working-age population. The increase in the unemployment rate over the
course of a recession can be decomposed into parts accounted for by logarithmic variation in the
labor force participation rate and the employment-population ratio respectively.
       This exercise is performed in Figure 2. It plots the cumulative log deviations from trend of the
published time series for the employment-population ratio and the labor force participation rate
from the CPS for the last six recessions. Figure 2 has two related messages. First, the record
upswing in the unemployment rate observed in Figure 1 is mirrored by a record contraction in
employment: Employment has declined relative to trend by 7 log points since the start of the
recession, dominating the severe recession of the mid 1970s, as well as the joint effects of the
double recession of the early 1980s.
       A second message of Figure 2 is that, rather than contributing to the rise in unemployment, a
reduction in labor force participation of around 2 log points has muted the rise in joblessness in the
current recession. Figure 2 also reveals that the current recession is no exception in this respect:
Almost all of the downturns prior to 2007 also exhibit a mild procyclicality of labor force
participation.
       An interesting aspect of the response of labor force participation in this recession is that it seems
to have had two stages. Daly, Hobijn, and Kwok (2009a) emphasize that during the first part of the
recession the labor force participation rate remained unexpectedly high. Since May 2009, however,
the labor force participation rate fell by 1.7 percentage points, its steepest decline since the 1950s.
       Unemployment and GDP (Okun’s Law). One of the most robust aggregate statistical
relationships for the U.S. economy is the negative comovement between changes in the
unemployment rate and growth in GDP—Okun’s (1962) Law. Figure 3 displays a version of
Okun’s Law updated to include the current recession. It plots the deviation from trend of the
unemployment rate against the percentage deviation from trend of GDP using the CBO’s estimates
of the NAIRU and potential output up to January 2010.3 The dashed line is the regression line based
on the observations from 1949 through 2007, excluding the Great Recession. In the absence of large
movements in potential output and the NAIRU, Okun’s Law implies that for every 2 percent that
output falls below trend, the unemployment rate will increase by about 1 percentage point.
3
    Detrended unemployment and output data based on Hodrick-Prescott filtered series yield very similar results.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                       7



      This rule of thumb has performed remarkably well in accounting for the evolution of Okun’s
Law in the first part of the 2007 recession through 2009Q1, as indicated by the bold squares in
Figure 3. Thus, as we have noted of other dimensions of the 2007 downturn, the adjustment of the
labor market until the second quarter of 2009 is by no means an outlier relative to past recessions.
      The last nine months of 2009, however, have witnessed an important departure from the
historical path of Okun’s Law: Even though overall economic activity, as measured by GDP,
rebounded in the second half of 2009, the unemployment rate continued to rise. This recent
divergence between output and the labor market can be traced to the high level of average labor
productivity growth during that period,4 resulting in an increase in the unemployment rate in 2009
that surprised policymakers and forecasters alike.5 The exceptionally strong productivity growth
during the onset of the recovery also occurred during the jobless recoveries that followed the
previous two recessions. We revisit the implications of this for the outlook going forward in section
3.6
      Hours vs. bodies. The evidence presented thus far has pertained solely to measures of the
number of persons in or out of work, and not to the number of hours worked per employed person.
Here we summarize the behavior of each of these measures, and identify their relative importance in
driving the contraction in total labor input during the current downturn. Our point of departure is
another simple accounting identity, namely that total labor input                            is the product of employment
      and hours per worker           . It follows that the logarithmic decline in total hours worked during the
recession may be decomposed into the sum of the respective logarithmic declines in                                   and     .
      Figure 4 performs this simple accounting exercise using data on employment and weekly hours
per worker in the nonfarm business sector from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Labor Productivity
and Costs program.7 It plots the cumulative log declines in employment and hours per worker for




4
  Mulligan (2009, 2010) argues that the current downturn has been qualitatively different from previous severe recessions because
   productivity growth remained normal while labor supply shifted to the left. He concludes that a reduction in labor supply and/or an
   increase in labor market distortions are major factors in the 2007 recession.
5
  For a detailed analysis of the recent behavior of Okun’s Law, see Gordon (2010).
6
  Nalewaik (2010) suggests that deviations from Okun’s Law are less severe when one considers Gross Domestic Income, i.e. an
   income-based measure of output, rather than GDP, which is based on the expenditure side of the national accounts.
7
  The BLS series identifiers used for employment and weekly hours per worker are respectively PRS85006013 and PRS85006023. In
   constructing these series, the BLS combines data from the Current Employment Statistics and the CPS. Employment here includes
   both payroll employees as well as self-employed and unpaid family workers.
8                                                                            The Labor Market in the Great Recession



each postwar recessionary downturn in total labor input.8 Total labor input has declined by 10 log
points in the current recession, again more than in any other postwar recession.
    An interesting aspect of Figure 4 is that, while the 2007 recession is unusual in its severity, the
adjustment of the labor market bears an important resemblance to that observed in prior recessions.
Figure 4 highlights this on two dimensions. First, we observe that reductions in hours per worker
prevail in the early stages of the recession, with contractions in employment becoming dominant
later on. Second, Figure 4 reiterates the message of Figure 2 that employment has fallen by 7 log
points, but additionally reveals that hours per worker have contracted by 3 log points. Thus, there
has been something close to a 70:30 bodies/hours split to the decline in total labor input over the
course of the 2007 recession. This is in line with the conventional wisdom, since at least Okun
(1962), that around two-thirds of the cyclical variation in labor input is accounted for by the
extensive margin. Reiterating this point, Figure 4 reveals that, across the last six recessions,
variation in employment accounts for between 50 and 80 percent of declines in total hours.


                                         1.2 Who has been hit hardest?
Underlying the acute surge in joblessness documented in Figures 1 through 4 is a rich degree of
heterogeneity in the structure of unemployment across different groups of the labor force. Here we
document this heterogeneity in the experience of unemployment across groups in the labor force,
focusing on four dimensions of heterogeneity: gender, age, race and educational attainment.
    To assess the quantitative importance of these differences, Table 1 reports the ratio of the rise in
each group’s unemployment rate to the rise in the overall unemployment rate for the last five
downturns using data from the CPS. If the rise in unemployment were spread uniformly across
different subgroups of the labor market, the ratios in Table 1 would all equal 1. We find that male,
younger, less educated workers, as well as individuals from ethnic minorities, experience steeper
rises in joblessness during all recessions, including the most recent one.9
    An interesting aspect of the results in Table 1 is that the current recession is by no means an
exception in terms of its gender bias. While many commentators on the present downturn have
8
  The recession dates used for constructing Figure 4 differ slightly from the official NBER recession dates. They correspond to the
   quarters around the NBER recession dates over which total hours worked are observed to decline.
9
  This echoes the findings of an abundant literature that has documented differences in the cyclical sensitivity of different
   demographic groups (see Clark and Summers, 1981, Gomme, Rogerson, Rupert, and Wright, 2004, Kydland, 1984, Mincer 1991,
   for example).
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                          9



emphasized its character as a mancession, Table 1 reveals in contrast that all recessions have
affected male workers disproportionately more; the mancession is not a new phenomenon. Şahin,
Song, and Hobijn (2009) show that this can be traced to the fact that industries in which male
workers are concentrated, such as construction and durable goods manufacturing, are particularly
sensitive to the cycle.


                        1.3 Accounting for the Composition of the Labor Force
Heterogeneity in the experience of unemployment across labor force groups is an important
characteristic of joblessness in the current recession. Recent decades have witnessed dramatic
changes in the composition of this heterogeneity in the labor force. We focus here on one particular
dimension of composition that has a crucial bearing on historical comparisons of unemployment
rates: age structure. The labor force has become older since the 1980s as the baby boom generation
has aged, a point emphasized by Shimer (1998, 2001).10 Accounting for such compositional
changes can paint a different picture of aggregate unemployment trends because these different
labor force groups are systematically more or less likely to experience spells of unemployment.
       We implement a simple method for controlling for the impact of changes in the age composition
of the labor force on trends in aggregate unemployment, by fixing the labor force shares for each
age group to their level at some reference date, and tracing out the implied composition-adjusted
unemployment series. Figure 5 performs this exercise using the most recent labor force shares to
construct composition-adjusted series. This reveals an interesting finding: Accounting for changes
in the age composition of the labor force leads to a substantial downward revision of past
unemployment rates. Figure 5 reveals that the age-adjusted unemployment rate has reached its
highest level in the postwar period.



10
     An online appendix that accompanies this paper presents composition adjustments for the full interaction of age, gender, race and
     education, as well as for each dimension individually. While changing gender composition has had very little impact, composition
     by race and education plays a role. The influx of immigrants since the 1970s that has led to a greater fraction of Hispanic workers
     in the labor force, who in turn are more likely to experience an unemployment spell. On the other hand, increased educational
     attainment since the 1980s has shifted the structure of the labor force toward better educated workers who face lower
     unemployment rates on average (see Farber and Western, 2010, for more on this). Shimer (1998) cautions against adjustments for
     educational composition, however. Workers with higher unobserved ability are likely to face lower unemployment rates
     conditional on education. As workers become more educated over time, the average ability of each education group will decline,
     leading to an increase in that group’s unemployment rate. In addition, if the educational distribution shifts, employers may simply
     revise the educational requirements of jobs, leading to no real effect on the unemployment rate.
10                                                                          The Labor Market in the Great Recession



                              2. Labor market flows in the recession
Another defining characteristic of the U.S. labor market is that it is in a state of continual flux. Even
when the aggregate economy is in a tranquil state, many workers flow in and out of employment
and unemployment. In times of recession, these flows come into focus as proximate determinants of
increases in joblessness: Does unemployment rise as a result of increased inflows as workers lose
their jobs? Or does it rise because unemployed workers increasingly fail to find new jobs? Or is it
some combination of the two?
     Based on the shallow downturns of 1990 and 2001, recent research has argued that the nature of
labor market adjustment in times of recession has radically shifted in recent years. Hall (2005)
states that “In the modern U.S. economy, recessions do not begin with a burst of layoffs.” Echoing
this, in his study of unemployment flows, Shimer (2007) concludes that “Fluctuations in the
employment exit probability are quantitatively irrelevant during the last two decades.” 11 Instead,
increased unemployment duration, or a decline in the rate at which workers flow out of the
unemployment pool, is argued to drive the entirety of contemporary unemployment variation.
     In contrast, a long line of research on labor market flows prior to the last two recessions came to
the conclusion that cyclical ramp-ups in unemployment are driven by both margins.12 More recent
work has revived this conclusion, and identified a clear pattern to unemployment flows in times of
recession: Increases in unemployment are preceded by sharp rises in unemployment inflows,
followed by more prolonged periods of elevated unemployment duration.13 The conclusion of that
literature pointed towards cyclical ramp-ups in unemployment being driven by both margins, with
inflows being relatively more dominant early on in recessions.
     The current downturn provides an opportunity to assess these conclusions: Is a diminished role
of job loss a feature of modern recessions, or of shallow recessions? To get a sense for this, we
explore updated estimates of unemployment transitions from a variety of data sources.



11
   Shimer (2007) uses the term “employment exit probability” to refer to the probability of entering unemployment. We do not use
   this terminology because employment exit can be taken to mean a flow from employment to either unemployment or
   nonparticipation, of which the latter does not involve an inflow into unemployment, and may even be taken to mean any separation
   from employment, which would also include job-to-job flows.
12
   See, among others, Perry (1972), Marston (1976), Blanchard and Diamond (1990), and Baker (1992).
13
   See, Braun, De Bock, and DiCecio (2006); Davis (2006); Elsby, Michaels, and Solon (2009); Fujita and Ramey (2009); Kennan
   (2006); and Yashiv (2008).
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                           11



                2.1 The Ins and Outs of Unemployment in the Current Recession
A first glimpse of the dynamics of unemployment flows can be obtained from published time series
from the CPS.14 Shimer (2007) describes a method that uses monthly series on the number
employed, the number unemployed, and the number unemployed for fewer than five weeks to infer
the rates at which workers enter unemployment, and unemployed workers exit unemployment. His
point of departure is the following description of the evolution of the unemployment stock                                        :

                                                                                           ,                                            (2)

where           and       are respectively the inflow and outflow rates,                        is the labor force, and          indexes
months. While some recent literature has referred to                              and          as “separation” and “job-finding”
rates, we use the terms inflow and outflow rates advisedly. First, many separations from employers
do not result in a flow into unemployment, a point we shall return to in section 2.3. Second,
includes flows from unemployment to nonparticipation as well as employment. The cyclical
properties of the outflow rate in this and in prior recessions are almost identical to those of
transitions from unemployment to employment in longitudinally-linked microdata.15 We focus on
the outflow rate because it is the proximate driving force for the changes in the unemployment rate,
and it is much more transparent to compute.16
       The goal of the analysis is to relate variation in the unemployment rate                                            to variation
in the flow hazards                and . To that end, we first need to estimate these flow rates. Following
Shimer (2007), we compute the monthly outflow probability,

                                                                                           ,                                            (3)




14
   Throughout the remainder of this section we focus on unemployment flows estimated from CPS time series, rather than the
    longitudinally-matched monthly CPS microdata (the so-called “gross flows” data). This choice is informed by the fact that there
    are important measurement issues that accompany the use of the gross flows data, including spurious transitions driven by
    measurement error in reported labor market states in consecutive monthly surveys, non-random attrition from the sample, and
    discrepancies between published changes in aggregate labor market stocks and those implied by the gross flows.
15
   It is difficult to make strong statements on the importance of the distinction as one uses increasingly disaggregated data. The reason
    is that, as one disaggregates the CPS data further, cell sizes start getting smaller, and sampling variance worsens, yielding noisy
    estimates. This is aggravated when one uses longitudinally-linked microdata, as in practice only a fraction of the CPS sample can
    be matched across months.
16
     An implicit assumption underlying equation (2) is that all inflows into unemployment originate from employment,             . In fact,
     as we will see in what follows, a substantial fraction of inflows originate from nonparticipation in the U.S. We relax this
     simplifying assumption in section 2.3 below.
12                                                                            The Labor Market in the Great Recession



where             is the stock of workers who report having been unemployed for less than one month.17
Intuitively, the term inside the brackets is the fraction of the unemployed in month                                that remains
unemployed the next month, the complement of which is the monthly outflow probability. This can
then be mapped into a Poisson outflow hazard rate                                            .
       Obtaining an estimate of the inflow rate is slightly more involved. Assuming that the flow
hazards,         and     , and the labor force,         , are constant between surveys, one can solve equation (1)
forward one month to obtain:

                                                                                     .                                           (4)

Here unemployment is a weighted average of the flow steady state level of unemployment
                       and last month’s unemployment                   , with weight given by the monthly rate of
convergence to steady state,                                          . Since we observe the labor force and
unemployment stocks in each month, and with an estimate of the outflow rate                                  in hand, equation
(4) is a nonlinear equation that can be solved for the inflow rate                                     . As emphasized by
Shimer (2007), this procedure for estimating                        implicitly corrects for a time aggregation bias
arising from inflows within a given month exiting prior to the next month’s survey.
       Figure 6 plots quarterly averages of the estimated monthly time series for the rates of inflow to
and outflow from unemployment, using the most recent CPS data up to 2009 Q4. Figure 6
highlights a number of interesting properties of the dynamics of unemployment flows in past
recessions. First, as emphasized in the entirety of research on unemployment flows, both old and
new, the outflow rate from unemployment is markedly procyclical, exhibiting systematic and
prolonged downswings in all recessions. Second, the inflow rate into unemployment is
countercyclical, exhibiting sharp upswings at the onset of all recessions that tend to subside quickly
by the end of the recession. Third, the response of unemployment inflows in the relatively mild
recessions that began in 1990 and 2001 appears to be muted in comparison to other episodes, a
point that echoes the recent conclusions of Hall (2005, 2007) and Shimer (2007).
       At this point, we can return to the question that motivated this part of our analysis: To what
extent is the cyclical ramp up in unemployment accounted for by changes in these flow hazard
17
     As noted by Polivka and Miller (1998) and Abraham and Shimer (2001), the published time series on short term unemployment
     from the BLS displays a discontinuous decline following the CPS redesign in 1994, as a result of a change in the way
     unemployment duration was recorded. We correct the published post redesign series for short term unemployment by rescaling it
     by a factor of 1.16. See Elsby, Michaels, and Solon (2009) for more details.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                      13



rates? Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) provide a simple method for answering this question. Their
starting point is an observation that has been noted by many analysts of U.S. unemployment flows:
That the unemployment rate in the U.S. is very closely approximated by its flow steady state value,
that is

                                                                                         .18                                        (5)

       Equation (5) is useful for our purposes because it provides a link between variation in the
unemployment stock and variation in the constituent flow hazard rates. Elsby, Michaels and Solon
(2009) show that simple log differentiation of this approximate relation implies:

                                                                    , where                                                         (6)

       Equation (6) has a simple message: To compare changes in inflow and outflow rates on an equal
footing with respect to changes in unemployment, all one needs do is compare the logarithmic
variation in each of the flow hazards.
       The results from applying this decomposition of unemployment variation for each recession
since 1973 are depicted in Figure 7. We identify start and end dates for each recessionary ramp-up
in unemployment since 1973, and compute the cumulative logarithmic difference in inflow and
outflow rates relative to their respective start of recession values. In many ways, the message of
Figure 7 confirms the qualitative picture suggested in Figure 6: In all recessions, inflows account
for a substantial fraction of unemployment variation early on in the downturn, and then subside in
the latter stages of the recession. In contrast, the contribution of the outflow rate becomes more
dominant as each recession progresses.
       For our current focus, there are two noteworthy aspects of Figures 6 and 7. First, mirroring the
conclusions of Section 1 on labor market stocks, the behavior of unemployment flows in the initial
stages of the current downturn bears a striking resemblance to the dynamics of unemployment flows
in past severe recessions. The early quarters of the current ramp-up in unemployment are
characterized by a wave of inflows that has since receded partially. The contribution of the inflow
rate is almost identical to that observed in the 1974 downturn. Thus, returning to the question that


18
     To see why this is so, note that the sum of the inflow and outflow rates     typically exceeds 0.5 on a monthly basis in the U.S.
     An implication is that the rate of convergence to flow steady state in equation (5) above tends to be very high in practice.
14                                                                               The Labor Market in the Great Recession



motivated this analysis, sharp spikes in the rate of inflow into unemployment appear to be a feature
of severe recessions, rather than only of older ones.
     Figures 6 and 7 also shed light on what’s new about the current downturn. Figure 6 reveals that
the unemployment outflow rate fell to an historic low of 24 percent in 2009 Q3. This is not just a
consequence of the secular trend toward declining outflow hazards shown in Figure 6: Figure 7
shows that the exit rate fell by over 80 log points in the current downturn, more than in any of its
postwar counterparts, echoing the conclusion of Section 1 that this is the deepest postwar downturn
in labor market outcomes. We return to this phenomenon in Section 3, when we discuss its
implications for a recovery.


                           2.2 Unemployment Flows by Labor Force Group
In Section 1.2 we saw that changes in unemployment rates have differed substantially across
different demographic groups during the 2007 recession, with some groups being hit harder by the
downturn than others. We now look into the sources of this heterogeneity by examining
unemployment flows across groups.
     We focus on the same four dimensions of heterogeneity as in Section 1.2. Estimation of the flow
hazards for each labor force group mirrors the aggregate analysis above. 19 Figure 8 displays the
series for the inflow and outflow hazards for each group. They are plotted as twelve-month moving
averages to smooth out noise induced by the greater sampling variance that accompanies these more
disaggregated series. In accordance with the message of equation (5), the flow hazards are drawn on
log scales.
     Figure 8 has a rich set of implications for the structure of joblessness across groups. Perhaps its
most prominent feature is the remarkable uniformity in both the levels and cyclical behavior of
outflow rates across groups. Most striking are the series by education group, for which the exit rates
are virtually indistinguishable since 1976.20 In the current recession, the log decline in outflow
hazards has been almost identical across groups. Reductions in the outflow rate that accompany
19
   The Bureau of Labor Statistics publishes seasonally unadjusted estimates of unemployment by duration starting from the mid
   1970s by gender, age and race. As in Section 1.2 above, for education groups we use CPS monthly microdata files from January
   1976 on to construct measures of the number unemployed less than five weeks, unemployed and employed by education groups.
   We then seasonally adjust the raw data using the Census’ X12 procedure, and compute the monthly outflow and inflow rates using
   the analogues to equations (3) and (4) that hold for each group. As before, we also correct for discontinuities in the series for short-
   term unemployment by group induced by the redesign of the CPS in 1994.
20
   This echoes the findings of Mincer (1991).
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                     15



recessions, from both a qualitative and a quantitative perspective, are truly an aggregate
phenomenon.
       In stark contrast, there are large differences in rates of inflow into unemployment across groups.
Comparison of these with the heterogeneity of unemployment across groups in Table 1 reveals a
close link: The same groups that face high unemployment rates—young workers, less-educated
workers, and workers from ethnic minorities—also face markedly high rates of entry into
unemployment. The message of this comparison is that the bulk of the large differences in the level
of unemployment across groups observed in Table 1 are driven by differences in each group’s
propensity to enter unemployment, rather than differences in the duration of their spells.
       In addition to revealing large differences in the levels of unemployment across groups, Table 1
also demonstrated that some groups face greater increases in unemployment in times of recession.
What can account for this? Well, recalling equation (5) above, we can write the change in group ’s
unemployment rate as

                                                                   , where                                                        (7)

One possibility, then, is that these groups simply faced larger logarithmic changes in their
constituent flow hazards. Inspection of Figure 8 reveals that this is precisely what accounts for the
surge in the unemployment of men relative to women in the current recession: While male and
female outflow rates have been essentially identical, men have faced a much larger increase in
inflows, a point emphasized by Şahin, Song, and Hobijn (2009).21
       But this is not the whole story. For age, race and education groups, there is little difference in
the cyclicality of unemployment flows, and whatever differences exist tend to predict the opposite
of the pattern depicted in Table 1. For example, outflow rates among young workers aged 16 to 24
have fallen just as much as for older workers, and their inflow rates have hardly risen in the
recession. Yet, in Table 1, the unemployment rate among 16 to 24 year-olds rose substantially more
than aggregate unemployment.
       The answer lies in equation (7) above: For values of the group-specific unemployment rates
observed in Table 1 (i.e. lying below one half),                          is increasing in            . Thus, the higher the

21
     Şahin, Song, and Hobijn (2009) explore this phenomenon using longitudinally-linked monthly CPS microdata to estimate labor
     market flows between unemployment, employment and nonparticipation. Consistent with Figure 8, they find that, for men, the
     employment to unemployment transition rate increased more than it did for women, while unemployment to employment
     transition rate declined proportionally across gender groups.
16                                                          The Labor Market in the Great Recession



unemployment rate faced by an individual group, the greater the responsiveness of the group’s
unemployment rate to changes in its constituent flow hazards. Intuitively, equation (7) implies that
changes in the flow hazards have a logarithmic influence on unemployment: A doubling of, for
example, the inflow hazard, leads to an almost doubling of the unemployment rate. The higher the
unemployment rate, then, the more cyclically sensitive is an individual group’s rate of joblessness.
     Inspection of Figure 8 reveals that this observation can account entirely for the greater cyclical
sensitivity of unemployment among youth, ethnic minorities and the less-educated in the current,
and indeed all recessions over the sample period. Combining this with our earlier observation that
the bulk of the differences in unemployment levels, and thereby of            , across groups can be
attributed to differences in rates of entry into unemployment yields an interesting implication: The
majority of the variation in both the levels and the cyclical sensitivity of group unemployment rates
can be accounted for by differences in the level of inflow rates across groups.


                          2.3 The Role of Job Loss in the Recession
The previous sections have shown that unemployment inflows are a proximate driving force of the
increase unemployment in the current recession, and that they play an important role in accounting
for cross sectional differences in the level and cyclicality of unemployment across groups. It is
tempting to conclude that this constitutes evidence that job loss has played a key role in the 2007
recession. In this section, we delve into this observation to uncover the mechanisms that can
account for these elevated inflow rates.
     We address two important conceptual distinctions. First, as mentioned above, estimates of the
unemployment inflow rate,       in equation (4), are based on the implicit assumption that all inflows
into the unemployment pool originate from employment rather than nonparticipation. In fact,
around 40 percent of the unemployment stock is accounted for by individuals (re-)entering the labor
force. Consequently, estimates of     conflate two economically distinct driving forces for entry into
unemployment: flows from nonparticipation brought about by the process of labor force entry, and
flows from employment to unemployment that are associated with elevated rates of job loss.
     Second, job loss is often taken to mean a separation from an employer rather than an inflow into
the unemployment pool, the distinction being that workers can, and frequently do, line up new jobs
without an intervening unemployment spell, a point that has been made since Mattila (1974), and
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                        17



more recently by Fallick and Fleischman (2004) and Nagypál (2008). In what follows, we bring to
bear a range of additional data that speak to these distinctions.
     Unemployment Inflows by Reason. It is possible to distinguish among different sources of
unemployment flows using publicly available monthly time series on the number unemployed by
reason for unemployment, and the number unemployed for fewer than five weeks by reason from
the CPS. We focus on three main reasons for unemployment: job losers (layoffs), job leavers
(quits), and labor force entrants.22 An important benefit of this distinction is that the former two
categories originate from employment, while the latter originates from nonparticipation. This allows
us to distinguish between employment to unemployment associated with job loss, and
nonparticipation to unemployment flows that accompany labor force entry. 23
     Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) describe how these data can be used to infer estimates of
unemployment flows by reason for unemployment.24 Figure 9 plots estimates of the inflow rates by
reason. As emphasized by Elsby et al., all of the observed countercyclicality in the aggregate inflow
rate noted above is driven by a markedly countercyclical layoff inflow rate. The quit inflow rate is
comparatively very low and mildly procyclical, thereby dampening the observed countercyclicality
of aggregate inflows. In addition, inflows due to labor force entry are essentially acyclical, further
moderating the rise in the aggregate inflow rate in times of recession.
     The impression of Figure 9, one that is a unifying theme of the present paper, is that the
behavior of inflows by reason in the current downturn is again very reminiscent of past recessions.
The behavior of the layoff inflow rate in particular suggests a simple partitioning of recessionary
episodes: Deep recessions, such as those starting in 1974, the Volcker disinflation period of the
early 1980s, and the present downturn are characterized by markedly elevated layoff inflow rates;

22
   It is possible to further decompose job losers into temporary vs. permanent layoffs, and labor force entrants into new entrants and
    reentrants. We do not distinguish among these principally because the redesign of the CPS in 1994 led to substantial changes in the
    definition of these subgroups, and associated discontinuities in the respective time series. See Polivka and Miller (1998).
23
   A potential concern when distinguishing among job leavers and job losers in CPS data is that the distinction, much like the
    unemployment-nonparticipation distinction, can be blurred. Poterba and Summers (1984) find that, while few job losers alter their
    reported reason for unemployment from month to month, around 25 percent of job leavers in one month subsequently report they
    lost their job in the next month’s survey. We are less concerned about this for two reasons. First, as shown in Figure 9, job leavers
    comprise such a small fraction of unemployment inflows that such response error is unlikely to distort the job loser inflow rate, our
    primary focus in this section. Second, we will see in Figure 11 that the cyclical properties of the job loser inflow rate implied by
    household responses in the CPS are strikingly similar to the layoff separation rate implied by establishment responses in JOLTS
    data.
24
   There is a slight difference between the methods used by Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) to compute inflow rates by reason for
    unemployment and that used by Shimer (2007) to compute the aggregate inflow rate. Elsby et al. use a discrete time correction for
    time aggregation bias, while Shimer uses a continuous time correction. Results in Elsby et al. suggest this difference is not
    quantitatively important.
18                                                                            The Labor Market in the Great Recession



milder recessions, such as those starting in 1990 and 2001, are typified by a more modest increase
in inflows due to layoffs. Again, the message of the 2007 recession is that severe modern recessions
share many of the characteristics of deep recessions in the past.
       Evidence from Labor Turnover. The fact that unemployment inflows have risen markedly in the
current recession, and that layoff inflows have dominated that trend, is suggestive of job loss
playing a key role in driving cyclical rises in unemployment. But it is not necessarily conclusive. As
noted by Perry (1972), and recently re-emphasized by Hall (2005), elevated rates of inflow into
unemployment need not be the outcome of elevated rates of separation from employers: Increased
inflows in times of recession can occur if workers increasingly are unable to line up new jobs
immediately upon separation. Under this alternative hypothesis, countercyclical inflows are a
symptom of declining rates of job finding among potential job-to-job movers, rather than of
elevated rates of job loss.
       The current recession provides a unique opportunity to assess these competing hypotheses—it is
the first full recession covered by the new Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS).25
This is crucial for our present purpose because it provides a representative measure of the rate at
which employed workers separate from their employers in the U.S. More formally, denote the
separation rate from employers by                   , and the employment to unemployment inflow rate by                            .
Note that a measure of the latter is given by the sum of the layoff and quit inflow rates presented
above,                           . It follows that we can relate           and       simply according to:

                                                                          ,                                                       (8)

where           denotes the probability that a worker who separates from her employer in month t
subsequently flows into unemployment.
       Figure 10 plots the published JOLTS time series for the separation rate                           and the employment
to unemployment transition rate                     implied by CPS data. This reveals a stark set of facts. First,
there is a substantial difference between the separation rate and the employment-to-unemployment
transition rate, a fact that is suggestive of the abundance of job-to-job transitions in the U.S.
economy, as emphasized by Fallick and Fleischman (2004) and Nagypál (2008). Second, while the
employment to unemployment inflow rate has increased in the current downturn, the total rate of

25
     JOLTS data are available only back to December 2000. Because of this, they miss part of the ramp-up in unemployment in the
      2001 recession.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                         19



separation of workers from employers has, if anything, fallen slightly. At first blush, then, it would
seem that the elevated rates of inflow into unemployment during the current recession are driven
wholly by reductions in the rate at which workers line up new jobs. The results of Figure 10 would
seem to provide ample support for Hall’s (2005) hypothesis that job loss has little to do with
increased unemployment in times of recession.
       We argue that such a conclusion would be premature. It has long been recognized that the
relatively modest cyclical behavior of total separations masks substantial cyclicality in its
constituent elements—quits and layoffs. Moreover, these tend to display markedly opposite cyclical
patterns: The quit rate from employers moves procyclically, while the layoff rate moves
countercyclically.26 Figure 11 plots economy-wide layoff and quit rates from JOLTS for the current
downturn and reveals that, as with unemployment flows, the behavior of labor turnover in the
current recession is again remarkably consistent with historical trends in these series.
       Accounting for the distinction between quits and layoffs allows a more revealing investigation
of the relationship between separations and unemployment inflows than in equation (6) above. The
employment to unemployment transition rate can be decomposed as follows:

                                                                                                                                       (9)


where subscripts               and       respectively denote layoffs and quits,                                    is the aggregate
separation rate, and                            is the share of layoffs in aggregate separations. Equation (9)
therefore highlights an additional channel by which employment to unemployment transitions may
increase: through changes in the composition of separations that occur during recessions,                                    .27
       Figure 11 clarifies this point. It depicts the quit separation rate                         from JOLTS along with the
quit inflow hazard into unemployment                        derived from CPS data using the method described in the
previous section. At all points in time, workers who quit their previous job face a very low
probability of subsequently entering unemployment—                                averages just 16 percent over the sample


26
     See, for example, Slichter (1919), Woytinsky (1942), Akerlof, Rose, and Yellen (1988), and Anderson and Meyer (1994).
27
     As with so much of the analysis of unemployment flows, this compositional point was first noted by Perry (1972), who refers to
     the flow of potential unemployment inflows as possessing “lottery tickets” for avoiding entry into unemployment. In his words:
     “[T]hose who enter the flow because they quit voluntarily have better lottery tickets than those who enter it because they are laid
     off. Since quits fall and layoffs rise when unemployment rises, the quality of the average lottery ticket of workers in the pool…will
     deteriorate…” (p. 267).
20                                                           The Labor Market in the Great Recession



period. Job-to-job flows drive an important wedge between separations and unemployment inflows
due to quits. It is for this reason that quits account for only a small fraction of unemployment
inflows. In addition, the implied series for    displays no cyclical pattern: it has fallen steadily from
approximately 20 percent in 2001 to 14 percent in 2009. These two observations—that             is small,
and that it has not risen in the current downturn—account for why the contribution of quits to
increased unemployment inflows is not significant in the current downturn.
     A quite different story holds for layoffs. Figure 11 shows that, at all points in time, workers laid
off from their previous jobs face a very high probability of entering unemployment—             averages
91 percent since 2001. Job-to-job flows do not appear to be prevalent among laid-off workers.
Moreover, while the gap between the separation and inflow rates for layoffs closed in the early
periods of the current downturn, the rise in    accounts only for a small fraction of the overall rise in
unemployment inflows, perhaps one-quarter of the overall rise in the layoff inflow rate.
     Figure 11 therefore provides a unique perspective on the rise in unemployment inflows during
the recession. As suggested by Hall (2005), elevated rates of entry into unemployment are not
driven by increases in the overall rate at which workers separate from employers. But, in contrast to
the claims of recent literature, job loss nonetheless plays a crucial role in accounting for
recessionary unemployment: Increased inflows into unemployment can be traced to a shift in
separations during the recession toward layoffs, who are very likely to flow into unemployment.
Increases in the layoff rate therefore have played a central role in accounting for increased rates of
entry into unemployment in the current recession.


                     3. Outlook for recovery in the labor market
Until now, we have concentrated on analyzing the behavior of labor market stocks and flows
associated with the rise in unemployment in the 2007 recession. In this section, we turn to the
prospects for the labor market going forward.
     Our point of departure is to return to Figure 6 which displays the behavior of unemployment
flows during each postwar recession. Two features of Figure 6 provide a first glimpse of the central
features that will guide the recovery. First, since the spike in the inflow rate has partially subsided,
the key to any decline in unemployment in the future is a recovery of the outflow rate. Second, the
decline in the outflow rate that has accompanied the 2007 recession has been much more severe
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                      21



than in past recessions. Thus, the recovery of the outflow rate is all the more salient in the present
downturn for the future of the U.S. labor market.
   One can think of the relative strength of the rebound in the outflow rate as being determined by
two things. First, how many new job openings will be created? Second, for a given increase in the
number of vacancies, how quickly does the pool of unemployed find new jobs?


                                       3.1 Vacancy creation
Job creation reflects the overall health of the economy and it is expected that as the aggregate
activity recovers, vacancy creation will also start to increase. However, there are many factors that
affect the timing and level of vacancy creation during recoveries.
   On the up side is the additional strength in vacancy creation due to the alleviation of the credit
constraints that resulted from the financial crisis. Moreover, since the resolution of the financial
crisis is likely to cause a substantial decline in aggregate and individual uncertainty, firms’
willingness to hire could increase significantly. In particular, it implies a drastic reduction in the
probability of a detrimental aggregate economic outcome. As Bernanke (1983) points out, such a
reduction in the probability of “bad news” will increase the likelihood that firms make the decisions
to invest and hire, which are costly to reverse.
   There are also reasons to imagine that explanations of the jobless recoveries of 1990-91 and
2001 recessions are likely to be absent during the current episode. Willems and van Wijnbergen
(2009) argue that labor hoarding can explain the jobless recoveries following the 1990 and 2001
recessions. Labor hoarding is more likely during shallow recessions, but is much less likely during
the current deep recession, which has exhibited sharp rises in rates of job loss. Similarly, Van Rens
(2004) and Koenders and Rogerson (2005) have argued that firms used the previous two recessions
as an opportunity to improve their organizational efficiency and productivity. Since the 2002 to
2007 expansion was neither exceptionally long nor very strong, it seems that the forces that might
have caused limited hiring after the 1990 and 2001 recessions are much less likely to have a large
and persistent effect during this recovery. The strength in productivity growth in the second half of
2009 that led to the deviation from Okun’s Law depicted in Figure 3 may suggest that these forces
are present during the ongoing recovery, though.
22                                                                                 The Labor Market in the Great Recession



       On the downside, there is potentially a large amount of unused capacity in the economy in terms
of labor input that firms can tap into before needing to hire additional workers which could cause
the firms to wait to create new jobs. Currently workers who work part-time but who would have
preferred to work full-time make up 6.7 percent of those employed. Daly, Hobijn, and Kwok
(2009b), among others, have argued that the pace of hiring relative to output growth during the
recovery could be slowed down because firms first increase the hours of those who are already
employed but only part-time before they actually hire additional workers.
       Finally, there are reasons to suspect that labor market changes that have taken place in the last
two decades will render such sharp reversals in the labor market less likely. For example, there has
been a decline in firms’ use of temporary layoffs, eliminating the possibility of increasing
employment at low cost. 28 In addition, the sharp recovery following the 1980s recession may have
been aided by the reversal of the disinflationary monetary policy that instigated the recession in the
first place, a feature the current recession does not share.


                                3.2 Match efficiency and the Beveridge Curve
An important concern for the strength of the recovery is that, even if firms create new jobs, it will
be harder to match workers with the appropriate job openings. The main reason for this concern is
depicted in Figures 12 and 13.29 Figure 12 illustrates the relationship between the logarithmic
deviations from Hodrick-Prescott filtered trends of vacancies and the unemployment rate, i.e. the
Beveridge curve. Observations in the plot are classified in terms of ‘not during a recession’, ‘during
a recession before 2007’, and ‘during the 2007 recession.’ The bold dashed line is the regression
line based on all observations before 2008 and the light dashed lines delimit the 90% confidence
interval around this regression line. As noted by Shimer (2005), historically there has been a
remarkably stable negative association between job openings and the unemployment rate. As can be
28
     See Groshen and Potter (2003) for a detailed discussion.
29
     Figures 12 and 13 are updated versions of Figures 4 and 6 in Shimer (2005). For expositional purposes we plot monthly rather than
     quarterly data. To account for this change in frequency, we use a value of 2700000 for the smoothing parameter of the Hodrick-
     Prescott filter which is used to filter the trend in log levels of all variables. This corresponds to the value that Shimer (2005) uses
     corrected for the change in frequency using the factor for stock variables derived by Ravn and Uhlig (2002). The vacancy series is
     based on Barnichon (2009), who builds a vacancy posting index for the years 1951 to 2009 by combining information from the
     total print and online help-wanted advertising indexes with JOLTS. As discussed in Shimer (2005), the growth of internet vacancy
     posting since the mid 1990s, and newspaper consolidation and Equal Opportunities legislation in the 1960s, can make it hard to
     compare the level of vacancies over time. Shimer uses a low-frequency HP filter to remove these trends. In addition, the series we
     use from Barnichon (2009) are robust to a range of possible higher-frequency paths for the diffusion of internet vacancy postings.
     The cyclical component of the vacancy series that we use moves consistently with economic activity over the business cycle.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                       23



seen from the figure, during the fall of 2009 the unemployment rate has been higher than would be
implied by the historical Beveridge curve.
       Figure 13 investigates the sources of this deviation from past trends. It plots the logarithmic
deviations from Hodrick-Prescott filtered trends of the outflow rate,                            , and the ratio of the number
of vacancies to the number of unemployed persons, often referred to as labor market tightness.
Shimer (2005) refers to the remarkably stable positive relationship as the “matching function.”
Figure 13 reveals that the recent divergence from the Beveridge curve can be traced to the outflow
rate being substantially lower than would be suggested by the matching function relationship
observed over much of the postwar period. The substantial decline in the outflow rate witnessed in
the latter part of 2009 in Figure 6 therefore represents a significant outlier in the context of the
historical matching function.
       The breakdown of the Beveridge curve and matching function relations in Figures 12 and 13 is
evocative of the similar breakdown in match efficiency that occurred during the European
unemployment problem of the 1980s and 1990s (see, for example, Figure 11 in Layard, Nickell, and
Jackman, 1991). This raises the concern that the U.S. economy will be plagued by the persistently
high unemployment rates that these European economies experienced well into the 1990s—so-
called hysteresis. In practice, hysteresis can arise through a number of channels. We highlight a few
of these possibilities here, and provide a sense of their relevance in the current downturn.
       Mismatch. One potential reason for a persistent reduction in match efficiency is a mismatch
between the skills and the skill requirements of job openings.30 For example, Groshen and Potter
(2003) have argued that the jobless recoveries after the 1990 and 2001 recessions were in large part
due to structural reallocation of workers across sectors in the economy. They claim that this
reallocation led to a mismatch in skill-mix that resulted in a slower adjustment of the labor market
than in previous recessions. More recently, Phelps (2008) has reiterated this concern in relation to
construction and finance workers in the 2007 recession.
       This reallocation argument suggests that workers that were employed in sectors in structural
decline will have a harder time finding jobs than other workers. That is, it implies a divergence in
outflow rates from unemployment between those who previously were employed in industries in

30
     Related to this argument, Aaronson, Rissman, and Sullivan (2004) point out that there did not seem to be a higher need to
     reallocate labor across sectors in the 1990 and 2001 recessions, which were accompanied by jobless recoveries, than during earlier
     ones. Valletta and Cleary (2009) find the same for the 2007 recession.
24                                                                               The Labor Market in the Great Recession



structural decline versus those of other workers. Figure 14 addresses this question. It shows the
unemployment outflow hazard rates conditional on the industry in which a person was employed at
the start of the unemployment spell. If anything, we have actually seen a convergence of these
outflow rates rather than the divergence implied by the structural reallocation argument.31
     Besides a mismatch in skills, an additional concern is the potential emergence of geographical
disparities in the location of workers and job openings. This has come into focus in the current
recession amid concerns that, given the decline in house prices that accompanied the recession, job
applicants are more reluctant to apply for and accept jobs that are not within commuting distance
from their current residence and would require them to sell their homes. Ferreira, Gyourko and
Tracy (2009) find that homeowners with negative equity are less likely to move by using data from
American Housing Survey for 1985-2005.32 Their results cannot be easily extrapolated to the
current recession but still point to a potentially important negative effect of housing-related
problems on the labor market recovery since geographic mobility is an important part of adjustment
to shocks in the U.S. labor market as emphasized by Blanchard and Katz (1992).33
     Sclerosis and duration dependence. Associated with the record rise in the unemployment rate
has been a surge in long-term unemployment. The fraction of the labor force that has been
unemployed for more than six months has increased by a staggering 3.5 percentage points to a
postwar high of 4 percent, 1.5 percentage points higher than the previous peak in 1983. Likewise,
average unemployment duration has risen to an historic high of 30 weeks, the mirror image of the
historic low in the unemployment exit rate noted in section 2. Here we explore the effects of these
depressed unemployment flows on the evolution of the recovery—what Bentolila and Bertola
(1990) and Blanchard (2000) have referred to as sclerosis in the European context.34
     A first potential source of sclerosis relates to the effect of reductions in the level of
unemployment outflow rates on the speed of adjustment of the unemployment rate. This point is
31
   While suggestive, this need not imply that skill mismatch is not an issue in the current recession. For example, it may be the case
   that skill mismatch nevertheless exists, but that it occurs within industry classifications. In such a case, disaggregation by industry
   would be too broad to detect an increase in skill mismatch. However, estimation of further disaggregated unemployment flows is
   limited by the increased sampling variance that accompanies additional splitting of the CPS sample.
32
   Some commentators on the current recession have pointed to evidence that the rate of domestic migration in the U.S. has reached a
   postwar low in recent data. However, it is difficult to discern how much of this is associated with the recession—rates of internal
   migration have been falling in the U.S. as a secular phenomenon since the mid-1980s (see, for example, Frey, 2009).
33
   This implication of Blanchard and Katz (1992) has been the source of some dispute, however. See, for example, Rowthorn and
   Glyn (2006).
34
   We use the term sclerosis in the sense of Blanchard (2000): “Flows decrease, individual unemployment duration increases, and so
   does the proportion of long-term unemployed.”
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                         25



clarified by equation (4) above. There, reductions in the pace of worker reallocation,                                      , lead to
reductions in the responsiveness of unemployment to changes in flow steady-state unemployment,
                          . This matters for the recovery of unemployment in the wake of the current
recession: A by-product of the historically low outflow rate reached during the 2007 recession is
that the rate of convergence of unemployment to its flow steady state,                                in equation (4), also has
arrived at a postwar low. Thus, even if firms start to hire again, the outflow rate rebounds, and flow
steady-state unemployment recovers, the actual unemployment rate may exhibit a delayed reaction.
       Quantitatively, however, we find that these effects are likely to be small. While the recent
trough in the monthly outflow rate of 0.24 is a record low by historical U.S. standards, it remains
very high relative to the standards of the European unemployment problem of the 1980s, when
monthly outflow rates fell below 0.08 in many European economies. 35 To put this in perspective,
the half-life of a deviation of unemployment from flow steady state, which stood at a little over one
month prior to the current downturn in the U.S., has risen to just under three months in recent data
for the U.S., but is not even close to the values of nine months to a year experienced in Europe in
1980s and early 1990s.36
       A second source of sclerosis is the persistence in the decline of the outflow rate itself. Previous
literature has identified the duration composition of unemployment to be a key potential driving
force for such persistence (Blanchard, 2000). Specifically, a pervasive feature of unemployment
flows in the U.S. is that average rates of outflow from unemployment decline with the duration of
unemployment spells—so-called negative duration dependence—a point noted since Kaitz (1970),
and made more recently by Shimer (2008).37 Several explanations have been proposed for such an
outcome, including the depreciation of skills of the unemployed (Pissarides, 1992; Ljungqvist and
Sargent, 1998); the ranking of job applicants by the duration of their unemployment spell
(Blanchard and Diamond, 1994); and statistical discrimination by employers against the long-term
unemployed (Lockwood, 1991).

35
     Hobijn and gahin (2009, Table 1) report average duration distributions of unemployment spells, and Elsby, Hobijn and gahin
     (2009) document the behavior of inflow and outflow rates over time for a broad number of OECD countries. Even the
     unemployment-to-employment transition rate for the U.S. (currently around 0.2 on a monthly basis) substantially exceeds the
     outflow rate (the sum of unemployment-to-employment and unemployment-to-nonparticipation rates) among many European
     countries.
36
     These are computed based on the estimates in Elsby, Hobijn and gahin (2009, Figure 3).
37
     As noted by Kaitz (1970), this may take the form of “spurious” duration dependence that arises from dynamic selection (Salant,
     1977), or “true” duration dependence whereby the accumulation of unemployment duration has a causal effect on exit rates.
26                                                                          The Labor Market in the Great Recession



       Here we highlight potential reasons for why such duration dependence can matter for the
evolution of the labor market over the cycle. Noting that the aggregate outflow probability                              can be
expressed as a share-weighted sum of the outflow probabilities faced by each duration group                                        ,
                      , it follows that changes in the aggregate outflow probability over time can be
decomposed according to

                                                                                                                            (10)

Equation (10) summarizes two potential concerns over the role of duration dependence in the
recession. First, in the context of the surge in long-term unemployment encountered in the present
recession, it is tempting to hypothesize that those with longer unemployment spells have
increasingly become disenfranchised from the labor market, leading to a disproportionate decline in
their outflow rates. Such an effect would be captured by the first term in parentheses in equation
(10).
       Figure 15 addresses this by presenting time series for a range outflow rates for workers with
different unemployment durations. Specifically, we use longitudinally-linked monthly CPS
microdata from 1976 to compute the probability that an unemployed worker of a given duration
exits unemployment within a month. Figure 15 plots the associated hazards for durations equal to
less than 1, 1 to 3, 3 to 6, and 6 or more months. Consistent with the literature on negative duration
dependence in unemployment exit rates, the hazards for exiting unemployment decline as duration
rises. More importantly for the hypothesis under discussion, however, there is no evidence that exit
rates have fallen disproportionately among the high duration unemployed in the last five recessions.
Rather, just as we saw in Section 2.2 on unemployment flows by group, the cyclicality of outflow
rates displays an extraordinary regularity across duration groups. In sum, there appears to be little
evidence to suggest that elevated rates of joblessness are a symptom of diminished employment
opportunities of the long-term unemployed in this, or any other recession.38
       However, equation (10) also reveals that duration dependence can affect the cyclicality of the
aggregate outflow rate via changes in the duration structure of unemployment,                                   . Formally, a
simple description of the stock of unemployed workers of duration                         over time is

38
     Interestingly, this conclusion mirrors the results of Machin and Manning (1999) in their detailed analysis of the long-term
     unemployment problem in Europe. In their words: “while the long-term unemployed do leave unemployment at a slower rate than
     the short-term unemployed, this has always been the case and their relative outflow rate has not fallen over time.”
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                     27



                                                               ,                                 (11)

with initial condition   given by the unemployment inflow derived in section 2. It follows that the
unemployment share of duration group      is given by

                                                                     .                           (12)

Equation (12) has significant implications for the evolution of the outflow rate during the recovery.
It reveals that the unemployment shares of the high-duration unemployed are persistent, and in
particular depend on the outflow rates faced by low-duration unemployed that prevailed in the past.
Intuitively, even if outflow rates move uniformly across duration groups during the recession, the
historic decline in outflow rates as a whole can result in a persistent residue of long-term
unemployed workers who exit unemployment slowly, depressing aggregate outflow rates in the
future.
   To illustrate the potential importance of this mechanism Figure 16 presents an illustrative
exercise: It simulates the future evolution of the aggregate outflow rate in the wake of the current
recession, assuming that outflow rates for each duration group, as well as the aggregate inflow rate,
rebound in proportion to that witnessed in the 1983/4 recovery. For purposes of comparison, Figure
16 also plots an alternative path for the aggregate outflow rate, indexed to the actual recovery
observed in 1983/4.
   Figure 16 suggests that the accumulation of long-term unemployed individuals in the present
recession can indeed have quantitatively important effects on the rebound in the outflow rate during
the recovery. While the aggregate outflow rate rebounded by around 30 percent in the 1983-84
recovery, the simulated path for the upcoming recovery augurs a more lackluster 15 percent.
   The difference between the 1983-based and the simulated counterfactual path of the aggregate
finding rate is largely due to the low levels of the outflow rates at the end of 2009. Hence, even if
these rates rebound at the same growth rate as in 1983, they would remain at a lower level than in
1983 and this would lead to a higher average duration of unemployment, even in the long run.
Though this is definitely a cause for concern, it is important to note that it is unlikely that this
mechanism will lead to the degree of persistence in the outflow rate that led to the degree of
hysteresis seen in European unemployment. The simple reason is that the long-term unemployed in
28                                                                            The Labor Market in the Great Recession



the United States flow out of unemployment at a rate that is four times higher than the aggregate
outflow rates in Continental Europe reported in Elsby, Hobijn, and Șahin (2009).
     The role of Emergency Unemployment Compensation. One particularly salient reason for a
temporary decline in match efficiency relates to the temporary extension of Emergency
Unemployment Compensation (EUC) that began in June 2008. In addition to the regular 26 weeks,
one could be eligible to 53 additional weeks of EUC as long as the Congress continues to extend
it.39 Conventional economic theory suggests this lengthening of the expected duration of
unemployment benefits will place downward pressure on the unemployment outflow rate seen in
Figure 13, as those searching for a job become more selective about which job offers they accept.
     Existing research on the effects of unemployment insurance benefits suggests that there is a
strong positive relationship between the maximum duration of UI benefits and unemployment spell
duration.40 Estimates suggest that a one week increase in potential benefit duration is associated
with increases in the average duration of the unemployment spells of UI recipients of around 0.08 to
0.20 weeks. According to these estimates, then, a 53-week extension in potential benefit duration
would be associated with a 4.2 to 10.6 week increase in unemployment duration among UI
recipients.41 Since the fraction of unemployed workers now claiming some form of UI benefits has
averaged 50 percent in the current recession, this suggests something like a 2.1 to 5.3 week increase
in overall unemployment duration. Over the course of the current recession, average unemployment
duration surged from 16.5 weeks to 30.2 weeks, a 13.7 week increase. This back-of-the-envelope
calculation therefore suggests that EUC can account for as much as 15 to 40 percent of the rise in
aggregate unemployment duration, a potentially substantial effect. In terms of the unemployment
rate, this corresponds to between 0.7 and 1.8 percentage points of the 5.5 percentage point rise in
the unemployment rate witnessed in the current recession.
     There are reasons to believe, however, that the effect of extended UI benefits in the current
recession on the duration of unemployment is likely to be at the lower end of these estimates. Many
of the larger estimates of the effect of benefit duration on unemployment duration are based on data

39
   EUC is divided into four tiers (20 weeks, then 14, then 13, and finally another 6 weeks); one must reapply when each tier expires.
   In addition to these 53 extra weeks, most states offer Extended Benefits (EB) up to 20 weeks. The number claiming EB has been
   relatively small.
40
   See Card and Levine (2000), Katz and Meyer (1990), Krueger and Meyer (2002), Meyer (1990), and Moffitt (1985).
41
   Note that this calculation assumes that, upon entering unemployment, all unemployed workers anticipate that benefit duration will
   be extended by 53 weeks. In that sense it is an upper bound on the response.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                        29



from the 1970s and 1980s when temporary layoffs, who are more responsive to the generosity of
UI, comprised a larger fraction of unemployment. In addition, many of the larger estimates in the
literature are based on empirical strategies that identify the effect of UI by exploiting differences in
benefit schedules across states and time. As Card and Levine (2000) emphasize, a potential
difficulty of this approach is that many states extend UI benefits as a response to poor job finding
prospects in recessions, overstating the true disincentive effect of UI. Indeed, Card and Levine’s
estimates based on an exogenous policy change lie at the bottom of the range of effects, suggesting
a more modest impact of EUC.
   Not all vacancies are associated with job creation A final reason for the observed decline in
match efficiency could be that the measured stock of vacancies overstates the true number of job
openings in the economy. Evidence from microdata on vacancies presented by Davis, Faberman,
and Haltiwanger (2009, figure 5) suggests that establishments whose employment levels do not
grow nevertheless post vacancies. They estimate that these firms have a vacancy rate of about 2
percent of employment. Interestingly, this is about equal to the aggregate vacancy rate observed
during the second half of 2009. This suggests that a substantial part of the vacancies reported in the
latter half of 2009 may not be associated with job-creation, but rather with a minimum level of
vacancy postings that exists regardless of the level of net job growth.
   Taken together, our analysis of the decline in match efficiency observed in the latter stages of
the current recession points to two potentially important driving forces: The existence of a
substantial residue of long-term unemployed workers with relatively weak search effectiveness, and
the extension of Emergency Unemployment Compensation. Taken separately, one might imagine
that the temporary nature of EUC will imply that the labor market will recover as extended UI
benefits are withdrawn, while the structural nature of the long-term unemployment problem will
endure well into the recovery. However, there are likely to be important interactions between the
two. A major impetus for the introduction of the EUC program was in fact the rise in long-term
unemployment that accompanied the recession. Thus, an enduring long-term unemployment
problem could mean that the political will to withdraw EUC may take some time to materialize.
30                                                           The Labor Market in the Great Recession



                                           4. Conclusion
Our detailed analysis of the adjustment of the labor market in the current downturn reveals it to be
the deepest deterioration in labor market outcomes on record in the postwar era. Every indicator of
labor market activity suggests that the recession has been unique both in its depth and duration.
Rates of joblessness among all groups in the labor market have reached historic postwar highs.
There is little doubt that it is a Great Recession.
     Nonetheless, our analysis suggests that many of the features of labor market dynamics in the
Great Recession until the latter half of 2009 are strikingly similar to those seen in earlier recessions.
This is true of the behavior of employment and labor force participation rate, the use of the
intensive vs. extensive margins in the adjustment of labor input, and in terms of the demographic
groups most affected, with young, male, less-educated, workers from ethnic minorities being hit
harder.
     In terms of the underlying flows, just as in prior deep recessions increased joblessness in the
downturn can be traced to both increased rates of inflow, as well as increased duration, with inflows
being relatively more important early on in the downturn. This suggests that the more modest
response of unemployment inflows in the 1990 and 2001 recessions is a feature of mild recessions,
rather than of modern ones.
     Further analysis of worker turnover data from the new Job Openings and Labor Turnover
Survey provides a unique perspective on the driving forces of job loss in the 2007 recession. Recent
literature has emphasized the relatively acyclical behavior of the rate at which workers separate
from employers, suggesting that job loss plays only a limited role in driving recessionary
unemployment. Combining data from JOLTS and the CPS reveals that increased inflows into
unemployment have been driven predominantly by a change in the composition of separations
toward layoffs, who are very likely to become unemployed, and away from quits, who are very
likely to flow to a new job upon separation. Thus, contrary to recent claims, increases in layoffs
have played a key role in driving increased unemployment in the recession.
     Despite the similarities of the labor market response in the early stages of the current recession
with prior downturns, more recent evidence suggests there has been an important divergence with
past trends. Most prominently, rates of exit of unemployed workers from joblessness have slowed to
record levels, drawing into focus the importance of a rebound in outflow rates for the recovery.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                     31



Recent data point to two key factors: The record rise in long-term unemployment associated with
the recession is likely to yield a persistent overhang of workers facing long unemployment spells,
slowing the recovery. In addition, the extension of Emergency Unemployment Compensation
starting in June 2008 is likely to have led to a modest increase in long-term unemployment in the
recession.
       Despite these unfavorable forces, recent data suggest that the problems facing the U.S. labor
market going forward are unlikely to be as severe as the European-style hysteresis problem of the
1980s. While the jobless in the U.S. are exiting unemployment at a historically slow rate, they
nonetheless leave unemployment as much as four times faster than those in continental Europe in
the 1980s. Looking ahead, then, a tentative expectation is for a lackluster recovery, but one not
nearly as dismal as seen in Europe in the past. 42




42
     Even after the unemployment rate recovers, labor market disturbances associated with the recession are likely to have important
     and potentially long-lasting effects on workers. Since Ruhm (1991), and Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993), research has
     emphasized that the negative effects of displacement go beyond a temporary unemployment spell, as displaced workers often
     suffer substantial wage losses even after reemployment. Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) argue that job displacement might also
     have an effect even on mortality, with annual death hazards 10-15% higher for high-seniority displaced male workers 20 years
     after displacement. The recession might also have negative effects on the careers of new labor market entrants. Oreopoulos, von
     Wachter and Heisz (2006) find that students graduating in a recession start work at lower paying employers, with permanent
     effects on low-skilled graduates.
32                                                       The Labor Market in the Great Recession



                                         References
Aaronson, Daniel, Ellen R. Rissman, and Daniel G. Sullivan (2004), “Can Sectoral Reallocation
   Explain the Jobless Recovery?” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, QII,
   36-49.
Abraham, Katharine G. and Robert Shimer (2001), “Changes in Unemployment Duration and
   Labor-Force Attachment.” In The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained?, ed.
   Alan B. Krueger and Robert M. Solow, 367-420. New York: Russell Sage Foundation and
   Century Foundation Press.
Akerlof, George A., Andrew K. Rose, and Janet L. Yellen (1988), “Job Switching and Job
   Satisfaction in the U.S. Labor Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(2): 495-
   582.
Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer (1994), “The Extent and Consequences of Job
   Turnover,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics: 177-236.
Baker, Michael (1992), “Unemployment Duration: Compositional Effects and Cyclical Variability,”
   American Economic Review, 82(1): 313-21.
Barnichon, Regis (2009), “Vacancy Posting, Job Separation and Unemployment Fluctuations,”
   Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-35.
Bernanke, Ben S. (1983), “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,” Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, 98, 85-106.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean (2000), “The Economics of Unemployment: Shocks, Institutions, and
   Interactions.” Lionel Robbins Lectures.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Peter Diamond (1990), “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of
   U.S. Workers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990 (2): 85-143.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Peter Diamond (1994), “Ranking, Unemployment Duration and
   Wages,” Review of Economic Studies 61(3): 417-434.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz (1992), “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity, 1992 (1): 1-76.
Braun, Helge, Reinout De Bock, and Riccardo DiCecio (2006), “Aggregate Shocks and Labor
   Market Fluctuations,” Working Paper No. 2006-004A, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Clark, Kim B., and Lawrence H. Summers (1981), “Demographic Differences in Cyclical
   Employment Variation,” Journal of Human Resources, 16, 6 1-79.
Card, David and Phillip B. Levine (2000), “Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI spells:
   Evidence from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program," Journal of Public Economics, 78,
   107-138.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, and Joyce Kwok (2009a), “Labor Supply Responses to Changes in Wealth
   and Credit,” FRB-SF Economic Letter 2009-05.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, and Joyce Kwok (2009b), “Jobless Recovery Redux?” FRB-SF Economic
   Letter 2009-18.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                               33



Davis, Steven J. (2006), “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over the
   Past Fifty Years: Comment,” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed. Mark Gertler and
   Kenneth Rogoff, 139-57. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger (2009), “The Establishment-Level
   Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Research
   Department WP-09-14.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon (2009), “The Ins and Outs of Cyclical
   Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1:1, 84-110.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin (2009), “Unemployment Dynamics in the
   OECD,” NBER Working Paper 14617.
Fallick, Bruce, and Charles Fleischman (2004), “Employer-to-Employer Flows in the U.S. Labor
    Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows,” Finance and Economics Discussion
    Series 2004-34. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Farber, Henry S., and Bruce Western (2010), “The Distribution of Unemployment, Employment,
   and Hours in the Current Recession: A Preliminary Look,” mimeo Princeton University.
Ferreira, Fernando, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy (2008), “Housing Busts and Household
    Mobility,” NBER Working Paper 14310.
Frey, William H. (2009). “The Great American Migration Slowdown: Regional and Metropolitan
   Dimensions,” Washington DC: Brookings Research Report.
Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey (2009), “The Cyclicality of Job Loss and Hiring,” International
    Economic Review, 50, 415-430.
Gomme, Paul, Richard Rogerson, Peter Rupert, and Randall Wright (2004), “The Business Cycle
  and the Life Cycle,” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, ed. Mark Gertler and Kenneth
  Rogoff, 415-592. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, Robert J., (2010), “Okun’s Law, Productivity Innovations, and Conundrums in Business
   Cycle Dating,” mimeo Northwestern University.
Groshen, Erica L. and Simon Potter (2003), “Has Structural Change Contributed to a Jobless
   Recovery?” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 9-8.
Hall, Robert E. (2005), “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over the
   Past Fifty Years,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed. Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff,
   101-37. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hall, Robert E. (2007), “How Much do We Understand about the Modern Recession?” Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity, 2007 (2), 13-28.
Hobijn, Bart, and Ayşegül Şahin (2009) “Job-Finding and Separation Rates in the OECD,”
   Economics Letters, 104, 107–111.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993), “Earnings
   Losses of Displaced Workers.” American Economic Review 83(4), 685-709.
Kaitz, Hyman (1970), “Analyzing the Length of Spells of Unemployment,” Monthly Labor Review,
   93(11): 11-20.
34                                                     The Labor Market in the Great Recession



Katz, Lawrence F., and Bruce D. Meyer (1990), “The Impact of the Potential Duration of
   Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics 41,
   45-72.
Kennan, John (2006), “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over the
   Past Fifty Years: Comment,” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed. Mark Gertler and
   Kenneth Rogoff, 159-64. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koenders, Kathryn, and Richard Rogerson (2005), “Organizational Dynamics Over the Business
   Cycle: A View on Jobless Recoveries,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87, 555-579.
Krueger, Alan B. and Bruce D. Meyer (2002), “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance, ” In
   Handbook of Public Economics vol. 4, edited by Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein,
   Amsterdam: North Holland, 2002.
Kydland, Finn E. (1984), “Labor-Force Heterogeneity and the Business Cycle,” Carnegie-
   Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 21, 173-208.
Layard, Richard, Stephen Nickell, and Richard Jackman (1991), Unemployment: Macroeconomic
   Performance and the Labour Market. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lockwood, Benjamin (1991), “Information Externalities in the Labour Market and the Duration of
   Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies 58(4): 733-753.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (1998), “The European Unemployment Dilemma,” Journal
   of Political Economy, 106, 514-550.
Machin, Stephen and Alan Manning, “The Causes and Consequences of Longterm Unemployment
  in Europe,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, 3, 3085-3139,
  Elsevier.
Marston, Stephen T. (1976), “Employment Instability and High Unemployment Rates,” Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity, 1976(1): 169-203.
Mattila, J. Peter (1974), “Job Quitting and Frictional Unemployment,” American Economic Review,
   64(1), 235-239.
Meyer, Bruce D. (1990), “Unemployment insurance and unemployment spells,” Econometrica 58,
  757-782.
Mincer, Jacob (1991). “Education and unemployment” NBER Working Paper, No. 3838.
Moffitt, Robert (1985), “Unemployment insurance and the distribution of unemployment spells, ”
  Journal of Econometrics 28,85-101.
Mulligan, Casey (2009), “What Caused the Recession of 2008? Hints from Labor Productivity,”
  NBER Working Paper, No. 14729.
Mulligan, Casey (2010), “Aggregate Implications of Labor Market Distortions: The Recession of
  2008-9 and Beyond,” NBER Working Paper, No. 15681.
Nagypál, Éva (2008), “Worker Reallocation over the Business Cycle: The Importance of Employer-
   to-Employer Transitions,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Nalewaik, Jeremy J. (2010), “Report on the Income- and Product- Side Estimates of U.S. Output
   Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, this issue.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                 35



Okun, Arthur M. (1962), “Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance,” Proceedings of the
   Business and Economics Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association, pp. 98–104.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter and Andrew Heisz (2006), “The Short- and Long-Term
   Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession: Hysteresis and Heterogeneity in the Market for
   College Graduates,” NBER Working Paper No. 12159.
Perry, George L. (1972), “Unemployment Flows in the U.S. Labor Market,” Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity, 1972(2): 245-78.
Phelps, Edmund (2008), “U.S. Monetary Policy and the Prospective Structural Slump,” Speech to
   the 7th Annual BIS Conference on Monetary Policy, Luzern, Switzerland.
Pissarides, Christopher A. (1992), “Loss of Skill During Unemployment and the Persistence of
    Employment Shocks.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(4): 1371-1391.
Polivka, Anne E. and Stephen M. Miller (1998), “The CPS after the Redesign: Refocusing the
    Economic Lens,” In Labor Statistics Measurement Issues, ed. John Haltiwanger, Marilyn E.
    Manser, and Robert Topel, 249-86. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, (1984) “Response Variation in the CPS: Caveats for
   the Unemployment Analyst.” Monthly Labor Review, March 1984.
Ravn, Morten O, and Harald Uhlig (2002), “On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the
   Frequency of Observations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 371-374.
Rowthorn, Robert and Glyn, Andrew J. (2006) “Convergence and Stability in U.S. Employment
  Rates,” Contributions to Macroeconomics: Vol. 6 : Iss. 1, Article 4.
Ruhm, Christopher (1991). “Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?” American
Economic Review, 81(1), 319-24.
Șahin, Ayşegűl, Joseph Song, and Bart Hobijn (2009), “The Unemployment Gender Gap During the
   Current Recession,” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 16-2.
Salant, Stephen W. (1977), “Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 91(1): 39-57.
Shimer, Robert (1998), “Why is the U.S. Unemployment Rate So Much Lower?” In NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, vol. 13. MIT Press,
   Cambridge, MA, 11–61.
Shimer, Robert (2001), “The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 116, 969-1008.
Shimer, Robert (2005), “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
   American Economic Review, 95, 25-49.
Shimer, Robert (2007), “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,” NBER Working Paper
   No. 13421.
Shimer, Robert (2008), “The Probability of Finding a Job,” American Economic Review, 98(2),
   268-273.
36                                                     The Labor Market in the Great Recession



Slichter, Sumner H. (1919), The Turnover of Factory Labor, New York: D. Appleton and
    Company.Valletta, Robert, and Aisling Cleary (2009), “Sectoral Reallocation and
    Unemployment,” FRB-SF Economic Letter 2008-32.
Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky and Jonathan A. Parker (1994), “Measuring the Cyclicality of Real
   Wages: How Important is Composition Bias?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1), 1-25.
Sullivan Daniel and Till von Wachter (2009), “Job Displacement and Mortality:
    An Analysis using Administrative Data, ” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1265-1306.
Van Rens, Thijs (2004), “Organizational Capital and Employment Fluctuations,” Universitat
   Pompeu Fabra - Economics Working Papers 944.
Willems, Tim, and Sweder van Wijnbergen (2009), “Imperfect Information, Lagged Labor
   Adjustment and the Great Moderation,” Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 09-063/2.
Woytinsky, W. S. (1942), Three Aspects of Labor Dynamics, Washington, DC: Social Science
  Research Council.
Yashiv, Eran (2008), “U.S. Labor Market Dynamics Revisited,” Scandinavian Journal of
   Economics, 109(4): 779-806.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                                                          37


Table 1. Ratio of the Rise in Group Unemployment Rate to the Rise in the Overall Unemployment Rate by Recession

                                                Average
                                             unemployment               1980               1981-1982             1990-1991                2001                Current
                                                 rate
 Change in unemployment rate                                            1.9%                  3.3%                  2.3%                  2.2%                 5.5%

 Gender        Male                                6.2%                  1.42                  1.19                 1.13                  1.14                  1.19
               Female                              6.3%                  0.43                  0.75                 0.85                  0.84                  0.78

 Age           16-24                              12.6%                  1.58                  1.28                 1.57                  1.68                  1.67
               25-54                               5.0%                   1.0                  1.02                 0.92                  0.98                  0.99
               55+                                 3.6%                  0.22                  0.65                 0.90                  0.60                  0.66

 Education     Less than High School               8.8%                  1.36                  1.61                 2.03                  1.31                  1.60
               High School                         5.4%                  1.38                  1.27                 1.08                  0.97                  1.30
               Some College                        4.3%                  0.93                  0.75                 0.99                  1.22                  1.07
               College or Higher                   2.6%                  0.19                  0.44                 0.45                  0.79                  0.58

 Race          White                               5.5%                  0.96                  0.92                 0.87                  0.87                  0.91
               Black                              12.1%                  1.30                  1.67                 1.40                  1.86                  1.29
               Hispanic                            8.8%                   ---                   ---                 1.67                  0.90                  1.35
               Asian                               4.6%                   ---                   ---                  ---                  1.29                  0.80

Notes: Average unemployment rates are based on data from June 1976 to January 2010, except for Hispanics, for whom data are available only from January 1982 to January
       2010, and Asians for January 2000 to January 2010. For the current recession, we report the change in the unemployment rate from its most recent trough in 2007Q2
       to its peak in 2009Q4.
38                                                                                                     The Labor Market in the Great Recession




Figure 1. Unemployment Rate, 1948-2009
Fraction of labor force
     12%


     10%


     8%


     6%


     4%


     2%


     0%
       1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008
              Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics. Seasonally adjusted monthly data



Figure 2. Deviation from Trend in Employment and Labor Force Participation, 1973-2009
Cumulative log deviation from trend
     0.01

     0.00

  -0.01

  -0.02

  -0.03

  -0.04
                                                                                      Log change in labor
                                                                                     force participation rate
  -0.05
                                                   Log change in
                                               employment-population
  -0.06                                                ratio

  -0.07

  -0.08
            1973 Q4
            1974 Q2
            1974 Q4
            1975 Q2
                               1979 Q4
                               1980 Q2


                                              1982 Q1
                                              1982 Q3



                                                                1991 Q2
                                                                1991 Q4


                                                                                     2001 Q2
                                                                                     2001 Q4
                                                                                     2002 Q2
                                                                                     2002 Q4

                                                                                                        2006 Q4
                                                                                                        2007 Q2
                                                                                                        2007 Q4
                                                                                                        2008 Q4
                                                                                                        2009 Q2
                                                                                                        2009 Q4
                                              1981 Q3



                                                                1990 Q2
                                                                1990 Q4



                                                                                     2000 Q4



                                                                                     2003 Q2



                                                                                                        2008 Q2




Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations.                                                     contact
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                39



Figure 3. Okun’s Law based on CBO output gap and NAIRU (1949-now)
 Unemployment gap
    6
                                        2009Q4
                                  2009Q3
                                  2009Q2
    4
                                      2009Q1



    2                                               2008Q4


                                                                 2008Q3

                                                                          2008Q2
    0                                                                       2008Q1

                                            Recessions                                                   No recession


   -2


   -4


   -6
        -10            -8            -6            -4            -2            0             2             4         6   8
                                                                  Output gap
         Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, and Congressional Budget Office



Figure 4. Hours vs. Bodies by Recession, 1973-2009
Cumulative log decline in employment and weekly hours per worker
 Log change
  0.01

  0.00

 -0.01

 -0.02

 -0.03

 -0.04
                                                 Employment
 -0.05
                                                                              Hours per worker
 -0.06

 -0.07

 -0.08
           1974 Q2
           1974 Q4
           1975 Q2


                                1980 Q2


                                               1981 Q3

                                               1982 Q3


                                                                 1990 Q2

                                                                 1991 Q2
                                                                 1991 Q4



                                                                                       2001 Q2
                                                                                       2001 Q4
                                                                                       2002 Q2
                                                                                       2002 Q4


                                                                                                                 2006 Q4
                                                                                                                 2007 Q2
                                                                                                                 2007 Q4

                                                                                                                 2008 Q4
                                                                                                                 2009 Q2
                                                                                                                 2009 Q4
           1973 Q4




                                1979 Q4




                                               1982 Q1




                                                                 1990 Q4




                                                                                       2000 Q4




                                                                                       2003 Q2




                                                                                                                 2008 Q2




              Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Labor Productivity and Costs employment and weekly hours series.
40                                                                                                           The Labor Market in the Great Recession




Figure 5. Age-Adjusted Unemployment Rate
Percent of Labor Force
 12
                                                                                       Published
                                                                                    Unemployment Rate
 10


   8


   6


   4
                                                              Age Adjusted
                                                            Unemployment Rate

   2


   0
    1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008
       Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics. Adjusted for 16-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, and 55+ age groups



Figure 6. Unemployment Inflow and Outflow Rates


Outflow Rate, f                                                                                                     Inflow Rate, s
 1.2                                                                                                                     0.06

                                               Inflow rate (right axis)
 1.0                                                                                                                     0.05


 0.8                                                                                                                     0.04


 0.6                                                                                                                     0.03


 0.4                                                                                                                     0.02
                                                            Outflow rate (left axis)

 0.2                                                                                                                     0.01


 0.0                                                                 0.00
    1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008
         Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations. Quarterly averages of monthly data.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                        41




Figure 7. Contributions of Inflow and Outflow Rates by Recession, 1973-2009
Cumulative log change in hazards since the start of unemployment ramp up
 Log Change
   1.0


   0.8
                                                         - Log Change
                                                      in Outflow Rate (f)          Log Change
   0.6                                                                          in Inflow Rate (s)


   0.4


   0.2


   0.0


  -0.2
         1973 Q4
         1974 Q2
         1974 Q4
         1975 Q2

                             1979 Q3
                             1980 Q1
                             1980 Q3

                                               1981 Q3
                                               1982 Q1
                                               1982 Q3

                                                                 1990 Q2
                                                                 1990 Q4
                                                                 1991 Q2
                                                                 1991 Q4
                                                                 1992 Q2

                                                                            2000 Q4
                                                                            2001 Q2
                                                                            2001 Q4
                                                                            2002 Q2
                                                                            2002 Q4
                                                                            2003 Q2

                                                                                           2007 Q1
                                                                                           2007 Q3
                                                                                           2008 Q1
                                                                                           2008 Q3
                                                                                           2009 Q1
                                                                                           2009 Q3
         Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations.
42                                                                                                                                                 The Labor Market in the Great Recession



Figure 8. Unemployment Flows by Demographic and Educational Groups
12-month moving averages of seasonally adjusted monthly data up to December 2009
     Monthly Hazard (log scale)                        (a) Outflow Rates by Gender                   Monthly Hazard (log scale)                         (a) Inflow Rates by Gender
       1.00                                                                                            0.08


                                                 Women


                                                                                                                                                                              Women
       0.50                                                                                            0.04

                                                                               Men                                                                 Men




       0.25                                                                                            0.02




       0.13                                                                                            0.01
           1976                1981               1986               1991       1996   2001   2006         1976                1981               1986               1991             1996      2001   2006
                Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations                                   Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations

     Monthly Hazard (log scale)                          (b) Outflow Rates by Age                    Monthly Hazard (log scale)                           (b) Inflow Rates by Age
       1.00                                                                                               0.16

                                              16-24
                                                                                                                                                      16-24
                                                                                                          0.08
                                                     25-54
       0.50


                                                                                                          0.04
                                                                               55+
                                                                                                                                                                                 25-54
       0.25
                                                                                                          0.02



                                                                                                                                                           55+
       0.13                                                                                               0.01
           1976                1981               1986               1991       1996   2001   2006            1976                1981              1986               1991              1996   2001   2006
                Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations                                      Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                                                                                                                                      43

Figure 8 - continued. Unemployment Flows by Demographic and Educational Groups
12-month moving averages of seasonally adjusted monthly data
   Monthly Hazard (log scale)                  (c) Outflow Rates by Race/Ethnicity                                            Monthly Hazard (log scale)                    (c) Inflow Rates by Race/Ethnicity
    1.00                                                                                                                        0.13

                                                         Hispanic                                                                                                       Black
                       White

                                                                                                                                0.06                                 Hispanic

    0.50
                                                                                                                 Asian
                                                                                Black
                                                                                                                                0.03                                     White



    0.25
                                                                                                                                0.02                                                                                                       Asian




    0.13                                                                                                                        0.01
        1976                1981               1986              1991               1996                  2001        2006          1976                  1981            1986               1991               1996                2001   2006
              Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey, and authors' calculations                                   Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey, and authors' calculations

   Monthly Hazard (log scale)                     (d) Outflow Rates by Education                                              Montly Hazard (log scale)                        (d) Inflow Rates by Education
     0.80                                                                                                                       0.08


                                                                                                                                                                                   <12
                                                                                                                 12
                                                                            <12                                                 0.04

                                                                                                                                                                                                              12


     0.40                                                                                                                       0.02                                         12-15
                                                                                       16+                            12-15


                                                                                                                                                                          16+
                                                                                                                                0.01




     0.20                                                                                                                       0.01
         1976                1981              1986               1991               1996                 2001        2006          1976                  1981            1986               1991               1996                2001    2006
              Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survery, and authors' calculations                                  Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey, and authors' calculations
44                                                                                                          The Labor Market in the Great Recession



Figure 9. Unemployment Flows by Reason for Unemployment
Inflow Hazard
 0.04



                                                                      Entrant Inflow Rate
 0.03



                                                        Layoff Inflow Rate
 0.02




 0.01
                                                                 Quit Inflow Rate




 0.00
     1968             1973           1978           1983           1988           1993           1998           2003      2008
         Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations based on Elsby, Michaels, and Solon (2009)



Figure 10. Separation vs. Employment to Unemployment Transition Rates
Monthly Rate
     0.05

  0.045
                                                                        Total Separation Rate
     0.04

  0.035

     0.03

  0.025

     0.02

  0.015
                                                              E-U Transition Rate
     0.01

  0.005

        0
         1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
               Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations. Monthly rates based on CPS and JOLTS data.
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                       45



Figure 11. Separation and Unemployment Inflow Rates: Quits vs. Layoffs

Monthly Rate (log scale)
   0.063


   0.031
                                                                                   Quit Separation Rate


   0.016                                                                               Layoff Separation Rate



                                                                   Layoff Inflow Rate
   0.008

                                                                                  Quit Inflow Rate
   0.004


   0.002


   0.001
        1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations. Computed from CPS and JOLTS data.



Figure 12. The Beveridge Curve
Vacancies
   0.4



   0.2                                                 Jan-08
                                                     Feb-08
                                                        Mar-08
                                                                           No recession
                                                                  Jul-08
                                                      Apr-08 May-08
                                                               Jun-08
                                                                        Aug-08

   0.0
                                                                                Oct-08
                                                                           Sep-08 Nov-08Dec-08


                                          Recessions                                                 Feb-09
                                                                                                               Jan-10
  -0.2                                                                                          Jan-09        Feb-10
                                                                                                                   Sep-09
                                                                                                         Mar-09
                                                                                                               May-09
                                                                                                                Jun-09
                                                                                                                     Oct-09
                                                                                                                  Dec-09
                                                                                                                   Nov-09
                                                                                                                 Aug-09
  -0.4                                                                                                     Apr-09
                                                                                                               Jul-09




  -0.6
         -0.6                -0.4                 -0.2                 0.0                    0.2             0.4             0.6
                                                              Unemployment rate
            Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Barnichon (2009), and authors' calculations
46                                                                                                         The Labor Market in the Great Recession



Figure 13. The Matching Function
Outflow hazard rate
     0.6


     0.4
                                                                                  No recession
                                                                                                          Jan-08
     0.2                                                                                             Apr-08
                                                                                                     Mar-08
                                                                                                          Feb-08
                                                                                             Jul-08
                                                                                                May-08
                                                                                      Aug-08 Jun-08
                                   Recessions                              Oct-08
      0                                                           Dec-08
                                                                             Sep-08

                                                                        Nov-08
  -0.2                           Dec-09
                                  Jun-09
                                                     Jan-09
                                                     Feb-09
                                         Mar-09
                                   May-09
                               Nov-09
                               Oct-09
  -0.4                                      Jan-10
                              Aug-09
                                Apr-09
                                     Sep-09
                              Jul-09      Feb-10

  -0.6
           -1          -0.8        -0.6          -0.4          -0.2           0              0.2      0.4           0.6             0.8
                                                        Vacancy-unemployment ratio
           Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Barnichon (2009), and authors' calculations



Figure 14. Unemployment Outflow Rates by Industry where Person was Employed at Start of Spell
Hazard Rate (log scale)
  1.00




                                                                                 Construction

  0.50

                                                      Total




                                  Information
  0.25                                                      Durable Goods

                                                                                                     Financial




  0.13
                2000      2001      2002       2003       2004        2005        2006        2007    2008         2009     2010
           Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and authors' calculations, 12-month moving averages of non-seasonally adjusted data
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin                                                                                      47



Figure 15. Unemployment Outflow Probabilities by Duration of Unemployment.
 Fraction of unemployed
  0.7


  0.6                                                            F(0m-1m)


  0.5
                                                                F(1m-3m)

  0.4


  0.3
                                                   F(3m-6m)
                                                                       F(6m+)
  0.2


  0.1


     0
      1976                1981               1986               1991             1996      2001   2006
           Source: Current Population Survey, authors' calculations



Figure 16. Long-term unemployment and the Outflow Rate in the Recovery
 Monthly outflow probability
   0.55


     0.5
                                                                      F(0m-1m)


   0.45

                                                  Aggregate F: indexed to 1983 recovery
     0.4
                Aggregate F: counterfactual 2010 recovery


   0.35
                                                                             F(1m-3m)
     0.3
                                                                                F(3m-6m)

   0.25                                                                           F(6m+)



     0.2
                                         2010                                              2011

Note: Simulation of the recovery in the aggregate unemployment outflow rate in 2010/11 assuming that outflow rates by duration
  group recover at the same rate as witnessed in the 1983/4 recovery. For purposes of comparison, an index of the rebound in the
  aggregate outflow rate in the 1983/4 recovery is plotted.
