                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE HOUSING CYCLE AND PROSPECTS FOR TECHNICAL PROGRESS

                                          Casey B. Mulligan

                                         Working Paper 15971
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15971


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




First draft January 2009. I appreciate comments and suggestions from Ed Glaeser, Andreas Lehnert,
Kevin Murphy, Jesse Shapiro, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago and the Federal
Reserve Board. I will provide updates on this matter on my blog www.panic2008.net. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Housing Cycle and Prospects for Technical Progress
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 15971
May 2010
JEL No. E32,O33

                                               ABSTRACT

Information technology has already transformed some areas of our lives, and has the prospect for transforming
other sectors. This paper is about economic behaviors that anticipate technical progress, and how
they may describe the housing price and construction boom of 2000-2006 and the bust thereafter.
Specifically, I note that only a minority of housing output remains as an operating surplus for the structures’
owners. It follows the prospect of productivity shocks to the mortgage and real estate industries have
the potential to both move housing prices and non-residential consumption in the same direction, and
that demand impulses are magnified in their effects on housing prices. A bust occurs when those impulses
are realized later, or in a lesser magnitude, than originally anticipated. This view has testable implications
for vacancy rates, net operating surplus, aggregate consumption patterns, net investment rates, and
non-residential construction – all of which confirm the theory.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
         Information technology has dramatically advanced over the years, and it is
unreasonable to assume that today it will suddenly cease. But what types of production
will be most transformed by future advances, when will the gains will be realized, and in
what magnitude? This paper suggests that housing is one sector to be significantly
impacted by technical progress, and that some part of the housing boom and bust 2000-
2006 was a rational and efficient anticipation of such events.
         The prospects for technical progress are exciting, but they are inherently
uncertain. We do not yet know how to cure cancer, or how to make a cheap personal
computer run at 100 Ghz. Nevertheless, we would be ill-advised to make investment
decisions today under the assumption that lifetimes will remain constant, or that personal
computers will always run at the same speed. Some of the inputs that are complementary
with future technologies – those that are inelastically supplied in the short run – should
begin to be accumulated today, even though the progress on which they rely has not yet
occurred.
         If the new technologies are realized earlier – or in greater magnitude – than
originally anticipated, then the complementary inputs will enjoy a favorable and
abnormal return. If the new technologies are realized later, or in lesser magnitude, then
the complementary inputs will be under-utilized for a while and thereby earn an
unfavorable return.2        This paper modifies the existing economic theory of housing
investment to include these ideas.3 I conclude that at least part of the housing boom

2
  The widely discussed “IT productivity paradox” acknowledges at least part of this process – that
sometimes the gains from information technology investments are realized later, or in lesser magnitudes,
than originally anticipated.
3
  My model has similarities with models in the literature designed to jointly explain the employment cycle,
stock market fluctuations, and news about aggregate productivity. See Beaudry and Portier (2006) and
Christiano et al, (2008).
occurred because technology was expected to advance in ways that would make existing
housing structures more productive.
        When a bust occurs as a consequence of bringing the future into better (and less
exuberant) focus, the boom time construction was, in hindsight, too much and too soon,
but nonetheless the housing stock might not return to its pre-boom trend. As long as
there was at least partial truth in the original anticipations – i.e., at least some
productivity advance really did occur – then part of the construction boom was necessary
and efficient, even with the benefit of hindsight. Housing prices must crash during the
bust, but net housing investment may continue to be positive during the bust period. A
“bubble” – that is, an increase in housing prices that occurred for no fundamental reason
– would not have these properties. Thus, a bust period that keeps the housing stock and
housing prices above their pre-boom trends means that housing fundamentals are in fact
better, and thereby rejects the pure bubble theory.
        Figure 1 shows the basic price and investment patterns of housing boom and bust
to be explained. The left scale shows two monthly measures of the average value of
housing properties, known as the “Case-Shiller Home Price Index” and the “OFHEO
Home Price Index” divided by the PCE deflator and normalized to 100 in the first month
shown (January 2000).4           The right scale shows residential construction spending,
expressed as a percentage of personal income. The bottom series measures tenant-
occupied housing construction and the top series adds owner-occupied construction. The
Figure shows that real residential construction grew as housing values did through 2005.
Sometime between late 2005 and early 2006, both values and construction spending
peaked and then declined through early or mid 2009. Since then, construction spending
increased a bit, as did one of the measures of real home values (both value measures
agree that the 2009 change was significantly less than the changes during 2007 and
2008). The Figure also shows that the large majority of the amount and changes in
residential construction spending are for owner-occupied structures.
        Figure 2 displays quantity indices (2000 = 100) for investment in three types of
structures: owner-occupied residential, tenant-occupied residential, and non-residential.

4
  Himmelberg et al (2005, p. 69) point out that same-property comparisons such as the two indices shown
may exaggerate housing price appreciation because properties are improved over time, especially during
the boom. Thus, I refer to them as indices of property values, rather than indices of housing prices.


                                                                                                          2
The three types of structures investment stayed in about the same proportions 1993-2000.
Both types of residential investment increased significantly 2001-2005, and thereafter fell
back to pre-boom amounts. In contrast, investment in non-residential structures fell after
2000, and increased significantly 2005-2008. Because the boom increased both types of
residential investment and reduced non-residential structures investment, the question
addressed in this paper is why housing prices and construction increased 2000-2005,
without particular attention to the distinction between owner-occupied and tenant-
occupied housing.
       The time patterns for housing prices, investment (both residential and non-
residential), and income flows qualitatively match my stochastic technology model, and
are unlike market responses to a short run shift in housing demand. Thus, the bulk of the
housing boom appears to be a response to expectations about the future, and the housing
bust a revision of those expectations. Some of those expectations are related to technical
change, although it is also possible that additional expectations related to the anticipation
of government bailouts, and even irrational exuberance, added to – or even multiplied –
the effects of prospects for technical progress.
       Section I explains how much of housing output goes for banking services, real
estate brokerage, and management, as opposed to the owner of the structure. Structures
have a leveraged claim on housing output because they are less elastically supplied than
are the housing sector’s other inputs. Moreover, prospects for technical progress in the
provision of the elastically supplied inputs should increase both housing prices and
housing construction, especially for types of houses that are relatively intensive in the
elastically supplied inputs. Section II amends the familiar “q-theory” model of housing
investment with an elastically supplied intermediate goods sector. I measure time series
for the net operating surplus and vacancy rates emphasized by the theory, and show how
they suggest that optimism about the future fueled the housing boom, rather than tastes,
technologies, or subsidies during the boom. Section III therefore looks at the market
dynamics that would be an efficient response to good news about the future. It shows the
expected size of the housing service demand shift – that is, the amount that the housing
stock is expected to increase in the long run – that is implied by a given amount of short
run housing price elevation. It shows the quantitative expectations about tastes and



                                                                                           3
technology that are required to generate large housing price increases in the short run and
housing stock increases in the long run, and how to distinguish the theory from
alternative theories of the housing cycle, leaving future research to answer the question of
whether such expectations were reasonable. Section IV points out that real housing
prices are still higher than they were before the housing boom, despite the boom’s
apparent legacy of overbuilding, which suggests that some of the boom’s optimism still
remains three years later.




    I. Resource Use in the Housing Industry
I.A. National Accounting for Housing Output
         A physical housing structure has value because it helps provide people with flows
of shelter, privacy, and convenience. However, landlords and homeowners know that
housing services flows are not produced with structures alone: also important are
intermediate inputs of brokerage, management and banking services that can match and
maintain the physical structures with the families who live in them and the investors who
build them. As shown in the national accounts, banking, real estate brokerages, and
others outside the construction industry annually supply hundreds of billions of dollars
worth of the intermediate inputs to the housing industry.
         Figure 3 shows the claims on housing output net of depreciation for 2006, as
reported by Mayerhauser and Reinsdorf (2007).5 Almost a third of housing output goes
to intermediate goods and services.                Another six percent goes to labor (largely
management).6 Thus, the entire rent paid by occupants does not go to the investor in the
structure – much of it goes to the suppliers of other resources.


I.B. Prospects for Technical Progress
         Some optimism about the future costs of intermediate inputs was warranted
because applied information technology was rapidly advancing during the 2000s. Much


5
  Figure 4 shows data for the tenant-occupied housing units only, because the labor of owner-occupants is
not included in the national accounts. The results are similar for owner-occupied housing units, except that
labor would be zero and the other items proportionally larger.
6
  Henceforth, I do not conceptually distinguish intermediate inputs from compensation of employees.


                                                                                                           4
of the banking, real estate, and property management value added relates to information.
Bankers screen borrowers and value heterogeneous collateral.                   Hall and Woodward
(2008) claim “Recent years have seen great improvements in data, especially the
introduction of credit scores, which gave lenders new powers to forecast mortgage
defaults and to adjust interest rates offered to prospective borrowers. In 1990, credit
scores were rare; by 1996, they were standard.” Perhaps lenders also expected to use
information technology to better monitor and collect on loans, and therefore put subprime
lending programs in place.7
        Real estate brokers match heterogeneous families to heterogeneous properties;
among other things, they help reduce vacancy rates. Real estate brokers might also
expect to benefit from technical progress: Virtual Office Web sites and their
technological descendants might significantly reduce the brokerage resources needed to
match homes with the persons who value them most.
        It is natural to model information-technology progress like this as sometimes
having productivity effects only with a lag.                 After all, information technology
investments in a number of other industries did little to enhance measured productivity in
the short run, but nonetheless were thought to add to the investing firms’ value.8 The
Department of Justice alleged in 2005 that information technology was reducing costs in
the real estate brokerage business, but that anti-competitive practices up to that date had
so far prevented many of those gains from being passed on to the consumer.9 If true, but
the anti-competitive practices would eventually be outweighed by either regulation or
sufficiently vigorous entry, this would be another reason for optimism about the future
costs of intermediate inputs (even while the current costs were not particularly low).
        Residential real estate, mortgage, and lease transactions are small as compared to
those in the business sector, so the former ought to be a lot more sensitive to transactions
and administrative costs. Thus, both real progress and the prospect of additional progress
should motivate more construction in the residential sector (especially units that, absent


7
  Himmelberg et al (2005, p. 88) note the emergence of cost-reducing innovations in the mortgage market,
although they do not consider that housing boom prices might have embedded some optimism about further
progress in this direction.
8
  Bharadwaj, Bharadwaj, and Konsynski (1999).
9
  United States Department of Justice (2005).


                                                                                                      5
technical progress, would be intensive in the costs of brokerage, management, etc.), and
may even crowd out non-residential construction.


I.C. A Model of the Production and Distribution of Housing Output
         Although intermediate inputs appear to be necessary, presumably they are poor
substitutes for the structures themselves: one cannot significantly increase the effective
square footage of his house by paying his banker or broker to work harder. I therefore
model the production of housing services s(t) during period t as a Leontief function of the
net stock h(t) of housing structures and the amount x(t) of intermediate inputs supplied:


                                          s(t ) = min {h(t ), x(t )}                                       (1)


I let px denote the purchase price of the intermediate inputs and ρ denote the rental rate of
housing structures. Perfect competition in the market for housing services will mean that
the rental rate r for housing services will equal the total cost of producing each unit of s:


                                            r (t ) = ρ (t ) + p x (t )                                     (2)


         ρ(t) is the housing sector’s operating surplus rate (gross of depreciation) because
it is the difference between the rental rate for housing services and the rental rate for
(non-structure) resources needed to provide those resources. Figure 3 shows that, after
subtracting depreciation, ρ(t) is less than half of the total rent paid for housing services,
so the often-cited result that “housing prices are the present value of rents received for
housing services” will prove to be a poor approximation in my model.10
         Moreover, equation (2) says that even 100 percent equity owners of housing
structures have a leveraged claim on housing output: an increase in r holding px constant
increases the ratio ρ/r. For example, the net operating surplus share shown in Figure 3
implies that a 10 percent increase in the housing rental rate r would increase net operating
surplus by more than 20 percent. This leverage is not an consequence of financial

10
  ρ(t) could be considered the rental rate for housing structures, which is only part of the cost of supplying
housing. To avoid confusion, hereafter I reserve the term rent for the payments for housing services, and
describe ρ(t) as the gross operating surplus rate.


                                                                                                             6
arrangements – it does not exist because there may be multiple claims on the income paid
to structures. Structures have a leveraged claim on housing output because they are less
elastically supplied than are the housing sector’s other inputs.11
         The housing output in Figure 3 pertains to occupied structures; vacant housing
produces no output. Conceptually, I treat this additional cost – a structure owner’s risk of
having no occupant to pay rent – as a cost like the intermediate inputs. With this
convention, r(t) must be interpreted as the period t rent earned on occupied housing and
px(t) as the cost of the intermediate inputs as well as the foregone rent on vacant
housing.12 The vacancy cost could be added to the intermediate goods slice of Figure 3,
thereby decreasing the fraction of gross housing rent that goes to structure’s owners net
operating surplus.13
         Thus, my model of housing prices and construction explicitly acknowledges the
importance of intermediate inputs, and considers how: (a) the existence of intermediate
inputs affects comparative statics with respect to other parameters and (b) anticipation of
progress in the intermediate goods sector could elevate housing prices.




11
   Many of the formal housing price and construction models do not recognize claims on housing output
aside from structures’ rent and (occasionally) property taxes. See, for example, Poterba (1984), Topel and
Rosen (1988), Himmelberg et al (2005), Glaeser et al. (2008), and Iacoviello and Neri (2008).
12
   Alternatively, the foregone rent could be moved to the left hand side of equation (2), which would then
say that the average gross rent earned (including the zero rent earned by vacant units) equals the surplus
rate for the structure owner plus the price of the intermediates x.
13
   However, an offsetting adjustment would be to add to the net operating surplus slice of the Figure, due to
the fact that 2006 (the year for which Mayerhauser and Reinsdorf (2007) gave a detailed breakdown of the
claims on housing output) had a relatively low operating surplus.


                                                                                                           7
     II. Analytical Framework and the Role of Anticipation
         I assume that there exists a representative consumer,14 with preferences over
continuous-time stochastic processes for housing services s(t) and other consumption
items c(t).      Given the near constancy of the housing service share of personal
consumption expenditures, it is both realistic and convenient to consider a logarithmic
utility function:15
                                        ⎡∞                                        ⎤
                                  U = E ⎢ ∫ e−θ t [ ln c(t ) + η (t ) ln s(t )]dt ⎥                       (3)
                                        ⎣0                                        ⎦



where θ is a constant preference parameter and η(t) is a stochastic process for preference
parameters reflecting the state of aggregate housing service demand.16 Expectations are
with respect to realization of time paths for tastes and technology (more details below).
         In order to abstract from the details of wage setting and labor supply, I assume
that the economy is endowed with a given stream w(t) of labor product. The labor
product together with the production made possible by nonresidential capital k(t) is
available for four types of spending: housing structure investment, housing intermediates,
non-residential investment, and other consumption items.


                      w(t ) + Ak (t ) = h(t ) Sf ( I (t ) / h(t ) ) + B(t ) x(t ) + k(t ) + c(t )
                                                                                                          (4)
                                              h(t ) = I (t ) − δ h(t )


where A is the (constant) marginal product of non-residential capital net of depreciation
and B(t) is the time t marginal rate of transformation between housing intermediates and
consumption goods. Dots denote derivatives with respect to time.



14
   This assumption facilitates discussion of efficiency and aggregate wealth effects, but is unnecessary for
the other results.
15
   See also Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2010).
16
   A straightforward embellishment of the model would have multiple housing stocks that differ by
location. If preferences were shifting from one region to another, then such a model would imply that the
growing regions (in terms of housing preference) have fundamental prices that are above the national
average.


                                                                                                               8
         I(t) is gross residential investment. Shf is the cost of that investment, inclusive of
installation or “adjustment” costs, with f′, f″ > 0. Shf is homogenous of degree one in h
and I, which implies that housing investment is infinitely elastically supplied in the long
run.17   The convexity of f reflects the imperfect short run supply of resources to
construction activities.
         S is an exogenous shifter of the cost or productivity of investment activity. In
principle, Sf′ would be reflected in the measured price of housing investment relative to
the price of consumption goods.                     In practice, changes in relative shadow prices of
investment may not be fully reflected in price measures because the latter do not
adequately account for waiting times and other convex costs of adjusting capital stocks. I
assume that adjustment costs in excess of those reflected in measured investment prices
are recorded in the national accounts as spending on housing intermediate goods. I
normalize f′(δ) = 1.
         Integration of the non-residential capital accumulation equation (plus a
transversality condition for nonresidential capital) helps describe the intertemporal
production set for this economy:


                ∞                                                                          ∞

                ∫e
                     − At
                            ⎡⎣c(t ) + B(t ) x(t ) + h(t )Sf ( I (t ) / h(t ) ) ⎤⎦ dt ≤ k0 + ∫ e− At w(t )dt   (5)
                0                                                                          0




In words, the present value (using the net marginal product of non-residential capital to
discount) of spending on non-housing consumption, housing intermediates, and housing
investment costs must (for each realizations of the time paths for tastes, technology and
subsidies) equal the initial value of non-residential capital plus the present value labor of
income. Henceforth, I assume that the rate of time preference θ equals the net marginal
product A of non-residential capital.                       This implies that the efficient non-housing



17
  Some previous studies, such as Poterba (1984), Topel and Rosen (1988), and Glaeser at al (2008),
assume that investment costs are not homogeneous, so that housing is less-that-perfectly elastically
supplied even in the long run. Because quantitative predictions for housing prices depend on the magnitude
of the supply response and I want to be conservative as to the amount of price elevation that can derive
from fundamentals, I follow Summers (1981) and Hayashi (1982) in assuming homogeneity.


                                                                                                               9
consumption path is constant over time, except for jumps at moments in which
information arrives about tastes, technology, or subsidies.
        I characterize fundamental determinants of housing prices in two steps. First, I
calculate the allocation of housing and other goods over time, alternatively assuming
either that (a) the allocation is efficient or (b) that the only distortion in the system
appears through the intermediaries’ price (more on this below).                                            Second, I use the
marginal conditions from that allocation to calculate the time path of operating surplus
for a hypothetical owner of one unit of housing.                                 After characterizing fundamental
housing prices, I relate housing price comparative statics to aggregate wealth effects.


II.A. Housing Prices and Housing Investment
        Assume perfect foresight, for the moment. The system of differential equations
below helps characterize both the efficient allocation and allocations in which the supply
of housing intermediates is distorted (but all other margins are efficient):
          h(t ) / h(t ) = ϕ ( q(t ) / S ) − δ
                                                                                                                    η (t )c
          q (t ) = ⎡⎣ A + δ − ϕ ( q (t ) / S ) ⎤⎦ q(t ) + B (t )(1 − σ (t )) + Sf (ϕ ( q(t ) / S ) ) −
                                                                                                                     h(t )
                   ∞
                                                                                                                              (6)
                                            ⎡η (τ )c                                                                ⎤
          q(t ) ≡ ∫ e   − ( A +δ )(τ −t )
                                            ⎢ h(τ ) − B(τ ) (1 − σ (τ ) ) − Sf   ( )+
                                                                                  I (τ )
                                                                                  h (τ )
                                                                                           I (τ )
                                                                                           h (τ )   Sf ′   ( )
                                                                                                           I (τ )
                                                                                                           h (τ )   ⎥ dτ
                   t                        ⎣                                                                       ⎦
           f ′ (ϕ ( q ) ) ≡ q


where σ(t) is the date t subsidy rate for housing intermediates (equal to zero for the
efficient allocation). ϕ is “housing investment supply curve”: the inverse of the marginal
investment cost function f′. For the moment, q is just a co-state variable defined for
analytical convenience. Once paths for h and q have been calculated, a path for housing
investment is calculated as I(t) = ϕ(q(t)/S).
        It is tempting, but incorrect, to interpret A as “the interest rate.” A is the annual
opportunity cost of residential investment expenditure: the marginal product of non-
residential capital net of depreciation.18 Subsidies, liquidity considerations, and capital


18
  Non-residential capital income taxes are not included in my model, but as an investor’s opportunity cost
A would properly be measured net of taxes.


                                                                                                                              10
market frictions may cause A to differ from, say, mortgage rates.                                      Some of those
considerations are captured by the model’s “subsidy” parameter σ(t).19 As shown below,
comparative statics with respect to the subsidy parameter also aid understanding of
comparative statics with respect to the technology parameter B because the latter can be
decomposed into a substitution effect represented by a change in σ (σ affects non-
housing consumption c only through the time path for the housing stock – see the
resource constraint (5)) and a pure wealth effect represented by offsetting changes in σ
and B.
         Consider the competitive equilibria that support the allocations described above.
That is, the time paths for housing service rents r(t), rental rates of housing structures
ρ(t), housing investment prices pI(t), and housing intermediate prices px(t) that would
cause consumers of housing to demand the available housing, owners of housing
structures to allow their structure to be occupied, and suppliers of housing intermediates
to receive the marginal cost of supplying intermediates and incurring the adjustment
costs. In this case, housing services would rent at the rate r(t) that covered the structure’s
gross operating surplus ρ(t) and the payment of intermediates px(t) (the equation (2)
above).20 The housing service rental rate r(t) would also be equal to consumers’ marginal
rate of substitution between housing services and other consumption, which, given the
Cobb-Douglas utility function, is η(t)c/h(t).


                          px (t ) = B(t )(1 − σ (t )) + ⎡⎣ f          ( )−
                                                                      I (t )
                                                                      h( t )
                                                                               I (t )
                                                                               h(t )    f′   ( )⎤⎦ S
                                                                                              I (t )
                                                                                              h(t )

                                     η ( t )c
                          r (t ) =              = ρ (t ) + p x (t )                                              (7)
                                   h( t )
                          pI (t ) = q (t )


where the term in square brackets is the effect of the housing stock on average adjustment
costs.


19
   For more detailed studies of the determinants of σ(t), see Hendershott and Slemrod (1983), Mayer
(1993), Himmelberg et al (2005).
20
   Whether suppliers of housing intermediates earn positive, negative, or zero profits depends on the level
of the adjustment cost function, which does not affect any of the comparative statics in this paper except
where noted below.


                                                                                                                 11
        The competitive equilibrium interpretation of the co-state variable q(t) is as the
date t purchase price of a unit of housing, because it is equal to both the price of new
housing and the present discounted value of the structure’s rental rates received by each
unit of existing housing (recognizing that, due to depreciation, a unit housing at time t
will be worth less than a unit of housing after date t).
                    ∞
           q(t ) = ∫ e− ( A+δ )(τ −t ) ρ (τ )dτ
                    t
                                                                                                         (8)
                                       η (τ )c
           ρ (τ ) = r (τ ) − px (τ ) =
                                        h(τ )
                                               − B(τ )(1 − σ ) − ⎡⎣ f   ( )−
                                                                        I (τ )
                                                                        h (τ )
                                                                                 I (τ )
                                                                                 h (τ )   f′   ( )⎤⎦ S
                                                                                                I (τ )
                                                                                                h (τ )




        Thus, the top equation (6) says that housing investment is a monotone function of
housing prices, where the shape and position of that function depends on the supply curve
for housing investment. This theoretical result is well known (Poterba, 1984; Topel and
Rosen, 1988). Interestingly, the supply curve for housing investment was stable enough
during the housing boom and bust 2000-2008 to make this monotone relationship obvious
in the data, as in Figure 1.


II.B. Current Versus Future Fundamentals
        Equation (8) shows that equilibrium housing prices and investment depend on
current and expected future tastes, technologies, and subsidy rates. A greater taste for
housing (either in the present or in the future), more productive intermediates (either in
the present or in the future), or greater subsidies (either in the present or in the future) are
associated with higher prices (in the present) for housing structures.
        The flow ρ(t) – δ of net operating surplus per unit stock in the housing sector can
be used to gauge the relative importance of current versus future fundamentals for
explaining the current housing price. Future fundamentals that raise price affect the
current net operating surplus ρ(t) – δ only through the current stock h(t), and thus would




                                                                                                         12
tend to reduce ρ(t). High current housing demand, currently productive intermediate
inputs, or a high current subsidy rate each increase ρ(t).21
         Figure 4 displays the housing sector’s aggregate annual net operating surplus per
dollar of housing stock at the beginning of each year, for the years 1990-2008.22 Note
that the housing stock is measured in real terms – not in terms of replacement cost – so
that the low rates during the boom are due a high real quantity of housing, not a high
market value of that housing.23 The second series uses the 1990-2000 linear trend
housing stock as the denominator. It also falls as housing boomed, but less than then
series using the actual stock: part (but not all) of the reduced net operating surplus rate is
due to an increase of the stock above trend.24
         The net operating surplus depends on rental income, which is the product of the
rental rate for an occupied property and the fraction of properties that are occupied.
Thus, the low net operating surplus rates since 2002 shown in Figure 4 might reflect
either low rental rates for occupied properties or high vacancy rates, or both. Both
possibilities are consistent with the hypothesis that expectations about the future fueled
the construction of housing that was not highly demanded at the time of construction, but
Figure 5 helps to gauge the relative importance of rental and vacancy rates for pulling
down the net operating surplus. Figure 5 displays an index (year 2000 = 1) of the ratio of
real housing consumed to the real stock in place at the beginning of the year. Because the
BEA calculates real housing consumption according to structures occupied (by either
tenants or owners), this ratio changes because the vacancy rate changes. The other two
series in Figure 5 are indexes of the occupancy rate (one minus the vacancy rate) from the
Census Bureau.
21
   A high current portfolio demand for housing (that is, an investor’s demand to hold housing as an asset in
his portfolio, regardless of whether he lives in it) would also tend to reduce ρ(t) as a greater number of
investor-landlords compete for a constant number of tenants.
22
   The year 2005 value is interpolated because its net operating surplus is very low due to the extraordinary
“depreciation” during Hurricane Katrina.
23
   Net operating surplus is deflated with the deflator for Personal Consumption Expenditures. Davis,
Lehnert, and Martin’s (2008) “rent-price” ratio, calculated from the Decennial Census of Housing, is
related to my net operating surplus rate except that they measure the stock as a market value, and (aside
from monthly utilities) do not deduct any of the intermediate inputs from gross housing rents.
24
   Because owner-occupied housing output is imputed from rental rates of tenant-occupied housing, a shift
in demand toward owner occupied could reduce rental rates on tenant-occupied housing and thereby give
the false impression of reduced rental rates for the housing sector overall. However, we can at least
conclude that tenant-occupied demand was low during this period of relatively high construction in the
tenant-occupied sector (see Figure 2).


                                                                                                          13
         Clearly occupancy rates were low during the boom: 4 percent lower according to
the BEA measure, and 1-2 percent lower by the other two. The low occupancy rates
during the housing boom suggest that a number of homes were built with characteristics
(such as location) not particularly desired by the population at the time, but may have
been anticipated to serve future demands.25 To the degree that occupancy rates fell less
than three percent, they are not enough by themselves to explain the 10+ percent drop in
net operating surplus shown in Figure 4 because the elasticity of net operating surplus
with respect to occupancy rate is about 3.26
         In summary, low occupancy rates and low income flows to structures owners
since 2000 suggest that the housing boom was fueled by expectations about the future,
and not demand or supply conditions during the boom itself.                         The anticipation of
favorable future fundamentals (to the extent that the future is not so distant than current
housing will already be fully depreciated) raises current housing prices and creates
housing investment even before those favorable fundamentals are realized. As the stock
accumulates leading up to that realization, housing service rents fall and/or property
vacancy rates increase.




     III. Market Dynamics in Response to Future Fundamentals
III.A. Information Flows
         A bust following a boom could occur because changes in technology or demand
happened later that originally anticipated, or in lesser magnitude. The theory of dynamic
programming suggests that these two possibilities have a lot in common, so for
concreteness I model only the latter.
         Figure 6 shows how I model the parameters shifts that might describe a housing
boom and bust. Prior to time zero, market participants believe that the taste, technology,
and subsidy parameters η(t) and B(t)[1-σ(t)] will remained forever constant. At time zero

25
   The 2000-2007 increase in the real quantity consumed is 78% of the increase in the total real stock
available.
26
   If intermediate inputs were elastically supplied in the short run, unoccupied structures use intermediate
inputs too, and net operating surplus were about a third of gross housing output (Figure 4 shows that net
operating surplus is about half of net housing output), then a one percent decline in the housing occupancy
rate would reduce the net operating surplus rate by three percent.


                                                                                                          14
(circa 2002), they are informed that these parameters will shift once and for all at a
specific date T > 0 (circa 2006). Between time zero and time T, they know that the time
T shift will be in the direction of more demand and more productivity, but they do not
know the magnitude. With probability π, the shifts will be large: in the amounts ΔηH and
ΔBH, respectively. With probability 1-π, the shifts will be small: in the amounts ΔηL and
ΔBL, respectively.
          As I prove below, the time interval (0,T) will be a “boom” period of high and
rising housing prices and rates of housing investment. Housing prices will jump at time
T, with the direction of the jump determined by how the uncertainty was resolved. With
probability 1-π, housing price will jump down and housing investment rates will be
discretely lower than they were during the prior boom – a “bust.”
          With these information flows, each of the endogenous variables follows one of
two possible time paths, depending on the information realized at time T.                                                                            I let
superscripts denote the realization: for example, hL(t) denotes the time path for the capital
stock after time T when the low parameter shifts were realized. The evolution of the
housing price q prior to time T is described by:


if t < T :
                                                                                                                ηc
q (t ) = ⎡⎣ A + δ − ϕ ( q(t ) / S ) ⎤⎦ q (t ) + B(1 − σ ) + Sf (ϕ ( q(t ) / S ) ) −                                                                  (9)
                                                                                                                h(t )
                              ⎡ ηc
                                                                                       ( )⎤⎥ dτ + e
         T
q (t ) ≡ ∫ e − ( A+δ )(τ −t ) ⎢       − B (1 − σ ) − Sf     ( )+
                                                              I (τ )
                                                              h (τ )
                                                                       I (τ )
                                                                       h (τ )   Sf ′       I (τ )
                                                                                           h (τ )
                                                                                                                        − ( A+δ )(T −t )
                                                                                                                                            q (T )
         t                    ⎣ h(τ )                                                               ⎦


After time T, the new tastes, technology, and subsidy rate determine the evolution of q:


if t > T , j = L, H :
                                                                                                                                   (η + Δηj )c j
                               (     j
                                             )
q (t ) = ⎡⎣ A + δ − ϕ q (t ) / S ⎤⎦ q (t ) + B(1 − σ ) − Δ + Sf ϕ q (t ) / S
  j                                               j                       j
                                                                          B                ( (          j
                                                                                                                         )) −           h j (t )
                                                                                                                                                     (10)

                                   ⎡ (η + Δηj )c j                                                                                      ⎤
                                                                                 ( )+                                       ( )⎥⎦⎥ dτ
          ∞
q (t ) ≡ ∫ e
  j            − ( A +δ )(τ −t )
                                   ⎢               − B (1 − σ ) + Δ Bj − Sf        I j (τ )             I j (τ )
                                                                                                                     Sf ′    I j (τ )

                                   ⎣⎢ h(τ )
                                                                                   h (τ )
                                                                                       j
                                                                                                        h   j
                                                                                                                (τ )         h (τ )
                                                                                                                               j

           t




                                                                                                                                                       15
Rational expectations requires that consumption and housing prices before and after time
T fit together according to the probability of each post-T outcome:
                                                   c
                                q(T ) = q L (T ) + π  ⎡ q H (T ) − q L (T ) ⎤⎦
                                                    H ⎣
                                                  c
                                                                                                        (11)
                                            c     c
                               1 = (1 − π ) L + π H
                                           c     c


At this point, it is straight-forward to add possible effects of both irrational exuberance,
and government bailouts of the mortgage market, by interpreting the parameter π as
exceeding the objective probability of realizing the favorable fundamentals.27


IV.B. The Case of Inelastic Supply
         The less elastic is the supply of housing investment, the more that information
about fundamentals affects housing prices rather than housing investment (Glaeser,
Gyourko, and Saiz, 2008). As we see from Figure 1, housing investment did change over
time – supply was not completely inelastic – so the assumption (for the sake of argument)
that housing supply was expected to be forever fixed can be used to obtain an upper
bound on the amount by which anticipated progress elevates housing prices and a lower
bound on the amount prices would fall if and when bad news about that progress arrived.
Moreover, the fixed supply case offers closed form pricing formulas, which (according to
the numerical results shown below) can, with a small adjustment, help quantify price
effects in the elastic supply case. After working out the fixed supply case in this
subsection, I then present some calculations of how market outcomes would differ with
elastic supply, and with some degree of anticipation of the technical change.
         The inelastic supply case is described by:
                                                   ⎧ I / h if I / h ≤ δ
                                      f ( I / h) = ⎨                                                    (12)
                                                   ⎩ ∞ if I / h > δ




27
  Suppose, for example, that the government were expected to absorb a fraction τ ∈ [0,1] of the capital
losses experienced when housing prices jump down, but shares in none of the capital gains. Then the
rational expectations pricing formula would be exactly (11) with π = π′/[1-(1-π′)τ] ≥ π′, where π′ is the
objective probability of realizing the favorable fundamentals.


                                                                                                            16
As long as investment does not add to the net stock, each dollar of investment is a dollar
of foregone consumption (that is, no adjustment cost). Additions to the net stock are very
costly.28
         Assuming that the housing stock began at a value h(0) that was not too high, the
stock will optimally remain constant over time. Assuming further that non-housing
consumption is constant,29 the time t value of the housing stock is:


                       η c / h(0) − [ (1 − σ ) B + δ S ] e − A(T −t ) ⎡ η c E (Δη )            ⎤
            q (t ) =                                    +             ⎢             + E (Δ B ) ⎥ t < T   (13)
                                       A                      A ⎣ h(0) η                       ⎦


where E denotes the expectations operator with respect to the probability π. To calculate
housing values after time T, replace the expectations in equation (13) with their realized
values and replace T with t.
         The first term in equation (13) shows the relationship between housing prices and
the quantity of housing when tastes and technology are constant over time, and is
therefore the long run demand for housing structures. In particular, both the demand for
housing services (parameterized by η) and the technology for housing intermediates
(parameterized by (1-σ)B) affect the demand for housing structures.
         Three price changes calculated from equation (13) might be compared with data
from the housing cycle: (a) the time zero proportional price impact of the information that
Δη and ΔB are different from zero, (b) the level of prices q(T) at the end of the boom
period, and (c) the size of the log price drop at the end of the boom period, conditional on
realizing the smaller amount of progress. The first of the three are obtained by taking the
ratio of the second term in equation (13) to the first term:


28
   With both depreciation and fixed supply, there is a gap between the value of a structure’s cash flows and
the cost of replacement. Here I assume that homeowners own the right to replace their housing at constant
cost S, so a permanent $1 increase in the operating surplus is worth $1/A to the homeowner. In this case,
there is no housing that sells for S in the marketplace. This assumption is irrelevant in the case of
endogenous supply, because supply adjusts so that new and (depreciation adjusted) existing housing sell for
the same price.
29
   As seen from the intertemporal production set (5), expectations of the taste and subsidy rate parameters
have no effect on non-housing consumption because (in the fixed supply case) they do not affect the path of
the housing stock. Only real productivity affects consumption, in which case the price impacts would be
even larger because of the wealth effect on demand (see also Appendix III).


                                                                                                          17
                    q (0) − q (0) Δ     =Δ B = 0                cE (Δη ) + h(0) E (Δ B )
                                    η
                                                   = e − AT                                     (14)
                        q (0) Δ                               η c − [ (1 − σ ) B + δ S ] h(0)
                              η =Δ B = 0




where the numerator is the expected change in the net operating surplus at date T, and the
denominator is the net operating surplus at date t < 0. Equation (14) shows how much
housing prices jump (with fixed supply) when it is learned at time zero that time T will
deliver some progress (amount unknown). In order to see how much prices are elevated
by time T compared to what they were prior to time zero, just evaluate (14) at T = 0.
       Equation (14) shows how information about future fundamentals increases
housing prices even before those fundamentals are realized (as measured by the net
operating surplus per unit housing). Moreover, the positive derivative of that function
with respect to t shows that information causes prices to appreciate (prior to date T) even
if no new information arrives in the interim and current fundamentals are unchanged.
This is a basic implication of rational expectations: the market anticipates housing price
appreciation in order to make structures’ owners willing to retain ownership through out
the interval (0,T), despite the fact that net operating surplus is low during those years as
compared to the net operating surplus anticipated after date T. Thus, a rational market
that anticipates improvements in net operating surplus must have housing prices that are
(a) high relative to current net operating surplus and (b) appreciate over time prior to any
realized improvement in net operating surplus.
       If the small amount of progress (rather than the large amount) is realized at time
T, then house prices will drop:


                      q (T ) − q L (T )    (ΔηH − ΔηL )c + (Δ HB − Δ BL )h(0)
                                        =π                                                      (15)
                           q (T )           η c − [ (1 − σ ) B + δ S ] h(0)


Perhaps most interesting for today is the housing price percentage change from before the
boom started (the first term in the equation (14)’s sum) and just after the bust occurs:




                                                                                                 18
                                      ΔηL c + Δ LB h(0)
                                                                 ≥0                    (16)
                               η c − [ (1 − σ ) B + δ S ] h(0)




The fixed supply case says that qL(T) does not fall below its pre-boom value, because
fundamentals are not any worse than before. As I show below, this is not necessarily true
with endogenous supply, because the anticipation of the possibility of best outcome (state
H) may lead to the accumulation of housing before time T beyond what would ever be
accumulated if state L had been known with certainty.
       The magnitudes of the price changes shown in equations (14), (15), and (16) can
be large.   An anticipated change in demand by itself (ΔB = 0) has a greater than
proportional effect on housing prices (unless that change is sufficiently far in the future)
because the owners of residential structures have a leveraged claim on the value of
housing output ηc.
       Table 1 offers some impressions of the possible size of a housing cycle caused by
prospects for technical progress and housing demand increases. The first several rows of
Table display information about each of the relevant model parameters, and the columns
vary according to what is assumed about those parameters. One of the key parameters is
the pre-boom magnitude of spending on intermediates: Figure 3 shows that net housing
output is 47% net operating surplus and 36% intermediates (inclusive of spending on
labor), so compensation of intermediates is 43% of the operating surplus gross of that
compensation and 77% of net operating surplus (0.77 = 36/43).
       The last rows of the table show model outcomes: the expected shift in housing
structure demand and the peak price elevation. The housing structure demand shift is
defined to be the permanent increase in the log housing stock that would be consistent
with a housing price that was constant and equal to S. The peak price elevation is defined
to be the amount the equilibrium housing price exceeds S at the moment before market
participants learn that they overestimated the amount of progress that would occur.
Under fixed supply, this price peak elevation is equation (14) evaluated at T = 0, and is
decomposed into preference and technology pieces as shown in the formula. The Table’s
last row offers a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the price peak with an endogenous


                                                                                         19
supply response by taking 52 percent of the fixed supply case (that is, the price elevation
shown in the row above).
           The first column of the Table shows the maximum possible housing price cycle
that derived from services-demand-adjusted technical progress alone, because it assumes
not only fixed supply but also that the progress is perfectly certain to eliminate all
spending on intermediate inputs. The estimate is services-demand-adjusted because it
holds fixed non-housing consumption c and the pre-subsidy technology B and assumes
that σ is expected to go to one with certainty.30 In this case, the derived housing
structures demand has shifted 0.41 log points and the housing price peak is 77 percent
above what prices were before the progress was anticipated: see the second-to-last row of
the table. The second column shows the case in which elimination of intermediates
spending is accompanied by a 20% housing services demand increase – one can interpret
this as a rough estimate of the wealth effect of a change in B that is not present with a
change in the subsidy rate – and the peak housing price with fixed supply 122 percent
(structures demand shifts 0.59 log points). With elastic supply, the peak housing price
elevation would be about 63 percent (see the last row of the second column). Of course,
technical progress would not be so dramatic as to fully eliminate intermediates spending
and would not be rationally expected to occur with perfect certainty, so the model
suggests that prospects for technical progress alone (even including a large wealth effect
that feeds back into housing demand) would make a housing cycle with a price peak
significantly below 63 percent.
           The remaining columns of the Table acknowledge uncertainty in two ways. First,
one possible outcome is a much smaller change in the housing subsidy or technology
parameters (σ = 0.25 rather than σ = 1); the probability π of the larger change is assumed
to be 0.67, rather than the probability one assumed in the first two columns. Second,
housing market participants are assumed to bear only part (namely, half – see the Table’s
second row indicating the “crash subsidy rate”) of the housing capital loss that will occur
in the state that the technological progress is not realized, which has the effect of
distorting the objective probability of favorable progress.31 The third “acknowledge


30
     Recall from above that the technology parameter B has a wealth effect that the subsidy rate does not.
31
     See footnote 27.


                                                                                                             20
technology uncertainty” column shows that the net effect of these two forces is for
housing prices to peak at 110 percent (57 percent with elastic supply), rather than 122
percent. In other words, fixed supply and a 67% chance of eliminating all intermediate
inputs means that prices peak at 110 percent the moment before market participants learn
that they over estimated the amount of progress that would occur.
       “Imperfect progress” is modeled in the fourth column by assuming that the best-
case subsidy rate is σ = 0.75, rather than σ = 1. In other words, the best case progress has
an elimination of 75% of intermediates expenditure, rather than 100%. This puts the
peak price elevation at 95% with fixed supply and about 49% with elastic supply.
       The fifth “acknowledge demand uncertainty” column assumes that the low state
has not only less technological progress, but also no demand shift. Of all of the columns,
it is probably the best indicator of how much realistic expectations about technical
progress could elevate housing prices: it puts the peak price elevation at 86% with fixed
supply and about 45% with elastic supply.
       There has been much discussion of how anticipation of possible government
bailouts of AIG, mortgage lenders, and underwater mortgage borrowers contributed to
the housing boom. The final column of the Table suggests that those bailouts might
explain significantly less than half of the price boom, because with a zero crash subsidy
rate the peak price elevation is still 75%.
       The Table shows how the prospect of a significant reduction in the cost of
housing intermediates, and/or a modest increase the demand for housing services can
significantly shift the derived demand for housing structures and thereby significantly
elevate prices. It follows that the derived demand for housing structures has to shift
significantly in order for housing prices to rise significantly. Figure 7’s green series
shows the equilibrium relationship between peak price elevation and the amount of the
structures demand shift, assuming for the moment that the shift derives from expected
changes in technology, not tastes. To give the reader the opportunity to consider smaller
derived demand shifts than shown in Table 1, the horizontal axis is limited to the range
[0,0.5] and some of the smaller shift-price elevation pairs from Table 1 are displayed as




                                                                                         21
boxes in the Figure.32 The green series shows how, with fixed supply, even a derived
demand shift as small as 10 percent could elevate housing prices more than 20 percent.


III.C. Supply Responses: Unanticipated Fundamentals
        At the other extreme of fixed supply is the model with no adjustment costs even
in the short run (f(I/h) = I/h). In this case, the housing stock is unchanged until date T, at
which time it jumps immediately to its new steady state.33 Neither net operating surplus
nor housing prices are impacted by either the anticipation or realization of changes in
fundamentals.
        The actual impact on net operating surplus and housing prices depends on where
between these two extremes lies the actual path for the housing stock. This is easiest to
see in the case (ΔηH = ΔηL and ΔBH = ΔBL) in which the future values of the fundamentals
are fully revealed at time zero. Figure 8 shows three cases: inelastic supply (infinite
marginal adjustment cost), no adjustment costs, and finite adjustment costs. The last case
is based on the integral (9) calculating housing prices, and shows how supply responses
mitigate the housing price impact of future fundamentals. The positive boom time
(before date T) impact on the housing stock means a negative near term impact on
housing service rents and therefore the net operating surplus rate. This reduces price
impacts relative to the fixed supply case. The impact on the path of the housing stock
after date T is positive relative to the fixed supply case and negative relative to the
perfectly elastic supply case. This proves that net operating surplus at each date is less
than it would be with fixed supply, so that the price impact is less than it would be with
fixed supply. The price impact has to be positive (and thereby greater than in the
perfectly elastic supply case), though, in order for positive net investment to be optimal.
        In order to say more about the price impact, more has to be shown about the
optimal path of the housing stock that solves the dynamical system (6). When model
parameters are known to be constant over time and non-housing consumption is held
constant, optimal housing prices are defined to be those on the one dimensional stable

32
   Some of the boxes are not on the green curve because they reflect housing service demand shifts as well
as intermediates cost reductions.
33
   The size of the jump depends on whether the fundamentals change a large amount (state H) or a small
amount (state L).


                                                                                                        22
manifold (a.k.a., “stable arm” or “saddle path”) of that system. Those allocations below
that manifold (in the [h,q] plane) involve zero housing in finite time, which is not
efficient because of the Inada condition on the utility function. Those above the stable
manifold violate the transversality condition of optimization.34
         When new fundamentals are realized immediately (T = 0), the terms B(t), η(t),
σ(t), and S(t) are constant over time t ≥ 0. The system is stationary with a single steady
state:
                          (η + Δη )c
                                       = ⎡⎣ A + f (δ ) ⎤⎦ S + B(1 − σ ) − Δ B ≡ rss
                              hss                                                                     (17)
                          qss = S


         Figure 9 is a phase diagram in the [h,q] plane showing the dynamics of the
stationary system for initial values of h and q that do not coincide with (hss,qss). The
optimal path is the stable manifold of this system – the union of the only two time paths
(one from the left and the other from the right) that converge to the steady state. If the
fundamentals suddenly and permanently changed at time 0 in a way that left h(0) less
than the new steady state, the housing price q would jump up to the point on the stable
manifold that corresponded to h(0), and then the system would move along that manifold
toward the steady state.35 Thus, quantifying the slope of the stable manifold is essential
for quantifying price impacts of changes in fundamentals.
         Appendix I shows how to globally calculate the stable manifold to any desired
degree of precision. A closed form price impact formula is available when the changes in
fundamentals are small and the housing stock began in the steady state (with respect to
the previous fundamentals),
                                       ⎡          d [ B(1 − σ )] ⎤
                                dq = λ ⎢ d ln η −                ⎥
                                       ⎣                rss      ⎦                                    (18)
                                      S ⎡ 2
                                λ≡             A + 4rssϕ ′(1) / S − A⎤
                                    2ϕ ′(1) ⎣                        ⎦


34
   More below on violation of the transversality condition of optimization. Given my application of the
model to the housing boom, for simplicity I do not include an non-negative gross investment condition. If I
did, other arguments may be needed to rule out paths that perpetually have zero gross investment.
35
   See Summers (1981, Figure 2) or Poterba (1984, Figure I).


                                                                                                        23
ϕ′ is the inverse of the slope of the marginal adjustment cost function; S/ϕ′ is the
convexity of adjustment costs. dlnη and d[B(1-σ)] denote small permanent parameter
changes that are effective immediately at time zero.
           Assuming that T = 0, the price responses in the presence of adjustment costs
(quantified by the parameter λ evaluated at some finite ϕ′) can be compared to price
responses with fixed supply merely by examining the relationship between the parameter
λ and the degree of adjustment cost convexity S/ϕ′, holding fixed A, δ, and rss. This
amounts to holding fixed the steady state while changing the slope of the stable manifold
in Figure 9. For this purpose, numerical values are assumed for the marginal product of
non-residential capital, the depreciation rate, housing expenditure share, and the relative
importance of intermediate inputs as shown in Table 2. Figure 10’s blue curve shows the
result: the more convex are adjustment costs (measured on the left vertical axis), the
larger is the price response.
           Adjustment cost convexity S/ϕ′ can also be expressed in terms of an elasticity of
response of investment intensity I/h with respect to the housing price q, which has been
estimated in the literature, because the elasticity is ϕ′/δ in the model’s steady state.36
Figure 10’s red curve shows the unsurprising result that the housing price impact falls
with the degree to which housing investment responds to prices. Figure 10 also includes
a green tick mark on its right scale to indicate the median elasticity among Topel and
Rosen’s (1988) empirical estimates of 1.575 (see their Table 3), which corresponds to a
price impact of an immediate and unanticipated permanent shock that is 52 percent of the
fixed supply case. I have truncated Figure 10’s right vertical scale at 4.0, which closely
corresponds with the largest elasticity estimate displayed by Topel and Rosen; the red
curve shows how an elasticity as large as 4 corresponds to a price impact as small as 37
percent of the fixed supply case. In other words, the Topel and Rosen estimates suggests
that the price impact is at least 37 percent, and reasonably estimated as 52 percent, of the
fixed supply case. This is the basis for Table 1’s assumption for converting fixed supply
price impacts into elastic supply price impacts using a multiplicative factor of 0.52.


36
     Recall that δ is the annual housing depreciation rate.


                                                                                         24
         The stable manifold is a kind of long run “derived demand curve” for housing
structures because, as long as the model parameters are expected to be constant, it
indicates a permanent, downward sloping, relationship between the housing stock and
housing prices. Moreover, as long as the model parameters remain constant, the system’s
dynamics involve moving along that “demand curve” curve toward the point at which
housing prices are at their long run value q = S, which is independent of preferences,
adjustment cost convexity, and the cost of housing intermediates. Thus, the amount of
price elevation indicates a particular sized “derived demand shift” in the quantity
dimension and thereby indicates market expectations about the future of the housing
stock according to the shape of the stable manifold. Specifically, once the system
parameters have reached their long run values, the time t anticipated value for the long
run housing stock hss can be approximated by inverting (19):37
                                           q(t )      λ   h
                                                 − 1  ln ss
                                            S         S h(t )
                                         S ⎡ 2
                                 λ≡              A + 4r ϕ ′(1) / S − A⎤                                 (19)
                                     2ϕ ′(1) ⎣                            ⎦
                                                                    h(t )
                                                                 1−
                                                                     hss
                                  r ≡ [ (δ + A) S + (1 − σ ) B ]
                                                                    h
                                                                 ln ss
                                                                    h(t )


Figure 7 displays this relationship under two alterative assumptions about the amount of
adjustment cost convexity: (blue series) S/ϕ′ = 25.4 years, and thereby consistent with a
short run housing investment elasticity of 1.575 at the steady state (see Appendix II), and
(red series) the limit of infinite marginal adjustment costs (f″ Æ ∞), in which case the

                                     q (t )      (1 − σ ) B + δ S + AS ⎡ h(t ) ⎤
stable manifold approaches                  −1 =                       ⎢1 −     ⎥ , which coincides
                                      S                    AS          ⎣    hss ⎦




37
  This is an approximation (increasingly accurate as h(t) Æ hss) because the actual stable manifold for the
system with constant marginal adjustment cost is nonlinear in the [ln h,q] plane, and equation (19)
approximates the price elevation per unit shift in the stable manifold with the slope from equation (18)
evaluated at a housing stock between h(t) and hss.


                                                                                                          25
with the “fixed supply” case considered in Table 1.38 For the purpose of drawing the
curves in Figure 7, I assume that the convex adjustment cost technology does not create
economic rents in the steady state (i.e., that f(δ) = δ) and that the long run housing stock
exceeds the current value because of a change in technology, rather than tastes.39 Based
on elastic supply, the Figure’s blue series shows that the fixed supply model exaggerates
the price impact of derived demand shifts (consistent with the 52 percent adjustment used
in the last row of Table 1), and that any given percentage shift of derived housing
demand (in the quantity dimension) creates peak price elevation of about the same
number of percentage points.


III.D. Supply Responses: Anticipated Fundamentals
         Consider now the case that the date T change in fundamentals is anticipated as of
date 0 < T, still holding non-housing consumption c constant. Prior to date zero, the
system (9) (together with the housing stock evolution equation) looks like Figure 9,
except that the steady state and dynamics are determined by the “old” taste and
technology parameters. After date T, the system (10) (together with the housing stock
evolution equation) looks like Figure 9 with the steady state and dynamics determined by
the “new” taste and technology parameters and the economy moving along the stable
manifold toward the steady state that corresponds to the new parameters. The new steady
state has more housing, and is therefore shown in Figure 11a to the right of the steady
state hss corresponding to the old parameters.
         Figure 11a illustrates with red to indicate dynamics according to the old
parameters, and black to indicate dynamics according to the new parameters.40 During
the interval t ∈ (0,T), the dynamics correspond to the “old” parameters, but instead of
converging to the steady state along the “old” stable manifold, the economy is following
those dynamics that leave it on the “new” stable manifold exactly at date T. The peak
housing price occurs exactly at date T (see the allocation CT shown in Figure 11a)

38
   As f″ Æ ∞, the stable manifold does not approach vertical – although movements along it become
infinitely slow – because a finite but persistently elevated housing price is enough to equate the finite
demand for housing to the current supply.
39
   The relationship between price elevation and the long run demand shift is slightly different if prices are
elevated because of a change in tastes.
40
   See Summers (1981, Figure 5) for a related analysis of an “announcement effect.”


                                                                                                            26
because, among dates with the new fundamentals, date T is the date with the smallest
housing stock. As with the fixed supply case, prices must be rising during the interval
(0,T) in order to make home owners willingly own housing during a time interval when
prices are high but fundamentals are not enhancing the net operating surplus.
         The duration T of time that the new fundamentals are anticipated reduces the size
of the time zero price jump. In the “unanticipated fundamentals” case considered above,
the time interval is zero and the system at time zero jumps to the point C0 on the stable
manifold in Figure 11a. When the time interval T is longer, more housing is accumulated
in anticipation of the fundamentals. With more housing in place by time T when the new
fundamentals are realized, the housing price can be lower. Comparing the allocations C0
and CT in Figure 11a, we see that, as long as supply can respond, the unanticipated
fundamentals case has the larger peak housing price.
         Figure 11a illustrates the system when the new fundamentals are anticipated with
perfect certainty. To characterize the system with two possible states (L or H) to be
realized at date T, first consider the steady state and stable manifold corresponding to
each of them, as shown in Figure 11b. Regardless of whether the change in fundamentals
is small or large, the new steady state has more housing, and is therefore shown to the
right of the steady state hss corresponding to the old parameters.                         If nonhousing
consumption were not affected by the new fundamentals, then the housing price just
before date T must be the expected value of the price at date T, where that price will be
on one of the two stable manifolds, depending on the state that is realized.41 In other
words, the dynamics on (0,T) are exactly as in Figure 11a, except that the system at date
T is on the vertical average of two stable manifolds, rather than on the single stable
manifold shown in Figure 11a.
         After date T, the system (10) (together with the housing stock evolution equation)
has its steady state and dynamics determined by the “new” taste and technology
parameters and the economy moves along the stable manifold toward the steady state that
corresponds to the realized state (L or H).42 When the low state L is realized, the peak


41
  More generally, the housing price just before date T satisfies the Euler equation (11).
42
  The model’s equilibrium dynamics can be calculated recursively. For the case of fixed non-housing
consumption, first calculate the two stable manifolds (one for each possible realization of the parameters)
that describe the dynamics after time T. A locus of time T destinations for the system (9) is calculated by


                                                                                                          27
housing price occurs just prior to time T. For the reasons explained above, the amount of
the peak price elevation decreases with the short run elasticity of housing supply and with
the duration T of time that the possibility of new fundamentals are anticipated.
         Figures 12a and 12b show the time paths for housing prices. Housing prices jump
up at time zero and gradually increase over time until time T. If the smaller parameter
change is realized at time T, then housing prices jump down. If the time T housing stock
is still below the steady state corresponding to the realized parameters (the case shown in
Figure 11), then the price path is as shown in Figure 12a: prices gradually fall as the
housing stock approaches the new steady state from below. Otherwise the price path is as
shown in Figure 12b, with prices below pre-boom levels and gradually rising as the
housing stock approaches the new steady state from above.
         Gross housing investment follows the same qualitative pattern as do housing
prices. As shown in Figure 13a, the housing stock therefore accelerates prior to date T
and decelerates (but still grows) after date T. Figure 13b shows the case in which the
time T housing stock exceeded that consistent with the fundamentals that were ultimately
realized, in which case the housing stock declines after time T.
         For an anticipation period of five years, Figure 7’s red series displays the model’s
peak price elevation (which occurs immediately before date T = 5) as a function of the
size of the expected long run derived demand shift (equivalently, the amount by which
the long run log housing stock will exceed the time zero log stock) assumed to derive
from prospects for technological change, rather than tastes. For comparison, the blue
series shows the relationship when the same permanent change in fundamentals occurs at
date T = 0, and was unanticipated.43 The blue and red series are close, because the Topel-
Rosen short run supply elasticity estimates imply that the housing stock cannot respond
enough in five years to put the system on the stable manifold at a point that is



averaging (in the price dimension) the two manifolds with weights π and 1-π. Then choose the point on
that locus so that following the old parameter dynamics backwards leaves the housing stock at hss in exactly
T units of time.
                                                                                    5λ
                                                                            −
43                                                                              ϕ ′ (1) / S
  The red schedule is calculated from the blue with the adjustment factor e           , which indicates the
amount the gap ln hss/h(0) closes during 5 years (see equation (19)). It follows that schedules
corresponding to anticipation periods of length T ∈ (0,5) would be in between the red and blue schedules in
Figure 7.


                                                                                                         28
significantly below the point that would have been attained if the parameter changes had
been unanticipated.
        Using the parameter values shown in the second to last column of Table 1,
adjustment cost convexity of 25.4 years (see Appendix II), and an anticipation period of 3
years, Figure 14 displays a quantitative phase diagram for the system (9) and (10).44 The
stable manifolds for the H-state and L-state are shown as dotted and dashed black
schedules, respectively, and their probability weighted average is shown as the blue
schedule. The time path on the interval [0,T] is shown as a red curve, with housing prices
jumping up at time zero when the possibility of new fundamentals becomes known, and
then rising continuously for 3 years and jumping down at time T = 3 when it becomes
known that the state is L. The system then follows the L-state stable manifold toward the
L-state steady state (shown in the Figure as a black box).
        Simulated gross housing investment, the housing stock, and housing price are
graphed against calendar time in Figure 15, assuming that time zero corresponds with the
middle of 2003 and time T corresponds with the middle of 2006.45 In percentage terms,
housing investment booms more (about 60 percent above its pre-boom value) than
housing prices do (35-40 percent above their pre-boom value), which is a consequence of
an assumed value for adjustment cost convexity that is sufficiently small. Housing prices
peak in mid 2006 at more than 40 percent above their pre-boom values, and then quickly
fall to about 5 percent above their pre-boom values. By the end of 2009 (2012), housing
prices are still 4.5 (3.7) percent above their pre-boom values. Because the L-state stock is
assumed to be sufficiently large compared to what can be accumulated over three years,
the housing stock continues to increase (albeit slowly) even after 2006 when it is known
that the H-state will not be realized.


     IV. If the Optimism were Gone, then Real Housing Prices would be Lower
        As long as the fundamentals are different (in the direction of a higher steady state)
after time T than they were before the boom, the housing stock will always remain

44
   Figures 14 and 15 are based on numerical solutions to the system, assuming that the adjustment cost
technology is quadratic and creates no economic rents in the steady state (algrebraically, the assumptions
are: f″ is constant and f(δ) = δ). Thus, neither approximation (18) nor (19) is needed.
45
   Empirically, the housing boom does not obviously begin discretely in a specific month. However, Figure
1 suggests that the period of heaviest (detrended) construction activity is July 2003 through March 2006.


                                                                                                       29
discretely above its pre-boom levels even if housing prices do not. This is a basic
difference between the rational expectations approach and “bubble” explanations of the
housing cycle.        The “bubble” theory by definition assumes that fundamentals are
unchanged, which means that the housing construction boom was completely wasteful
because the housing stock would ultimately return to its pre-boom level. The rational
expectations approach says that, even with the benefit of hindsight, some of the housing
construction was efficient because the long run housing stock is higher.46
         Whether these two approaches can be distinguished in the short run depends on
the amount of the supply response that had occurred by date T. Figure 13a shows the
case in which the supply response was small: at all dates it has positive net investment
and housing prices above their steady state level, even after it is known that fundamentals
would change less than expected. In this case, it would be clear even in the short run that
the housing stock would not return to what it was before the possibility of new
fundamentals were anticipated because the housing stock would continue to increase.47
However, as shown in Figure 13b, it is possible that supply had responded enough by
date T that it exceeded its steady state value corresponding to the fundamentals that were
ultimately realized. In this case, housing prices after date T would be lower than their
steady state value S.
         If, ex poste, the expectations of new fundamentals were completely unfounded,
the steady states values hss and hssL would coincide. In this case, net investment must be
negative and housing prices below S after date T. These two housing market indicators
are at their lowest immediately after date T, with amounts determined by the gap between
hT and hss and the short run elasticity of housing supply. The percentage price depression
immediately after date T must be less than the percentage by which date T net operating
surplus was depressed relative to the net operating surplus that had prevailed before the


46
   In an economy with constant growth rates of population or other determinants of housing demand, the
question would be whether the housing stock stays above the previous trend, even after the housing price
bust.
47
   I have assumed that time T is both the time of information arrival and a time of change in the
fundamentals. If instead the information arrived at T and the fundamentals changed at some later date T2,
then housing prices could be: (a) rising after they crashed at date T, (b) below their previous peak, and (c)
at all dates be higher than they were before the boom. In other words, the entire time interval [0,T2] would
be a construction boom, but part way through the boom the time T information revealed that the early boom
was (in hindsight) a bit too exuberant.


                                                                                                          30
housing boom, because housing rents and the net operating surplus will gradually
increase after date T as housing supply is reduced. For the same reasons cited above,
Topel and Rosen’s estimates imply that the supply responses cause prices to be 48
percent closer to the steady state than they would be without supply responses (recall the
52 percent adjustment factor determined from Figure 10). The net operating surplus at
the end of the housing boom, as a ratio to the real housing stock, was about 7 percent
below what it was before,48 so with the 52 percent supply-adjustment factor, housing bust
real housing prices would be depressed 3 or 4 percent below what they were before the
housing boom (0.04 = 0.52*0.07) if fundamentals had not changed in the direction of
more housing.        Conversely, if fundamentals had changed in the direction of more
housing, the housing bust should depress real housing prices less than 3 percent below
their pre-boom levels, if at all.
         Perhaps that’s why proponents of the “bubble” theory of the 2000s housing cycle
were forecasting in the first half of 2009 that housing prices would fall further (Shiller
2009); real housing prices then were still higher than they were before the boom.
However, Table 3 shows that, even by the end of 2009, various indicators still show real
housing values to be as high or higher than they were at the turn of the century.49
Moreover, as shown in Figure 1, the real housing values ceased their declines at levels
that were no where near the 3-4 percent depression that would be consistent with
depressed net operating surplus and no change in housing fundamentals, which suggests
either that some of the housing boom’s optimism was justified, or that a significant
amount of unfounded optimism still remains. On the other hand, Figures 1 and 2 suggest
that housing construction activity did drop below what it was in the late 1990s: more time




48
   Figure 5 shows a net operating surplus rate that falls about 25 percent, rather than 7, because Figure 5’s
rate is calculated as a ratio to replacement cost (the real stock at the end of the boom was about 4 percent
above trend, whereas the real stock adjusted for the rising cost of replacement was almost 20 percent above
trend due to the fact that housing prices were high during the boom).
49
   The various national measures disagree much more on the amount by which real housing prices increased
2000-2006, with a range from 20% (Census Bureau quality-adjusted new homes) to 73% (Radar-Logic). A
significant part of the disagreement relates to the weighting of the various regions to form the national
composite, which is why my Table 3 also reports unweighted averages of the regions, and real price
changes for the median region.


                                                                                                         31
is needed to determine whether housing construction will remain depressed long enough
to return the housing stock to its pre-boom trend.50




     V. Conclusions
         The housing boom that lasted through 2006 featured high and rising real housing
prices, high rates of real investment in both owner-occupied and tenant-occupied
housing, and low rates of real investment in non-residential structures. Housing sector
net operating surplus – that minority part of housing service rents that accrues to
homeowners and their creditors – was low relative to the housing stock during the boom,
as were occupancy rates. More recently, real housing prices are much lower, although
probably still above their pre-boom levels. Housing investment is now below, and non-
residential structures investment above, pre-boom levels.
         It sometimes suggested that the housing boom derived largely from low interest
rates, and public policies promoting homeownership, in the mid 2000s. But low interest
rates by themselves should push up all kinds of structures investment, not just residential
structures.      And policies to encourage homeownership should have depressed
construction of rental housing units, when in fact that construction boomed too.
Something else must have changed, and perhaps in a way that interacted with public
policies regarding interest rates and home ownership.
         That “something else” can be broadly characterized as “optimism” (perhaps
rational, perhaps not) about the future because the housing boom featured rising housing
prices and low net operating surplus. The facts that the housing boom ended with a large


50
   If real housing prices are now (after the housing crash) still higher than the steady state, and housing’s
net operating surplus relative to replacement cost is back to normal (as suggested by Mulligan and
Threinen’s (2010) quarterly estimates of net operating surplus through 2009 Q4), then the model predicts
that housing prices are expected to be slightly higher in the future. The expected housing price
appreciation is small, though, as seen from equation (8) as rearranged below. The first square bracket term
is the deviation of the net operating surplus (as a ratio to replacement cost) from its steady state value A,
which Mulligan and Threinen find to be about 0.3 percent per year. With a depreciation rate of 2.5 percent
per year and housing prices currently elevated no more than 10 percent, the second square bracket term is
0.2 percent per year or less, for a combined expected appreciation rate of no more than 0.5 percent per year.
q (t ) ⎡    ρ (t ) − δ ⎤    ⎡ q (t ) − 1 ⎤
       = ⎢A−            ⎥ +δ ⎢            ⎥
q (t ) ⎣       q (t ) ⎦      ⎣ q (t ) ⎦


                                                                                                         32
stock of housing yet real housing prices did not fall to pre-boom levels suggests that
some of that optimism still remains in the marketplace.
       One achievement of this paper is to quantify the expected size of the shift in the
long run demand for housing structures that would be consistent with any given peak
housing price elevation. For example, Figure 7 reports that real housing prices can be
elevated more than 40 percent if the derived demand for housing structures were soon
expected to shift by 0.40 log points in the quantity dimension, or 0.46 log points if that
shift were anticipated 5 years in advance. To some readers, the stock of housing cannot
be reasonably expected to increase that much, even in the long run, so that this result by
itself confirms their suspicion that the housing cycle was indeed a “bubble”: a housing
boom that was divorced from reasonable expectations about the economic fundamentals.
       If the housing cycle is to be linked to fundamentals, then it must be explained why
housing structures’ demand would shift so much. Another contribution of this paper is to
show how, even in the absence of financial leverage, housing structures are a naturally
and significantly leveraged claim on the value of housing services because some of the
payments for those services must be used for depreciation, spending on intermediate
goods, and property taxes, with only the residual remaining for the owners of structures.
Thus, an expected 40 percent increase in real housing service expenditure could elevate
housing prices by more than 40 percent in the short run.
       Perhaps housing demand was expected to increase as a growing fraction of the
population chose to work from home, entertain at home, and otherwise demand more
housing. But this paper also points out that reduced production costs in the mortgage and
real estate sectors – “housing intermediates” – could ultimately make existing housing
more productive. Table 1’s first and second columns show that the derived demand for
structures is significantly reduced by the necessity of spending resources on housing
intermediates, and thereby that the long run housing stock would be significantly
increased if some of those costs could be eliminated. I showed, for example, that a 2/3
probability of a modest housing service demand increase combined with a 75 percent
reduction in the costs of housing intermediates would elevate prices by 40 percent or
more. An important step for future research is to determine whether such expectations




                                                                                       33
were quantitatively reasonable, and to monitor actual technical progress in the housing
intermediates sectors.
         The prospects for technical progress are inherently uncertain, so that their effects
might be magnified by “irrational exuberance,” subsidies, or both. For example, market
participants may focus too much on the rosy technology scenario in which technical
progress is realized rather quickly, or in an especially large magnitude.                            Implicit
government guarantees and reasonable prospects for government bailouts may also cause
market participants to rationally downweight the less favorable states of nature.51
         Flood and Hodrick (1990, p. 99) found that “when agents expect the future to be
somewhat different than history” price movements induced by fundamentals may look
like bubbles to a researcher who is not fully aware of those fundamentals. In this regard,
it is difficult to distinguish bubbles from rational expectations, and thus difficult to know
whether the housing cycle of the 2000s is something that should have been “fixed.”
However, I have strengthened this application of rational expectations theory to assume
that agents’ expectations for progress are at least partly correct ex poste – that is, that
some progress actually does occur (even if it were smaller or later than originally
anticipated) – in which case the two theories are different in terms of the housing stock
path after the bust. Perhaps the recession and transitory credit market interruptions are
obstacles to immediate execution of this test, but one day we will know whether the
housing stock (relative to trend) will ultimately remain above what it was before the
housing boom, or instead that the construction boom of the 2000s was completely
unnecessary.




51
  Specifically, the prospect for technical progress raises the conditional variance of housing prices, thereby
raising the market value of government bailouts and guarantees that pay out according to the amount that
housing prices fall. From this perspective, it is not historically low home mortgage rates that stimulated
home buying, but rather the failure of mortgage rates (or other mortgage costs) to rise to reflect the value of
the mortgage default option, which increased as a result of the greater uncertainty associated with prospects
for technical change.


                                                                                                            34
   VI. Appendix I: Calculation of the Stable Manifold

       The stable manifold is the solution to the dual boundary value stationary
dynamical system:


         H (t ) = ϕ ( q (t ) / S ) − δ
         q (t ) = ⎡⎣ A + δ − ϕ ( q (t ) / S ) ⎤⎦ q(t ) + B (1 − σ ) + Sf (ϕ ( q(t ) / S ) ) − η (t )ce − H (t )


          lim q (t ) = S         ,     lim H (t ) = ln hss         , H (0) given
         t →∞                        t →∞


where H denotes the log of the housing stock.
       As shown by Mulligan (1991), the stable manifold can be represented as a single
function q(H) that solves a single differential equation with a single boundary condition:

                          ⎡⎣ A + δ − ϕ ( q / S ) ⎤⎦ q + B (1 − σ ) + Sf (ϕ ( q / S ) ) − η ce − H
               q ′( H ) =
                                                      ϕ (q / S ) − δ
               qss = q ′(ln hss )

                                       S ⎡
                 lim      q ′( H ) =           A−              A 2 + 4 rssϕ ′(1) / S ⎤
                                     2ϕ ′(1) ⎣                                       ⎦
               H → ln hss


               rss ≡ η c / hss


q(H) is readily calculated numerically by integrating q′(H) away from the steady state
point.




                                                                                                                   35
      VII.    Appendix II: The Short Run Supply Elasticity and Adjustment Cost
              Convexity

          Topel and Rosen (1988) examined the national time series relationship between
housing construction activity and the quality-adjusted prices of new homes, as measured
by the Census Bureau. Their Table 3 reports elasticities of short run housing investment
with respect to housing price increases ranging from 0.72 to 3.94 (median of 1.575),
depending on the expected duration of the price increase and the details of their empirical
specification.
          My model predicts that date t gross housing investment is a stationary function
ϕ(q(t)/S) of the contemporaneous housing price q(t). Moreover, that relationship is linear
when the adjustment cost technology f is quadratic: gross housing investment is
proportional to (q(t)/S - 1) with a constant coefficient ϕ′. In the steady state, the elasticity
of housing investment with respect to q(t) is ϕ′/δ.52
          In order for this elasticity to be 1.575 with a depreciation rate of 2.5% per year,
adjustment cost convexity S/ϕ′ would have to be 25.4 years, which is the value used in
sections III.C and III.D of the paper.




52
     The proof is:
                      h(t ) + δ h(t ) = ϕ ( q (t ) / S ) h(t )
                      ln ⎡⎣ h(t ) + δ h(t ) ⎤⎦ = ln ϕ ( q (t ) / S ) + ln h(t )

                      ∂ ln ⎡⎣ h(t ) + δ h(t ) ⎤⎦             ϕ ′ ( q(t ) / S ) q(t )   ϕ′
                                                    q(t ) =                           →
                               ∂q(t )                         ϕ ( q (t ) / S ) S        δ



                                                                                             36
     VIII. Appendix III:                Anticipated          Technical         Change:         Evidence   from
           Consumption

         Consumption is constant over time unless news arrives about the nature of the
intertemporal production set (5), re-arranged below to solve for the optimal amount of
consumption.
                                   ∞
                    c = Ak0 + A∫ e − At ⎡⎣ w(t ) − B(t )h(t ) − h(t ) Sf ( I (t ) / h(t ) ) ⎤⎦ dt         (20)
                                    0



         Expectations of the taste and subsidy rate parameters have no effect on
consumption except through the path of the housing stock. Thus, if it were learned that
future housing demand or housing subsidies would be high, that would immediately
reduce non-housing consumption and lead to a path of increasing housing construction.
Conversely, news of low housing demand or housing subsidies would immediately
increase non-housing consumption and lead to a path of decreasing housing construction.
         Good news about the productivity 1/B of the housing sector’s intermediate inputs
increases housing investment, but it also likely increases non-housing consumption.
Consider, for example, the inelastic supply case. The intertemporal production set (20)
shows that good news about B frees resources for non-housing consumption in the
present value amount h(0)ΔBe-AT/A (recall from above that ΔB is the magnitude of the
anticipated reduction in B).53 If we measure the market value of the initial housing stock
as h(0)q(0)/S, recall from equation (13) that the same good news increases the market
value of the housing stock by h(0)ΔBe-(A+δ)T/(A+δ). Thus the consumption impact of the
news is greater than the housing value impact of the news to the degree that housing
depreciates.
         At the other extreme – no adjustment costs – good news about future B has no
effect on housing prices (and therefore no effect on the market value of housing) but
increases non-housing consumption.54                      Thus, the present value of non-housing


53
   Iacoviello and Neri (2008) connect housing prices and consumption by another mechanism: high housing
prices alleviate liquidity constraints.
54
   To prove this, use the intertemporal production set (20) and the steady state equation (17) to solve for the
consumption impact as a ratio to the amount of consumption prior to the news.


                                                                                                            37
consumption increases more than does the market value of housing, as it does in the fixed
supply case.
        Mulligan and Threinen (2008, Table 1) used the Case-Shiller and OFHEO price
indices to prepare alternative calculations of the reduction in the value of housing wealth
since 2006. They found $8.3 trillion and $4.5 trillion, respectively. Based on the
assumption that each dollar of lost housing wealth was a dollar in reduced non-housing
consumption (which, in their approach, included leisure time), they calculated that each
$5 trillion of lost housing wealth would reduce non-housing consumption by 2 percent.
The q-theory of investment presented in this paper suggests that the consumption impact
would be even larger if the news were entirely about housing intermediates’ productivity,
because the change in housing wealth from this shock does not fully measure the
expansion of the intertemporal production set. The consumption impact could be zero (or
even in the other direction) if the news were about other fundamentals.55 In other words,
consumption behavior is an indicator of the type of shocks causing the housing boom and
bust.
        Figure 16 shows quarterly nonhousing consumption, decomposed into durables
and nondurables + services. Both types of consumption expenditure are deflated with the
same deflator – population times the PCE deflator, expressed as a deviation from a trend
from 2 percent per year, and measured on the right scale. In order to indicate the housing
boom, the red series displays construction spending, deflated in the same way and
measured on the left scale. Non-housing consumption rises significantly at the end of the
1990s – arguably the years when market participants became optimistic about technical
progress in mortgages, etc. Consumption fell sharply in 2007 and 2008. Case et al.
(2005) and Campbell and Cocco (2007) also conclude from U.S. data that housing prices
affect aggregate consumption.




55
 An intermediate case – the consumption impact is less than the housing wealth change – is also possible
when the price effects of technical progress are accompanied, or reinforced by, distorted price of the
mortgage put option.


                                                                                                      38
Table 1. Price Peak with Fixed Supply, as a Function of Model Parameters

                                           eliminate combine with acknowledge               acknowledge
                                      intermediates 20% demand      technology    imperfect     demand      no crash
                                              w.p. 1    increase    uncertainty    progress   uncertainty    subsidy

annual depreciation rate                      0.025        0.025         0.025       0.025         0.025      0.025
annual opportunity cost                        0.05         0.05          0.05        0.05          0.05       0.05
high state probability                            1            1          0.67        0.67          0.67       0.67
crash subsidy rate                                0            0           0.5         0.5           0.5          0
intermediaries as share of
gross operating surplus                        0.43         0.43          0.43        0.43          0.43       0.43
net operating surplus                          0.77         0.77          0.77        0.77          0.77       0.77
flow subsidy rate
initial                                           0            0             0           0             0          0
high                                              1            1             1        0.75          0.75       0.75
low                                            0.25         0.25          0.25        0.25          0.25       0.25
housing preference
initial                                       0.176        0.176         0.176       0.176         0.176      0.176
high                                          0.176        0.212         0.212       0.212         0.212      0.212
low                                           0.176        0.212         0.212       0.212         0.176      0.176

                                                        Outcomes
Expected dmd shift (log quantity dimension)    0.41        0.59           0.53        0.43          0.40       0.35

peak price elevation
preference term                                0.00         0.45          0.45        0.45          0.36       0.30
technology term                                0.77         0.77          0.65        0.50          0.50       0.45
combined                                       0.77         1.22          1.10        0.95          0.86       0.75


peak price elevation with elastic
supply (estimated as 52% of above)             0.40         0.63          0.57        0.49          0.45       0.39
Table 2. Calibration of Housing Market Parameters

parameter                                              symbol value units (of value)
opportunity cost (marginal non-residential product)           A     5        %/year
housing depreciation rate                                      δ  2.5        %/year
intermediate expenditure per unit opportunity cost    B (1-σ)/A 36/47          share
housing expenditure share                               η/(1+η)    15             %

Sources: National Accounts and Annual Population Growth
Table 3. Real Housing Values Were Not Low at the End of 2009
1999:IV - 2009:IV appreciation in various housing price indices, adjusted for inflation

                                                                    Source:
Aggegrate MSAs or                                                                     Quality-Adjusted
Regions by:                      Case-Shiller Radar-Logic                     OFHEO       New Homes
Weighted Composite                      12%          25%                        17%                1%
Unweighted Avg                           2%           5%                        19%                NA
Median                                   0%           4%                        16%                NA


Notes
inflation-adjusted according to the deflator for Personal Consumption Expenditures
MSA = "Metropolitan Statistical Area"
Case-Shiller and Radar-Logic sample 20 (25) MSAs, respectively
OFHEO samples 50 states, and aggregates to 9 regions
Quality adjusted new home price index from Census Bureau
Radar Logic index is measured in 2000:I, rather than 1999:IV
                                                  Fig 1. Real Housing Construction and Average Property Values

                                            180     construction: owner-occupied
                                                    construction: tenant-occupied
         erty value index, Jan 2000 = 100




                                                                                                                 0.07
                                                    Case-Shiller Housing Value
                                            160
                                                    OFHEO Housing Value




                                                                                                                        stacked share off real personal income, SA
                                                                                                                 0.06
                                            140


                                            120                                                                  0.05


                                            100
                                                                                                                 0.04

                                            80
                                                                                                                 0.03
real prope




                                            60
                                                                                                                 0.02
                                            40

                                                                                                                 0.01
                                            20


                                             0                                                                   0
                                 Fig 2. Quantity Indexes for Investment in Structures

             140

                                                 Owner-occupied housing
             130                                 Tenant-occupied housing
                                                 Non-residential

             120
2000 = 100




             110



             100



              90



              80



              70
                   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008
Fig 3. Claims on Net Tenant-Occupied Housing Output, 2006




                                   Intermediate goods
           Net Operating               and services
        Surplus (mortgage            consumed, 30%
        interest & business
           income), 47%




                                  Taxes on
                                                        Compensation of
                                 production
                                                        Employees, 6%
                              (property taxes),
                              net of subsidies,
                                    18%
                        Fig 4. Housing Sector Net Operating Surplus per Unit Stock
                                 (2005 interpolated, stocks valued at replacement cost)

              6.0%


              5.8%


              5.6%


              5.4%


              5.2%
annual rate




                                         ratio to trend stock
              5.0%
                                         ratio to actual stock
              4.8%
              4 8%


              4.6%


              4.4%


              4.2%


              4.0%
                 1995     1997          1999             2001           2003              2005   2007
                                                   Fig 5. Occupancy Rates, 1985-2009

                   1.01



                   1.00



                   0.99
index (2000 = 1)




                   0.98



                   0.97

                                 BEA real consumption per real stock
                   0.96          Homeowner Occupancy Rate (Census Bureau)

                                 Rental Occupancy Rate (Census Bureau)
                   0.95
                       1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000    2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009
                                                                         year
Fig 6. Possible Paths for Tastes and Technologies

      η(t),[1
         ) [1−σ (t)]B(t)


                                  ΔηH
                                           ΔηL
            η


       (1−σ )B
                                           ΔLB
                                  ΔHB



            0
                                                    t = time
                          0                T
                       (2002 ?)         (2006)
                                       Fig 7. Peak Housing Prices as a Function of Demand Shift,
                                              Adjustment Cost Convexity, and Anticipation
                       90%

                                Adjustment Cost Limit (aka, fixed supply)
                       80%
                                SR supply elas = 1.575, Anticipated 0 years
                                SR supply elas = 1.575, Anticipated 5 years
                       70%
                                from Table 1
peak price elevation




                       60%


                       50%


                       40%


                       30%


                       20%


                       10%


                       0%
                         0.00   0.05      0.10      0.15     0.20      0.25   0.30   0.35    0.40   0.45   0.50
                                                 "LR demand" shift, log quantity dimension
Fig 8. Possible Housing Stock Paths
The Figure shows three housing stock time paths corresponding to three alternative assumptions about the costs of investment.



       h(t)
                                      no adjustment costs




                                                                                        finite adjustment costs




                                                                                       infinite adjustment costs
h(0)


                                                                                                                  t = time
        0                                                          T
Fig 9. Phase Diagram for the Stationary System
The Figure shows the stationary system’s steady state, dynamics, and stable manifold.




                          q




                                                                                        h = 0
                      S



                                                                    q = 0
                                                                                                 h
                                                            h ss
                  Fig 10. Local Price Impact Rises with Adjustment Cost Convexity,
                                    Falls with Quantity Response
        100                                                                                    4.0


        90
                                                                                               3.5

        80
                                                                                               3.0
        70

                                                                                               2.5
        60




                                                                                                     Elasticity
                    adj cost convexity (left scale)
years




                    Elas. of Inv. wrt Housing Price (right scale)
        50                                                                                     2.0
                    median Topel-Rosen estimate

        40
                                                                                               1.5

        30
                                                                                               1.0
        20

                                                                                               0.5
        10

         0                                                                                     0.0
              0       0.1         0.2          0.3          0.4     0.5     0.6    0.7   0.8
                                housing price impact, ratio to fixed supply case
Fig 11a. Phase Diagram for Anticipated Changes: One State
The Figure shows the system’s dynamics and stable manifold. The dynamics shown by the red arrows correspond to the “old” taste and technology
parameters. When the new parameters are first anticipated at date 0, price jumps up. The economy then follows the red path, reaching the end
exactly at time T when the new parameters take effect. The new stable manifold (shown as a black path) describes dynamics thereafter.


                         q


                                                           C0
                                                                   CT

                                                                                              h = 0
                     S



                                                                 q = 0
                                                                                                             h
                                                         h ss                         h s′s
Fig 11b. Phase Diagram for Anticipated Changes: Two States
The Figure shows the system’s dynamics and stable manifold. The dynamics shown by the red arrows correspond to the “old” taste and technology
parameters. When the new parameters are first anticipated at date 0, price jumps up. The economy then follows the red path, reaching the end
exactly at time T when the new parameters take effect. The new stable manifolds (shown as black paths, one for each possible realization of the
parameters) describes dynamics thereafter.
                         q



                                                             1−π
                                                                     π
                                                                                               h = 0
                     S



                                                                  q = 0
                                                                                     L             H          h
                                                          h ss                   h   ss
                                                                                               h   ss
Fig 12a. Time Path for Housing Prices: Small Supply Response



                 q




            S


                                                         t
             0             T
Fig 12b. Time Path for Housing Prices: Large Supply Response



                 q




            S


                                                         t
             0             T
Fig 13a. Time Path for the Housing Stock: Small Supply Response



                 h

           h ssL


           h ss
                                                         t
             0             T
Fig 13b. Time Path for the Housing Stock: Large Supply Response



                 h



             L
           h ss
           h ss
                                                        t
             0             T
                                                 Fig 14. Quantitative Stock and Price Trajectories
                                                 (cut (1-s)B in 1/2, 3/4 and raise exp share 0, .025)
                                      1.6
                                                                                     H-state stable manifold
                                                                                     2006 target
                                      1.5                                            3 year boom
housing price, relative to pre-boom




                                                                                     L-state stable manifold
                                                                                     pre-boom
                                      1.4
                                                                                     L-state ss


                                      1.3



                                      1.2



                                      1.1



                                       1
                                            1   1.05           1.1            1.15                 1.2         1.25
                                                            housing stock, relative to pre-boom
                                                      Fig 15. Simulated Housing Stock, Investment, and Real Price:
                    1.70
                                                                    2003‐2012, Low State Realization


                    1.60



                    1.50
                                                                                                                                gross investment rate
Ratio to Pre‐boom




                                                                                                                                housing stock
                    1.40
                                                                                                                                housingg price
                                                                                                                                         p


                    1.30



                    1.20



                    1 10
                    1.10



                    1.00
                               03

                                        04

                                                 04

                                                            05

                                                                     05

                                                                              06

                                                                                       06

                                                                                                07

                                                                                                         07

                                                                                                                  08

                                                                                                                           08

                                                                                                                                      09

                                                                                                                                               09

                                                                                                                                                        10

                                                                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                                                          11

                                                                                                                                                                                   11

                                                                                                                                                                                            12

                                                                                                                                                                                                     12
                           Jul‐0

                                    Jan‐0

                                             Jul‐0

                                                        Jan‐0

                                                                 Jul‐0

                                                                          Jan‐0

                                                                                   Jul‐0

                                                                                            Jan‐0

                                                                                                     Jul‐0

                                                                                                              Jan‐0

                                                                                                                       Jul‐0

                                                                                                                                  Jan‐0

                                                                                                                                           Jul‐0

                                                                                                                                                    Jan‐1

                                                                                                                                                             Jul‐1

                                                                                                                                                                      Jan‐1

                                                                                                                                                                               Jul‐1

                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan‐1

                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul‐1
                                          Fig 16. Personal Consumption and Residential Investment,
                                                               1995-2009, deflated by PCE deflator

                                  2,500        Durable Goods                                         25,000

                                  2,300        Nondurable goods & nonhousing services                24,000




                                                                                                              stacked amt per person, detrended 2%/yr, SA
                                               Residential Investment
                                  2,100                                                              23,000
                      2%/yr, SA




                                  1,900                                                              22,000

                                  1,700                                                              21,000
per person, detrended




                                  1,500                                                              20,000

                                  1,300                                                              19,000
            d




                                  1,100                                                              18,000

                                   900                                                               17,000

                                   700                                                               16,000

                                   500                                                               15,000
   IX. References

Abel, Avinash K. Dixit, Janice C. Eberly, Andrew B. and Robert S. Pindyck. “Options,
       the Value of Capital, and Investment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 11(3),
       August 1996: 753-777.
Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier. “Stock Prices, News and Economic Fluctuations.”
       American Economic Review. 96(4), September 2006.
Bharadwaj, Anandhi, Sundar G. Bharadwaj, and Benn R. Konsynski.          “Information
       Technology Effects on Firm Performance as Measured by Tobin’s q.”
       Management Science. 45(7), July 1999: 1008-24.
Buiter, Willem H. “Housing Wealth Isn’t Wealth.” NBER working paper no. 14204,
       July 2008.
Campbell, John Y. and Joao F. Cocco. “How do Housing Prices Affect Consumption?
       Evidence from Micro Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 46(2), 2000: 385-
       96.
Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller. “Comparing Wealth Effects: The
       Stock Market versus the Housing Market.” Advances in Macroeconomics. 5(1),
       2005: 1-32.
Christiano, Lawrence J., et al. “Monetary Policy and Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles.”
       ECB working paper no. 955, October 2008.
Davis, Morris A., Andreas Lehnert, and Robert F. Martin. “The Rent-Price Ratio for the
       Aggregate Stock of Owner-Occupied Housing.” Review of Income and Wealth.
       54(2), 2008: 279-84.
Davis, Morris A. and Francois Ortalo-Magne. “Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents.”
       Forthcoming, Review of Economic Dynamics, 2010.
Flood, Robert P. and Robert J. Hodrick. “On Testing for Speculative Bubbles.” Journal
       of Economic Perspectives. 4(2), December 1990: 85-101.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz. “Housing Supply and Housing
       Bubbles.” Journal of Urban Economics, 2008.




                                                                                   39
Hall, Robert E. and Susan E. Woodward.         “The Financial Crisis and Recession.”
      Manuscript,        Stanford     University,         November      24,      2008.
      (http://sites.google.com/site/woodwardhall/)
Hayashi, Fumio. “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation.”
      Econometrica. 50(1), January 1982: 213-224.
Hendershott, Patric and Joel Slemrod. “Taxes and the User Cost of Capital for Owner-
      Occupied Housing.” Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics
      Association. 10(3), Winter 1983: 375-93.
Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. “Assessing High House
      Prices: Bubbles, Fundamentals and Misperceptions.”          Journal of Economic
      Perspectives. 19(4), December 2005: 67-92.
Matteo, Iacoviello and Stefano Neri. “Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an
      Estimated DSGE Model.” Manuscript, Boston College, August 2008.
Mayer, Christopher. “Taxes, Income Distribution, and the Real Estate Cycle: Why All
      Houses Don’t Appreciate at the Same Rate.” New England Economics Review.
      May 1993: 39-50.
Mayerhauser, Nicole and Marshall Reinsdorf.          “Housing Services in the National
      Economic Accounts.” Manuscript, Bureau of Economic Analysis, September
      2007.
Mulligan, Casey B. “A Note on the Time-Elimination Method for Solving Recursive
      Dynamic Economic Models.”          NBER Technical Working paper no. 116,
      November 1991.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Fundamental Origins of the Housing Boom and Bust.” Cato
      Unbound. December 2008.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Luke Threinen. “Market Responses to the Panic of 2008.” NBER
      working paper no. 14446, October 2008.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Luke Threinen. “The Marginal Products of Residential and Non-
      Residential Capital Through 2009.” NBER working paper no. 15897, April 2010.
Poterba, James M.   “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset Market
      Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 99, November 1984: 729-52.




                                                                                     40
Shiller, Robert J. “Why Home Prices May Keep Falling.” New York Times. June 6,
       2009.
Summers, Lawrence. “Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q Theory Approach.”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1981(1): 67-127.
Topel, Robert and Sherwin Rosen. “Housing Investment in the United States.” Journal
       of Political Economy. 96(4), August 1988: 718-740.
United States Department of Justice. “Justice Department Sues National Association of
       Realtors for Limiting Competition among Real Estate Brokers.” September 8,
       2005. (http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/press_releases/2005/211008.htm)




                                                                                  41
