NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VALUING INCREMENTAL HIGHWAY CAPACITY IN A NETWORK
H. Allen Klaiber
V. Kerry Smith
Working Paper 15989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15989

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

The first author’s research was completed while he was a Post-doctoral Fellow at ASU. Thanks are
due Michael Kaminsky for excellent research assistance, to Mike Keane for suggesting a direct approach
for implementing our two step estimator, and to Natalie Cardita and Jon Valentine for assistance in
preparing this manuscript. Partial support for the research was provided by ASU’s Decision Center
for a Desert City. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by H. Allen Klaiber and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Valuing Incremental Highway Capacity in a Network
H. Allen Klaiber and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 15989
May 2010
JEL No. H4,R14,R40
ABSTRACT
The importance of increments to an existing highway system depends upon their contributions to the
accessibility provided by the existing network. Nearly 40 years ago, Mohring [1965] suggested this
logic for planning optimal highway investment programs. He argued it could be implemented by measuring
the quasi-rents generated by specific additions to an existing roadway system. This paper uses a unique
set of additions to a loop roadway in metropolitan Phoenix, together with detailed records of housing
sales over the past decade, to meet this need. We find that estimated increases in capitalized housing
values due to four segments added during this period range from 73 to over 273 million dollars per
mile of the roadway addition.

H. Allen Klaiber
Department of Agricultural Economics
and Rural Sociology
208A Armsby Buliding
Pennsylvainia State University
University Park, PA 16802
aklaiber@psu.edu
V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 873806
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu

Valuing Incremental Highway Capacity in a Network
I. Introduction
A highway is a network whose economic value depends on its inter-linked
connections. Some links have greater value than others. While this judgment seems like
common sense, to our knowledge no one has measured how specific roadway segments
contribute to a highway network. This task is especially relevant for recent policy debates
about failing infrastructure and how to prioritize spending. One third of the eighty one
billion in spending on infrastructure in the stimulus package under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 is for highway and bridge projects. Yet, there
has been little guidance offered on how to select among competing projects, aside from
the criterion of being ready to start quickly.1
In October of 1985 Maricopa County voters approved a one half cent sales tax for
twenty years for construction of controlled access highways. Eligibility for the funds
requires that the facilities be part of the county’s Regional Transportation Plan and a
component of the State Highway System. Proposition 400 approved by county voters in
2004 extends the sales tax for another twenty years to 2025. These tax resources are for
projects that involve new freeways, widening of existing freeways, and for bus and high
speed rail. A current example of one of these projects is a proposed new segment of the
loop roadway around metropolitan Phoenix -- the South Mountain Freeway. The Arizona
1 A recent article in the New York Times suggests policies favoring new highways over repair as well
as a willingness on the part of state officials to divert transportation funds for other projects have
contributed to the poor conditions for roadways in New York, Connecticut, and New Jersey. The
assessment indicates setting priorities among the maintenance and upgrade needs for the 84,000
miles of roads in this area has been difficult. See Kocieniewski [2009].

1

Department of Transportation recently recommended scaling back the project with the
planned right of way reduced from ten to eight lanes and a change in route based on
budget shortfalls. Three alternatives are listed for the North-South segment completing
the loop. The original objective of the funding initiative was to improve the roadway
network in the metropolitan area, enhancing overall accessibility. Yet in discussing these
alternatives the costs and community impacts were the primary reasons identified in
describing the changes. All alternatives are implicitly considered equivalent in their
contribution to the network. Figure 1 displays the proposed route alternatives. As the map
displays there are differences in the potential effects of these alternatives on the areas that
are readily linked to the loop network. Our analysis for completed segments suggests that
these types of differences can be important to the value of connector roadways.
Few lay observers would have difficulty with this conclusion. Nonetheless when
there are public or professional comments on these types of changes it has not been
possible to offer more than an informal question –how does this affect overall
performance of the system? Recently Greenstone [2009] has argued that our current
system for evaluating regulations is “broken”. He suggests that:

“It is largely based on faith, rather than evidence. The efficacy of many
regulations is never assessed. Many others are only evaluated before they are
implemented—the point when we know the least about them.” (pp. 111-112)

He calls for a culture of persistent experimentation and evaluation. In the context of
public investment policies his suggestion was first made and illustrated by Haveman

2

[1972]. Indeed his ex post assessment of water resource investments confirmed
Greenstone’s intuition, concluding that:

“…this study has demonstrated a need to seriously reappraise the procedures of
benefit cost analysis as practiced by agencies. Unless procedures are constantly
revised on the basis of performance feedback from existing undertakings, the
credibility of ex ante analysis will, and should, be challenged.” (p. 111)

This research was developed to respond to these calls current (and early) for ex post
assessment. While we don’t know that there was formal benefit-cost analysis of the
roadway segments we evaluate, it is nonetheless possible to develop an ex post evaluation
of their effects and to suggest how it can be used to enhance future ex ante assessments of
projects similar to our example of the South Mountain Freeway.
One of the early leaders in transportation economics, Herbert Mohring [1965],
provides a conceptual basis for using ex ante analysis in setting priorities. He suggested
that segment specific measures of the quasi rents associated with additions to capacity
were needed as part of the design and evaluation of policies to maximize the benefits
from a highway network. He argued that pricing and investment decisions should take
into account the differential economic importance of the links in highways as a part of
networks. Much of the literature since that time has grappled with the congestion pricing
component of his two decision criteria (see Parry [2009] or an overview). However, his
recommendation to add capacity based on the incremental value of such investments has
not. The only research that is close to meeting this challenge is an early effort by Keeler

3

and Small [1977] that used engineering estimates of the relationship between speed and
highway capacity in reducing congestion. It was primarily intended to estimate ex ante
tolls assuming optimal capacity. Their analysis did not consider the quasi rents for
specific highway segments, evaluating instead the effect of measures of capacity and tolls
on congestion for different roadways in the San Francisco Bay Area.
A hedonic property value model might seem a natural possibility for
implementing Mohring’s proposal, especially in situations where one can observe
housing prices before and after a new road segment is introduced. However, the dual
challenges of selecting a proxy measure for how a highway segment influences land
values and uncovering an instrument that convincingly identifies the change in property
value due to each new segment have proved difficult. Even if these tasks are addressed
successfully, there remains a concern about the economic interpretations of what is
measured.2 Thus, it should not be surprising to find that this literature is so incomplete.
Fortunately circumstances in Phoenix, Arizona offer an opportunity to exploit the
pattern of residential development in relation to new highway segments to address all
three concerns. We use four new highway segments developed between 2000 and 2007 to
estimate the effect of freeway additions as separate treatments influencing residential
housing values. We estimate subdivision fixed effects to control for unobservable
attributes of neighborhoods and of the households that select them. Within a Tiebout
framework, we expect households with similar preferences for neighborhood features to
sort into similar subdivisions. Under the assumption that the distribution of these
unobservables in a subdivision does not change over the relatively short time periods
spanned by each of the intervals associated with the highway additions in our analysis, a
2

See Kuminoff and Pope [2010] and Klaiber and Smith [2009] for further discussion.

4

two step regression model can be used to estimate the treatment effect of highway
additions. Our application matches the conditions discussed in Starrett’s [1981] classic
analysis of land markets for full internal capitalization of projects yielding local public
goods. By using a set of hedonic models, each estimating fixed effects for highway
segments in each time period, we are able to: estimate the relative value of each new
highway link; control for unobserved land uses affecting private homes at the subdivision
level; and use a feasible GLS estimator to take account of the covariance structures for
the estimated fixed effects in each time period.
Section two develops the context for interpreting estimates of the residential land
capitalization of new highway segments as measures of the incremental benefits
generated by additions to a local highway network. Section three summarizes the key
elements of our estimating model. It also describes the data used in measuring the
segment specific capitalization effects. Section four presents the findings and discusses
their role in contributing to metropolitan Phoenix’s loop road system. In the last section
we consider two issues. The first concerns whether our method is unique to Phoenix due
to the specialized nature of these roadway projects in relation to the residential
development in the area. Second, we discuss the next steps in using roadway and
residential data similar to Phoenix to develop measures of the ex ante benefits of
alternative roadway projects such as would be associated with the South Mountain
project.

II. Land Capitalization and Highway Quasi-Rents
A. Background

5

The use of housing prices to estimate the marginal willingness to pay for changes
in spatial amenities has a long history.3 Four strategies are currently used to address these
issues. Each has a mix of data requirements and maintained assumptions. The first
approach is the traditional one using a single cross section of housing sales to estimate a
hedonic price function. In the absence of additional information, this strategy is often
criticized because the information available is regarded as incomplete. An equilibrium
reflects households sorting among locations for some of the reasons that analysts can
measure and due to factors that may not be readily observable. These two sets of
influences (i.e. the observed and unobserved factors impacting the equilibrium) may well
be interrelated. The result is a reasonable prospect for biased estimates of the effects that
we seek to measure. This result follows because the factors that cannot be measured and
are omitted are also often correlated with those that can be observed.
A second, reduced form, approach also uses housing prices but relies on external
events and spatial fixed effects to resolve the dual challenges of unobservables and
identification. The external change must be related to the amenity of interest and serves
to identify its effect.4 It relies on convincing arguments and extensive documentation that
the external event plays the hypothesized role (see Angrist and Pischke [2010] for
arguments for this approach and its impact). The third approach proposed by Bajari and
Benkard [2005] substitutes structural information for the external event. In their scheme a
structural representation of the choice process allows point estimates to be derived for the
marginal rate of substitution for the attribute of interest relative to the numeraire good. As
Bishop and Timmins [2008] note, this approach yields point estimates of the relevant

3
4

See Palmquist [2005] for a review.
See Davis [2003], Chay and Greenstone [2005] and Pope [2009] as examples.

6

marginal rate of substitution (MRS) conditional on the assumed preference function and
the way each application introduces preference heterogeneity. In the simplest cases each
tradeoff rate is assumed to be fixed for each household. It can vary across households but
does not vary with the amount of the attribute. As a result, the Bajari and Benkard logic
must impose restrictions on the hedonic price function to avoid inconsistencies in the
households’ implied choices and the conditions for constrained utility maximization.5
The fourth set of methods involves full structural models using either a vertical or
horizontal specification for preferences (see Klaiber and Smith [2009] for a review). This
approach does not escape the need for instruments.6 Nonetheless, there is a set of
maintained assumptions required by these structural models as well.
Thus, the four methods yield different types of information and impose different
assumptions that are unlikely to be testable within a single application. We would like to
be able to interpret these differences in prices in relationship to the tradeoffs people
would make to acquire the spatial (or temporal) difference hypothesized to lead to the
price change.
Kuminoff and Pope [2010] demonstrate that developing an economic
interpretation for estimates of capitalization is not straight forward. Extending models by
Tinbergen [1956] and Epple [1987], they find that the size of the change in the spatial
attribute and the heterogeneity in both the supply of alternatives as well as in the
household preferences, are all important to the interpretation of capitalized price changes
measured in response to exogenous events. Moreover, their empirical examples reinforce
Kuminoff [2009] has demonstrated how the selection of a preference function and a specific
distribution for the parameters associated with unobserved heterogeneity are used to augment the
information we can recover from households’ locational choices in identifying the parameters
estimated in sorting models.
6
Often the features of the equilibrium and assumptions about sorting suggest possible candidates.
5

7

the importance of these general conclusions. In related work Klaiber and Smith [2009]
used the assignment framework exploited by Cropper, Deck, and McConnell [1988] in
evaluating specification issues with hedonic models. Their focus was on assessing the
relationship between measures for housing price capitalization and the “true” general
equilibrium (GE) willingness to pay. They found the spatial extent of the market for those
affected by changes in spatial amenities was important to the discrepancy between
hedonic estimates of the capitalization of exogenous changes in land use and GE
willingness to pay.
In the current analysis the empirical model exploits a combination of spatial
controls, using subdivision level fixed effects, and temporal controls based on the
exogenous events associated with the completion dates for each specific highway
segment. Both sources of information allow us to identify the effects of each new
highway segment on land values as measured thru shifts in subdivision fixed effects.
Given we can accept the assumptions of Starrett’s internal capitalization model these
price differentials can be interpreted as estimates of the average household’s willingness
to pay for each new highways segment.

B. What Does Capitalization Measure for Roadway Segments?
Starrett [1981] identified two types of capitalization as conceptual extremes.
External capitalization derives from forces between communities. Internal capitalization
is associated with forces inside communities. Internal is the most relevant concept for
local public goods where proximity to the public good matters. Starrett used highways as
one of his examples of local public goods relevant to internal capitalization. We can

8

adapt his basic conceptual framework to explain how residential housing capitalization
captures the economic value of increments to highway capacity. Our model begins at the
household level. Each household is assumed to have a preference function, Ui(.), that
includes a measure of the public good associated with the highway system, q, and a
measure of that household’s use of the system, g, along with the amount of land, l, and a
numeraire good, x. The location of links to the network will affect the cost of a trip and
the value of q.
The household decision process envisions a conditional choice of g and l (land)
given a selection of each location from a discrete set of alternatives. We label these
potential locational choices as neighborhoods. In our empirical application we implement
the model by defining a neighborhood to be a subdivision. Maximizing equation (1) for
each location (where the budget constraint is substituted into the function for the
numeraire, x) defines a conditional indirect utility function, s(.) for each neighborhood
(s).

, , ,

,

(1)

where:
mi = household income

,

Ti = a head tax on each household
f(.) = cost of highway use (assumed the same for all households and a function of
location)
rs = rental price of land in location s

9

There will be no internal capitalization if the conditional indirect utility function
derived from this choice problem, vsi, is independent of the neighborhood. There must be
a spatial distinction before and after each project that adds to the highway system for a
welfare interpretation of price capitalization using this model. Following Starrett and
assuming preferences are quasi linear in the numeraire and additively separable with q
and g entering one component, land another, the envelop condition can be used to define
cases that preclude internal capitalization. These situations arise when the expression
defined in equation (2) is independent of s. We start by identifying this case as an
extreme. It helps to explain situations where the equilibrium admits capitalization. When
the indirect utility function is independent of the neighborhood, then there is no scope for
the rent to adjust to q. There is no spatial differentiation across neighborhoods and the
effects of a change in the public good are independent of the neighborhood selected.
When rents do differ by neighborhood, they change with q, equation (2) describes the
tradeoffs households in each neighborhood would make in equilibrium (s and m are
neighborhoods in equation (2)).7

,

,

,

(2)

As Starrett explains

“There are two principal assumptions which taken together guarantee project
benefits will be translated to land rents through the intensive margin. The first is
There appears to be a type setting error in Starrett’s equation (2). The second term should be
dr
 ls s based on the preceding text.

7

dq

10

that all the benefits of the project must be ‘intramarginal’ in that boundary
residents are marginally unaffected. …The second necessary assumption is that
residents do not tend to sort themselves out within the town according to their
relative preference for the public good.” (pp 313-314), emphasis added.

The first assumption amounts to saying we can identify a control community where the
public good has no effect on the residents. He refers to these as boundary communities.
The second refers to an absence of within community preference heterogeneity in tastes
for public goods.8
In this setting Starrett first proposes considering the change in land rents for the
boundary community in response to a change in q to measure a project’s benefits. With
the assumption that land in the community is owned by local residents (as opposed to
rented), the analysis must consider the effects of increases in demand for land across all
neighborhoods and adjust for the effects of that change in recovering the differential
change due to q for the neighborhoods assumed to be impacted. These are the treated
subdivisions in our empirical model.
We can adapt equation (2) using the definition of the boundary community
(labeled with the subscript



), together with the household sorting that leads to

equalization of the net contribution to utility and defines equilibrium adjustments due to a
change in q.

8 In contrast, structural sorting models permit diversity in preferences within a community because
it is recovered as a maintained distributional assumption. The specific form of the joint distribution
of income and tastes is used, along with the properties of the equilibrium to identify the parameters
describing the heterogeneity.

11

,

,

(3)

The first term on the right side of equation (3) is zero because
community. The second term (



is a boundary

) will depend on whether the project affects the

overall demand for land. If it does, then we have the general form of a difference in
difference model in equation (4).

,

(4)

The left side of this expression describes the difference in the change in land prices due to
project for the affected community (s) compared to the change in land prices due to the
overall demand changes (and other factors potentially) induced indirectly by the project
for the boundary (or control) community (  ), where we assume households experience
no gain due to the change in q. This formulation clearly displays that two differences are
needed. The project’s impact (and the change in q due to it) for the communities that
experience the gain and the indirect effects on controls that do not experience gains (due
to area wide changes in the demand for land).
If we further expand the model and allow for preference heterogeneity within
communities (a situation that was assumed away in the basic development), Starrett
argues that land rents will tend to undercapitalize the benefits of a change in q. This result
follows, in part, from a stability condition for the town structure. For our purposes, we
must assume that households are homogeneous within each neighborhood. To do

12

otherwise, as we discuss at the close of the paper, requires a structural model with
maintained assumptions characterizing household heterogeneity. Our estimates for the
effect of the additions to the highway network assume that the roadway effects can take
two forms. In our basic model the effect is constant for each neighborhood. In the second
specification the effect varies based on the inverse distance to the highway segment. For
the remaining terms in the model, Starrett’s separability assumptions assure that there is
no adjustment in response to changes in q.
The effects of roadways in our application are not continuous. They are assumed
to be capitalized at the subdivision level. The ability to distinguish these subdivisions
from assessor records is important to our strategy for identifying the incremental
willingness to pay for enhanced accessibility. In Phoenix the homes in each of the
subdivisions have lot sizes that are approximately equal. This feature implies that once
households select a neighborhood, sorting assures they will have comparable demands for
lot size as well as all the other attributes conveyed by that subdivision. We assumed in
our model that households’ costs of using the roadway, as represented by f(.), were the
same.
As we noted the measure in (4) requires two things: (1) home sales and the
identification of their locations in subdivisions and (2) a change in accessibility due to
changes in highway segments (i.e. the dq). Without this change in roadway segments we
don’t have a difference in accessibility that can be distinguished from the subdivision
fixed effect. We have instead the equivalent of what Starrett intends to be measured with
(lsrs-lσrσ) given the lot size features of subdivisions in Phoenix. In his framework the
other features of houses (and lots) are held constant. The only reason for land rents to

13

differ across neighborhoods (or in our case subdivisions) is due to differences in the
amount of q available to households who live in each. To measure the effects of changes
in q we need some basis for measuring how rs and rσ change with q. Thus, adding the
ability to observe these subdivision effects over time with the completion of new
roadway segments provides this opportunity. (i.e. measuring

).

We can measure these changes by having access to information on housing sales
before and after each highway segment’s completion and opening. Thus, a difference in
these fixed effects with each opening or, equivalently, a difference in differences
approximates the left side of equation (4). Sorting assures all other contributions that
would distinguish partial and general equilibrium effects are at the ex post equilibrium
values. If we assume an algebraic relationship between the proximity of a subdivision to
completed roadways, then our strategy of using subdivision fixed effects over time
together with this measure can be interpreted as a variant of the Athey and Imbens[2006]
change in changes approach to measuring the effects of the treatment.
Overall, then, our empirical model tests the internal capitalization condition
directly. The subdivision fixed effects measure the contribution to the housing prices in a
neighborhood as a result of each house’s location in that area. These effects account for
the unobserved factors that distinguish home prices in a particular neighborhood from all
others, after controlling for house attributes, the lot size, and other observables. If
measures of highway segments fail to be significantly related to the subdivision effects’
changes over time, then we conclude that there was no new internal capitalization.
Of course, one might argue that roadways are planned long in advance and, once
the path is known, the value of accessibility should already be capitalized into the
14

subdivision fixed effects. Certainly it is true that roadways require significant lead time.
However, the anticipated effects measure ex ante beliefs that cannot be recovered using
subdivision fixed effects without additional information. We seek to estimate what people
believe they would be obtaining. 9 Diversity in beliefs would not necessarily be
reconciled thru sorting, though it is reasonable to expect those with the strongest
preferences for access would move first. These expectations should make it more difficult
for us to estimate the ex post general equilibrium effect. If households perfectly
anticipated the gains (there were no unanticipated general equilibrium effects due to
access), then there should not be a significant change in subdivision fixed effects for the
treatment group (those with increased accessibility due to the new roadway) compared to
the change in those for the control neighborhoods between the time spans involved.
As we noted earlier, internal capitalization also requires that the benefits are
“intra-marginal.” Starrett explains that in cases like ours this condition means that some
neighborhoods realize no gains from increments to the local public good. In our case it
translates into an assumption that not all subdivisions within the overall area benefit from
each new highway segment. This assumption means that we need to define a set of
subdivisions that serve as controls in both spatial and temporal terms. In practice this
requirement implies we assume that at some distance from a new segment the roadway’s
role in creating increased access to the network has no value. This condition is consistent
with the features of a loop roadway that provides a highway network within a
metropolitan area but is not enhancing connections to outside metropolitan areas. The
highway segments we selected were (from the planning descriptions) intended to serve

Indeed Poulos and Smith [2008] in a different context use this logic to define information treatment
that estimates the ex ante negative effect of a highway.
9

15

metropolitan Phoenix, but do not change the area’s accessibility to other more distant
population centers. We assume the added segments have primarily a local value and will
be important to subdivisions near it. To meet this condition we impose a three mile
threshold for effects as a maintained hypothesis for our second step estimates.10
When these conditions are satisfied the incremental benefits of additions to a
public good are measured by residential land capitalization. These increments could be
used to estimate the net quasi-rents due to the project. Starrett’s proof of this result makes
strong assumptions about preferences and assumes the lump sum taxes imposed on
households cover the incremental costs of the increases to public goods and that
household income includes profit shares, rental income on land, and labor earnings, with
the latter unaffected by increments to q.11
While these are important maintained assumptions in his general capitalization
result, our strategy uses them as a starting point for interpreting the empirical results. We
do not argue that our findings offer measures of the aggregate quasi-rents for highway
segments. Instead we suggest they offer a basis for ranking the segments and discuss in
the closing section some strategies for extending the analysis for ex ante assessment of
these aggregate quasi rents.

III. Empirical Model and Data
A. Empirical Model
10

We investigated the sensitivity of our results to alternative specifications of this threshold and the basic
conclusions are maintained. In particular, we examined a 5 mile cutoff and found that magnitudes of
parameters decreased, but signs and significance were maintained.
11
There are differences in property tax rates across some of the municipalities and school districts within
our study area, Maricopa County, but these will also be controlled with our subdivision fixed effects.
Moreover, the roadways are paid thru county wide sales taxes not property taxes directly associated with
the roadways

16

Our analysis uses on a two step hedonic property value model. Separate first-stage
models are estimated for housing sales in each of five periods – a control time span
before the new roadways are completed and four other periods with time spans defined
by the sequential dates for the opening of each of the four highway segments. Our sample
includes all subdivisions with at least 13 sales per time period. Each model includes a full
set of variables describing the homes’ characteristics and the attributes conveyed by
location as well as fixed effects identifying the subdivisions in each time span. Equation
(5) specifies the general form for the first-stage hedonic model specification, a semi-log
equation. It maintains that the housing sales price, (Pi) is a function of housing and lot
characteristics, a monthly time index, and subdivision fixed effects.

ln

∑

∑

(5)

where:
t = identifies the time periods for each sample
cji = designates housing and lot characteristics
ski = corresponds to subdivision fixed effects
Mt = monthly time trend

i = unobserved error

The second step “stacks” the five sets of estimates for the subdivision fixed effects in a
single sample to allow these effects to be used to estimate the effects of two different
characterizations of roadway effects on the homes in each subdivision. The model is an
unbalanced panel with different subdivisions affected by the highway segments in each

17

time interval.12 When subdivisions appear in repeated sub-samples over time the
qualitative terms for highway segments are coded so that they influence land values (thru
the subdivision fixed effects) from the point of completion of the roadway until the end
of the sample period. Equation (6) specifies the estimated subdivision fixed effects to be
a function of an indicator variable that identifies subdivisions that satisfy two conditions.
They are within three miles of each new roadway segment and the sales were after that
highway segment opened. The model also includes a fixed effect to capture noise and disamenity attributed to subdivisions within 1,500 feet of a highway segment. This effect is
interacted with the timing fixed effect. Finally a measure of distance to the central
business district is included.
We consider the proximity to each highway segment in two different formats: (a)
the primary model is a fixed effect for the subdivisions within three miles of the roadway
segment (this corresponds to what we labeled earlier as the difference in differences
effect); and (b) the second uses the inverse distance to the roadway truncated to zero at 3
miles (this approach is a variation on the Athey and Imbens change in changes model).
This formulation gauges the sensitivity of our findings to treating the highway effect as
fixed.13 After each roadway opens these variables (and the fixed effects identifying
subdivisions adjacent to each segment) are assumed to continue to exert an influence on
the subdivisions’ contribution to housing sales prices.

12

In addition to different segments, it is possible that we might not observe a minimum of 13 sales within a
subdivision for some time periods. Either outcome would remove a subdivision from the housing sales
included in the first step model and thus the corresponding subdivision fixed effect for the time period in
which this occurs.
13 As noted in footnote #10 we also tested using a greater distance threshold and found comparable
effects to those reported here.

18

∑

∑

(6)

= corresponds to either the dummy variable for the distance interval (or the inverse
distance of road segment l from subdivision k for the robustness check)
= 1 if the road segment was opened in the time period defining interval t or in a
previous time period
= 0 otherwise
= 1 if the subdivision was adjacent to a completed highway segment during the
period
= 0 otherwise
= distance of subdivision k to the central business district.

Our two step strategy requires that we have estimates of both the fixed effects and
their covariance structure. By applying a Cholesky decomposition to each estimated
covariance structure for the fixed effects from each first stage model, the variables in
equation (6) may be transformed so that the feasible generalized least squares estimator
required for the second stage model can be derived using ordinary least squares with the
transformed “stacked” data.14 This decomposition is especially convenient because there
are over 15,000 subdivisions included in the full sample over all five sub-periods.
Equation (6) hypothesizes two types of effects for the treated subdivisions. The
first assumes that once a highway opens all homes experience a constant percentage
increment due to increased access to the roadway network. This effect persists thru time

The estimated parameters are based on each sub period and transformed using the relevant
Cholesky matrix for the estimated covariance structure for each sub period and then stacked. This
result follows because the covariance matrix for the feasible GLS applied to the pooled set of fixed
effects is assumed to be block diagonal.

14

19

as subsequent segments open due to the definition of the time fixed effect (Dlrt). For
subdivisions adjacent to a segment there may well be dis-amenity effects due to noise or
pollution. Changes in land uses near segments such as strip malls or commercial
structures could also be expected to influence these subdivision terms. The fixed effects
identifying adjacent subdivisions will capture the net impact of all of these influences.
In a second specification, we consider the possibility of spillover effects between
highway segments. To describe how this was implemented it is important to outline the
spatial structure of the changes in the highway system and then describe how interactions
between segments were hypothesized to alter the contribution of each new segment to the
accessibility of each subdivision to other areas within the metropolitan area.
During this time span several major loop freeways in the Phoenix area were
completed. This overall process for expanding the loop roadway involved four major
segments. Figure 2 displays the segments with color coding for the Price segment
(green), the Pima (blue), Santan (black) and connector (red). The southern segment of
Loop 101 (Price) connecting the cities of Tempe and Chandler was completed in
December 2000. The northern segment (Pima) connecting Scottsdale to Tempe was
completed in April 2002. Another project linking the Loop 101 with Interstate 10, a
major interstate, opened in November 2003 (connector). The second loop roadway, Loop
202, opened in June 2006 with the completion of a 12 mile segment of the Loop 202
joining the southern section of the Loop 202 Freeway linking Loop 101 and US 60
through the cities of Chandler and Gilbert (Santan).
A closer look at the segment labeled Price indicates that it is along the eastern
boundary of Phoenix. It is a north-south segment linking the southern (and middle)

20

residential areas to the major east-west connectors (i.e. Route 10 and 60). The Pima
component completes this north-south link providing access to and from Scottsdale and
provides an east-west thoroughfare connecting at the northern edge of the metro area. Our
spillover hypothesis suggests that completing the Pima segment may change the value of
the Price segment. A similar argument could be applied to the Price connector and Santan
segments along the southern boundary providing another east-west link to Interstate
Route 10. These effects are tested by introducing different sets of interactions of the
separate fixed effects for each roadway segment.

B. Data and First Stage Results
Our application involves over 600,000 sales of private homes in Maricopa County
from January 1, 1999 to June 30, 2007. Table 1 identifies the time period corresponding
to each completed segment, the number of subdivisions that had sales affected by each
highway segment, as well as the control time period. Table 2 provides two sets of
summary statistics. The top panel describes the characteristics of the properties involved
in housing sales. This includes the mean, standard deviation, the minimum, and the
maximum values for price and variables describing the characteristics of each house. In
addition it includes the distance between the centroid for each house and the roadway
segments. The bottom panel describes the features of the subdivisions included in our
sample. It reports the average number as well as the size of the smallest and largest
subdivision and the years they were built.
Table 3 provides estimates of the hedonic price equations for each time period.
The values in bold designate the estimated parameters that were significantly different

21

from zero with p-values of 0.10 or less. Following many previous hedonic studies, our
specification includes quadratic effects for age, lot size, and house size. Overall, the
effects of housing attributes were quite stable over the eight years comprising our sample
period and generally agree with our expectations for the effects of each of these structural
variables. The relative stability of the estimated parameters over time suggests that these
coefficients reflect the construction costs during the period. Locational effects of where
houses are placed are captured by the subdivision fixed effects. We do not report specific
estimates for the fixed effects for the subdivisions estimated separately for each time
period.
We selected two roadway segments-Price and Pima and developed kernel density
estimates for the fixed effects (using the three mile threshold) to identify treated and
control subdivisions in each time period. Figure 3 displays the results for the first
roadway segment to be completed, the Price, and Figure 4 is the Pima segment. In each
figure we display the density estimated for the treated (blue) and control (red) subdivision
fixed effects by sub-period and for the overall sample. The effects of each roadway on the
values of the affected subdivisions are clearest using the sub-period plots. For the Price in
sub-periods 3, 4, and 5 there is a clear displacement of the treated subdivisions to yield
larger estimated changes in the fixed effects than the control compared to the base time
period. This is the distinction that our second stage model isolates for each roadway
segment. The second stage model acknowledges that the fixed effects are not
independently estimated and takes account of these correlations with the feasible
generalized least squares estimator. These sample kernel density estimates assume

22

independence. Nonetheless these simple graphs are useful in providing a general idea of
what the second stage models are capturing.
The Pima kernel estimates display the shift in fixed effects for this roadway
segment as well. There is no period two in this case because the first time period after this
roadway was completed is our period three. All three periods for the Pima display a shift
and the full time period (in the last panel) more clearly displays the treatment effect. As
we discuss in the next section, the connector and the Santan segments do not have as
large an influence as the Pima and Price. As a result, we do not report kernel density
estimates for them.
Figures 5a thru 5d display the clustering of the subdivisions that are serving as the
treated cases for each highway segment (in red) and the controls (in black). As the figures
confirm there is a clear delineation of the treatments used for each segment.

IV. Estimates of the Incremental Values for New Highway Segments
Table 4 presents five different specifications of the second stage model. The first
panel is the simplest model with the fixed effect terms for each roadway, including
whether the subdivision is within three miles of roadway segment and the time period for
the hedonic model was after the completion of the segment. This simplest specification
also identifies whether a subdivision was adjacent to the segment and includes the
distance to the Central Business District (CBD). The second panel includes these
variables along with interaction effects to consider spillover effects that are associated
with directional spillovers. The third panel focuses on spillovers that focus on connection
effects between new and existing roadway segments. The fourth includes all fixed effects

23

and interaction variables. The last is a robustness check replacing the fixed effects with
the inverse distance between subdivisions and relevant roadway segments.
Our primary focus is on the estimates treating the highway as a fixed effect with
an implied constant mean effect (in percentage terms) for the subdivisions impacted by
each new highway segment. Regardless of whether the fixed effect (the first panel) or the
inverse distance (fifth panel) is used, there is a clear ranking of the contributions of
different highway segments to housing prices, with the north / south Pima segment the
most important, increasing housing prices by about twenty four percent. The Price/10
connector has the second largest impact that is significant and stable, indicating a thirteen
percent increase in housing prices for homes in a subdivision near this segment after it
was completed. The remaining segments also have significant effects on the subdivision’s
contributions to prices with a mean effect of seven percent for the Santan segment and
about four percent for the Price segment.
The models considering spillover effects are defined using interaction terms under
a “directional” or “connection” based rationale. These interactions are only significant
when they involve the Price segments. They do not appear to alter the overall effect for
composites of the completed roadway segment, suggesting that the simpler formulation
offers the best description of the highway segments’ effects. That is, assuming separate
fixed effects offers the best guide to the relative importance of each highway component.
The fixed effects for adjacent impacts are only statistically significant for the north /
south Pima segment using the full fixed effects specification. This effect reflects a large
set of land use changes that took place in the areas around this segment because of its
enhanced accessibility. Figure 5a illustrates the location of the subdivisions along this

24

segment. There has also been significant commercial development in this area that
closely aligns with the roadway. The composite of these two impacts on the adjacent
subdivisions is reflected in these fixed effects.
The last component of our analysis is in the fifth panel of Table 4. We estimate no
spillover (i.e. interactions between segments) model replacing a fixed effect for
subdivisions within each roadway segment with the inverse distance for the centroid of
the subdivision in relation to the closest point of the roadway. This term is interacted with
the fixed effect identifying when each segment opened (i.e. the

in equation (6)).

Two conclusions emerge from this gauge of the sensitivity of our findings. First,
as we noted at the outset of this discussion of findings, our conclusions about the ranking
and statistical significance of these new roadway effects remain stable for the segments
with the largest effects. Second, when we evaluate the estimates at the mean of the
inverse distance for the treated subdivision in our sample, the estimated average effect is
consistent but smaller compared to what we found with the models that assumed the
effects were constant. Only the Santan and Price display results that switch order of
importance and these would not be significant differences. More specifically, the
estimates at the mean values for the inverse distance are: 12 percent for Pima, 5 percent
for the connector to the Price, 2.3 percent for the Santan and 2.5 percent for the Price
segment.
Our adaptation of Starrett’s model suggests the difference in differences logic
recovers increments that reflect the sorting response of households to each neighborhood
after each change. These estimates provide the ex post increments to the willingness to
pay attributable to each roadway’s contribution to accessibility. At an aggregate level

25

they are approximate because we are using the average proportionate change together
with the average house price to estimate average increments.15 At best then, the results
should be interpreted as ranking the segments. In Table 5 we report a simple
approximation using the percentage increment for each roadway segment and the average
of the sales prices in the affected subdivisions to provide an order of magnitude measure
of these effects in comparison to the costs for each roadway segment.
As cautioned earlier these are not estimates of aggregate quasi rents. We are
gauging the size of the overall effects to judge whether small percentage effects on the
average subdivision for some roadway segments considered together with the number of
houses in these neighborhoods would change the ranking due to the number of affected
properties. In our case they would. The top ranked roadway segment remains unchanged
but the ordering of the others would be affected. This finding reinforced the need to
consider measuring both the average treatment effect and assessing the size of the
impacted area in the design of ex post evaluations. While there are many assumptions to
interpret these as benefit measures, for many purposes even the aggregate capitalized
value of specific segments offers sufficient information to gauge the importance of the
roadway segments.
Table 5 provides the elements that contribute to our estimate of aggregate changes
to evaluate our segment ranking. The first two columns report the number of houses near
each segment and those defined as adjacent to the roadway. Recall our estimates
15

i.e. if ∆q; is the change in accessibility due to segment j, then the WTPi for household i would be:

∆ ,
, , ,

, ,

,
,

Where * and ~ identify the differences in the utilization and land with and without the increased
accessibility implied by q j .

26

suggested that subdivisions near the roadway gained relative to controls but the gain was
reduced somewhat if these areas had homes that were adjacent to the roadway. Hence
both factors need to be considered in computing the increment to an aggregate for each
highway segment. The next four columns report the number of sales and average prices
for home affected by each highway segment. These are taken from the treated
subdivisions. We distinguish whether they are near or adjacent to the highway. The
seventh column reports our estimate for aggregate increment to evaluate our ranking
based on fixed effects alone.
If we use them as an order of magnitude gauge of the importance of the roadway
segments and compare them to the costs of each segment, we would conclude that all
have had impacts on land values that clearly exceed their costs.16
Ideally, a full benefit cost analysis would includea more complete accounting of
who gains and loses. As Mohring [1961] suggested, there are both gainers and losers
across each metro area. Starrett’s model assumes any income effects of capitalization will
be reflected in the bids for residential properties. We suspect, due to the rapid population
growth during the period of our sample’s transactions, that these roadways influenced the
placement of new subdivisions and thus channeled growth of residential housing. Our use
of controls to capture the boundary effects takes account of some of these influences.
Real housing prices in other areas probably did not decline over this period. The influx of
new households may have been responsible for avoiding a relative decline in real prices
for the areas that might have failed to gain access to the overall area during the period we

16

Cost estimates are obtained from yearly certification reports prepared by the Arizona Department of
Transportation. These reports show the progression of the freeway system as well as the costs for each
segment. When possible, we use the cost associated with segments under construction rather than the
estimated pre-construction costs.

27

study. This is why Starrett’s argument to consider the effects of overall land demands on
the boundary community’s land values is important to detecting the net effect of each
highway segment. A structural model would be needed to judge how these aggregate
approximations relate to the quasi-rents for these segments during this period. 17

V. Implications
Mohring’s [1965] call for greater attention to marginal cost pricing and economic
principles in managing existing roadways and in evaluating increments to their capacity
seems especially relevant to today’s policy climate where increased infrastructure
investment is viewed as especially important as a stimulus for aggregate economic
activity and as a long term need for economic growth. Research considering the
implementation of Mohring’s proposal for evaluating highway investments has been
virtually non-existent.
We argued that Starrett’s capitalization results can provide an effective rational
for measuring the gains (at the subdivision level) due to highway segments that generate
primarily local benefits within a metropolitan network. Our example is based on key
segments added to the loop roadways around metro Phoenix between 2000 and 2007. An
important question is whether it is possible to exploit the results from this type of analysis
to evaluate the ex ante incremental benefits from potential additions to other roadway
systems.
We answer this question in two ways. First, for Metropolitan Phoenix, which
recently extended the ½ cent sales tax 20 years to fund expansion of the freeway system,

All of these areas experienced significant price declines after the end of our sample period. There is
no reason to believe that these effects eliminated the relative value of segments near each roadway.

17

28

our results help provide guidance for the best types of roadways to target for additional
infrastructure spending. In fact, the first roadway targeted for the expansion of HOV
lanes was the Pima Freeway, consistent with our findings that this roadway is associated
with the largest capitalized benefit.
In terms of using our results to inform policymakers in other areas, our results are
not likely to translate directly. However, there is a link between the way Starrett posed
the question of internal capitalization and the current generation of vertical sorting
models (see Sieg et al [2004]) that may be worth pursuing in developing a calibrated land
valuation model for this task. Starrett’s neighborhood effects are similar to the effects of
local public goods in the Epple-Sieg [1999] vertical sorting model. That is, in these
models, the equilibrium conditions under the assumption preferences satisfy the single
crossing condition imply housing prices and public goods are linked. The nature of the
link depends on the preference specification. For the case of the CES function used in
Sieg et.al [2004] there is a simple updating rule linking neighborhood price indexes and
the neighborhood specific public goods. The relation exploits the ascending bundle
property of the equilibrium. This condition assures neighborhoods will be ranked the
same way if compared by housing (or land) prices or an index of public goods. Thus, the
prices and public goods indexes of adjoining neighborhoods (in the sense of being ranked
together) can be used to structure an updating rule for prices if the public goods change or
to compute the index of local public goods if the prices are different. It is this relationship
that could be used to calibrate preferences.
A sketch of the logic would proceed as follows. We would need to observe
housing prices before and after a highway project to estimate price indexes for a set of

29

neighborhoods comprising the choice set relevant for the market equilibrium in the area
where we would like to project the benefit of the improvement. The new location’s
application need not have the level of experimental detail distinguishing treatment and
control neighborhoods, as in the case of our Phoenix example. It would require the before
and after price indexes, and measures of the neighborhoods used to get the relationship to
the new roadway. Under these conditions, the estimated effects of new roadway
proximity from Phoenix could be used as relative values in the new location—a
calibration would attempt to use them in a public goods index to estimate the post project
prices.
Klaiber and Smith [forthcoming] have found support for a vertical sorting model
for Maricopa County based on local school quality using school districts as the basic
choice alternatives. Augmenting it to reflect our findings here would require significant
additional information and qualifying “ifs” and assumptions. Nonetheless, the basic point
is that using the structural foundation of the internal capitalization model is one way to
extend the results where the conditions associated with highway developments did not
offer the controls offered by our example.
Even if this scheme is judged too arbitrary for most highway projects, there is
scope for exploiting Starrett’s internal capitalization within a DD framework. Over the
past decade—rapidly growing areas like Las Vegas, Nevada, the Research Triangle area
of North Carolina and suburban Atlanta, Georgia as well as other areas may well offer
examples where this logic could be replicated to judge the overall viability of Mohring’s
proposal to rank highway projects.

30

References

Angrist, Joshua and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, 2010. “The Credibility Revolution in Empirical
Economics: How Better Research Design is Taking the Con Out of Economics.”
NBER Working Paper #15794.
Athey, Susan and Guido W. Imbens, 2006. “Identificaiton and Inference in Nonlinear
Difference in Difference Models,” Econometrica, Vol. 74 (March): 431-498.
Bajari, Patrick and C. Lanier Benkard. 2005. "Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous
Consumers and Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach."
Journal of Political Economy, 113(6): 1239-76.
Bajari, Patrick and Matthew E. Kahn, 2005. "Estimating Housing Demand with an
Application to Explaining Racial Segregation in Cities." Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 23(1): 20-33.
Bishop, Kelly and Christopher Timmins, 2008. "Simple, Consistent Estimation of the
Marginal Willingness to Pay Function: Recovering Rosen's Second Stage without
Instrumental Variables." Mimeo.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, 2005. "Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence
from the Housing Market." Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 376-424.
Davis, Lucas,2004. “The Effect of Health Risk on Housing Values: Evidence from a
Cancer Cluster.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1693-704.
Eberts, R.W. and McMillen, D., 1999. “Agglomeration Economics and Public
Infrastructure”. In P. Cheshire and E.S. Mills (eds.), Handbook of Urban and
Regional Economics, Vol. 3, New York: North Holland.

31

Epple, Dennis, 1987. "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and
Supply Functions for Differentiated Products." Journal of Political Economy,
95(1): 59-80.
Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg, 1999. "Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local
Jurisdiction." Journal of Political Economy, 107(4): 645-81.
Gramlich, Edward and Rubinfeld, Daniel, 1982. “Micro Estimates of Public Spending
Demand Functions and Tests of the Tiebout and Medium Voter Hypotheses.”
Journal of Political Economy 90: 536-560.
Greenstone, Michael, 2009. “Toward a Culture of Persistent Regulatory Experimentation
and Evaluation” in David Moss and John Cisternino, editors, New Perspective on
Regulation, (Cambridge, MA: The Tobin Project).
Haveman, Robert H., 1972. The Economic Performance of Public Investments: An Ex
Post Evaluation of Water Resource Investments (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press for Resources for the Future).
Keeler, Theodore E. and Kenneth A Small, 1977. “Optimal Peak- Load Pricing,
Investment and Service Levels on Urban Expressways” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol 85 (February): 1-25.
Klaiber, H. Allen and Daniel J. Phaneuf, 2009."Valuing Open Space in a Residential
Sorting Model of the Twin Cities." Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management. (forthcoming).
Klaiber, H. Allen and V. Kerry Smith, 2009. “Preference Heterogeneity and Non-Market
Benefits: The Roles of Structural Hedonic and Sorting Models” in Jeff Bennett,
editor, The International Yearbook of Non-Market Valuation

32

(Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar, forthcoming)
Klaiber, H. A. and V. Kerry Smith, 2009. “Evaluating Rubin's Causal Model for
Measuring the Capitalization of Environmental Amenities.” NBER Working
Paper #14957.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., 2009. "Decomposing the Structural Identification of Nonmarket
Values." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 57(2): 123-39.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V and Jaren C. Pope, 2009. “Capitalization and Welfare Measurement
in the Quasi-Experimental Hedonic Model” mimeo.
Lind, Robert C., 1973. “Spatial Equilibrium, The Theory of Rents, and the Measurement
of Benefits from Public Programs.” Quarterly Journal of Economic, 87 (2): 188207.
McDonald, John and Osuji, Clifford, 1995. “The Effects of Anticipated Transportation
Improvement on Residential Land Values.” Regional Science and Urban
Economics, 25: 261-278.
Mills, Edwin, 1967. “An Aggregate Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan
Area.” American Economic Review 57: 197-210.
Mohring, Herbet, 1965. “Urban Highway Improvements” in Robert Dorfman, editor,
Measuring Benefits of Government Investments, (Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution).
Mohring, Herbert, 1961. “Land Values and the Management of Highway Benefits,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 69 (June): 236-269.
Palmquist, Raymond B., 1982. “Measuring Environmental Effects on Property Values
without Hedonic Regerssions.” Journal of Urban Economics, 33 (3):333-47.

33

Palmquist, Raymond B., 2005. "Property Value Models," in Handbook of Environmental
Economics, Volume 2. Karl-Göran Mäler and Jeffery Vincent eds. Amsterdam:
North Holland Press.
Parry, Ian, 2009. “Pricing Urban Congestion” in Annual Review of Resource Economics,
edited by Gordon Rausser (Palo Alto: Annual Reviews, PP 461-484).
Pope, Jaren C., 2008. "Buyer Information and the Hedonic: The Impact of a Seller
Disclosure on the Implicit Price for Airport Noise." Journal of Urban Economics,
63(2): 498-516.
Poulos, Christine and Smith, V. Kerry, 2008. "Do New Highways Create New Sources of
Stigma?" Working Paper RTI International and CEESP, Arizona State Univeristy
(2008).
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh, 2004. "Estimating
the General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public
Goods." International Economic Review, 45(4): 1047-77.
Starrett, David A., 1981. “Land Value Capitalization in Local Public Finance,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 89 (April): 306-328.
Tiebout, Charles, 1956. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 64: 416-424.
Tinbergen, Jan, 1959. "On the Theory of Income Distribution," in Selected Papers of Jan
Tinbergen. L.H. Klaassen, L.M. Koych and H.J. Witteveen eds. Amsterdam:
North Holland.

34

Table 1: Time Periods
Time Period # Sales Cutoff # Subdivisions
1
13
3,144
2
13
1,844
3
13
3,162
4
13
6,034
5
13
1,555

Date Range
January 1, 1999 to December 22, 2000
December 23, 2000 to April 7, 2002
April 8, 2002 to November 16, 2003
November 17, 2003 to June 11, 2006
June 12, 2006 to Jun 30, 2007

35

Segment Completed
Pre‐completion
Price
Pima
Price connector
Santan

Table 2. Housing (N=619,494) and Subdivision (N=15,739) Summary Statistics
Variable
Price
Square Feet
Acres
Stories
Bathrooms
Age
Garage
Pool

Mean
236850
1951
0.19
1.24
2.69
11.33
0.96
0.29
a

Price Distance
Pima Distance
Connector Distance
Santan Distance
Size (N=10,696)
Number of Sales
Year Built
Age at Sale
Age at Sale Spread

Std Dev
265143
720
0.13
0.43
0.81
14.09

Min
17000
600
0.05
1
0.5
1

Max
1.00E+07
5997
6.790381
4
6
88

18.15
9.74
11.60
6.27
20.35
10.29
20.57
13.26
Subdivision Statistics
88.56
83.45
39.36
45.82
1988.09
14.90
15.88
14.92
2.64
5.22

0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04

63.56
59.40
65.87
69.72

13
13
1925
1
0

1115
855
2007
81
80.09

a

Distance measures are not included in first‐stage hedonic (in miles).

36

Table 3. First‐Stage Log‐Linear Hedonic Results by Time Period

Variable

1

Square Feet (100s)
Acres
Stories
Bathrooms
Age
Garage
Pool
Age Sq
Acres Sq
Square Feet Sq
Monthly Trend
# Observations
2

Adjusted R
1

1

Time Period
2
3

4

5

0.0437
0.5296
‐0.0396
0.0291
0.0014
0.0475
0.0363
0.0000
‐0.1572
‐0.0004
0.0061
114,143

0.0449
0.6106
‐0.0566
0.0350
0.0008
0.0382
0.0368
0.0000
‐0.1988
‐0.0004
0.0000
62,779

0.0440
0.5650
‐0.0576
0.0343
‐0.0039
0.0463
0.0435
0.0000
‐0.1138
‐0.0004
0.0043
107,556

0.0410
0.4921
‐0.0400
0.0250
‐0.0001
0.0179
0.0499
0.0000
‐0.0893
‐0.0003
0.0228
283,888

0.0415
0.7211
‐0.0480
0.0245
‐0.0070
0.0074
0.0518
0.0000
‐0.2120
‐0.0003
‐0.0059
51,128

0.9998

0.9995

0.9997

0.9997

0.9998

Bold indicates 90% significance.

37

Table 4: Fixed Effect Decomposition (N=15,739)

Variable
Price Dummy
Pima Dummy
Connector Dummy
Santan Dummy
Adjacent Price
Adjacent Pima
Adjacent Connector
Adjacent Santan
Phoenix CBD
Constant
b

Price/Pima
Price/Connector Dummy
Price/Santan
Connector/Santan
b

Model Specification
A: No Interactions
B: Directional Spillovers
C: Connector Spillovers
D: Full Spillovers
E: Inverse Distance
Estimate
Std Err
t‐Stat Estimate
Std Err
t‐Stat Estimate
Std Err
t‐Stat Estimate
Std Err
t‐Stat Estimate
Std Err
t‐Stat
0.0066
3.4598
0.0372
0.01
3.7900
0.1008
0.03
3.3700
0.0872
0.02
5.7900
0.1006
0.03
3.3700
0.0229
0.2359
0.01 31.4100
0.2361
0.01 31.4500
0.2375
0.01 31.6100
0.2378
0.01 31.6400
0.0995
0.0056 17.6222
0.1346
0.02
8.9400
0.1428
0.02
8.9600
0.1589
0.02
9.6300
0.1634
0.02
9.7700
0.0521
0.0118
4.4104
0.0729
0.01
5.1400
0.0752
0.01
5.2000
0.0757
0.01
5.2400
0.0743
0.01
5.1300
0.016
0.0066
2.4187
0.0087
0.03
0.3300
0.0091
0.03
0.3400
0.0121
0.03
0.4600
0.0120
0.03
0.4600
‐0.047
0.0375 ‐1.2519
‐0.0322
0.02 ‐1.6400 ‐0.0325
0.02 ‐1.6500 ‐0.0326
0.02 ‐1.6500 ‐0.0331
0.02
‐1.6800 ‐0.2785
0.0316 ‐8.8272
‐0.0061
0.05 ‐0.1300 ‐0.0035
0.05 ‐0.0700 ‐0.0050
0.05 ‐0.1100 ‐0.0050
0.05
‐0.1100 ‐0.0895
0.0656 ‐1.3647
0.0214
0.4832
0.0085
0.02
0.4600
0.0077
0.02
0.4100
0.0086
0.02
0.4600
0.0091
0.02
0.4900
0.0104
0.0026
0.00
8.3500
0.0026
0.00
8.3700
0.0026
0.00
8.4700
0.0026
0.00
8.4900
0.0021
0.0003
6.8584
10.2328
0.02 446.7800 10.2328
0.02 446.8100 10.2323
0.02 446.9800 10.2319
0.02 446.9600
10.234
0.0234 436.6595
‐0.0706

‐0.0306

0.03

0.04

‐2.2500

‐0.7800

Interactions occur only to the existing segment at time of completion of a new segment. This semgent is always listed first.

38

‐0.0844

0.02

‐4.3600

‐0.0287

0.04

‐0.7300

‐0.0179
‐0.0876
0.0600
‐0.0665

0.03
0.02
0.04
0.05

‐0.5200
‐4.0300
1.6200
‐1.4600

Table 5. Benefit/Cost of Highway Segments

House Population
Price Freeway
Pima Freeway
Connector Freeway
Santan Freeway

Proximity Measure
Adjacent
Near
5,015
76,032
7,052 116,220
1,360
41,341
7,079 120,133

a

Adjacent Prices
# Sales Avg Price
1,122 206,573
2,449 235,562
348 248,711
758 312,157

b

Value of Segment
Near Prices
Cost of
Segment
# Sales Avg Price
A
B
C
D
21,090 216,947
622,979,481
506,515,766
58,252,701
921,150,516 175,000,000
33,064 299,323 8,152,247,595 8,159,489,361 8,208,565,305 8,217,003,271 380,000,000
7,925 278,058 1,545,472,747 1,288,324,459 1,496,027,161 1,111,862,080 120,000,000
6,270 343,098 3,024,043,464 3,116,352,541 3,138,638,564 3,082,424,019 425,000,000

a

Averaged over houses selling after freeway opening within 1500 feet of the specified freeway

b

Averaged over houses selling after freeway opening within 3 miles of the specified freeway, including adjacent houses

39

g
Cost /
Length Benefit/Mile ‐
Model D
Mile
(mi)
12.5
73,692,041 14,000,000
30 273,900,109 12,666,667
5 222,372,416 24,000,000
20.2 152,595,248 21,039,604

Figure1. Alternatives Studied in the Draft Environment Impact Statement; South Mountain

40

Figure 2. Key Highway Segments

41

Price Freeway
Time 3

Time 4

10

11

12
13
Fixed Effect

Treated

14

1Density2
0

0

0

1Density
2

1 Density
2
3

3

4

3

Time 2

10

Control

12
13
Fixed Effect

Treated

14
Control

0

0

1 Density
2 3 4

.2 Density
.4
.6

5

.8

Time 5

11

10

11

12
13
14
Fixed Effect
Treated

15

8

Control

10

12
14
Fixed Effect

Treated

16
Control

Figure 3. Price Segment; Estimated Density

42

8

9

10
11
Fixed Effect

Treated

12
Control

Pima Freeway
Time 4
Density
0 .5 1 1.5 2

Density
0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

Time 3

10

11

12
13
Fixed Effect

Treated

14

8

Control

9

10
Fixed Effect

11

Treated

Control

0

Density
1
2

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Time Full

3

Time 5

12

10

11

12
13
Fixed Effect
Treated

14

15

8

Control

10

12
Fixed Effect

Treated

Figure 4. Pima Segment; Estimated Density

43

14

16
Control

(a) Price Freeway Subdivisions

(b) Pima Freeway Subdivisions
Figure 5: Housing transactions in Subdivisions used during analysis

44

(c) Connector Subdivisions

(d) Santan Freeway Subdivisions
Figure 5: continued

45

