                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     COMMERCIAL IMPERIALISM? POLITICAL INFLUENCE AND TRADE DURING
                            THE COLD WAR

                                              Daniel Berger
                                             William Easterly
                                              Nathan Nunn
                                            Shanker Satyanath

                                          Working Paper 15981
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15981


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2010




We thank J. Atsu Amegashie, Roberto Bonfatti, Richard Chisik, Azim Essaji, Robert Feenstra, Keith
Head, Elhanan Helpman, Larry Katz, Tim McKeown, Noel Maurer, Chris Meissner, Edward Miguel,
Kris Mitchener, Marc Muendler, Suresh Naidu, Dani Reiter, Bob Staiger and seminar participants
at Stanford, Stellenbosch Univ., UC Berkeley, UC Davis, Univ. of Essex, UC San Diego, UC Santa
Cruz, UNC Chapel Hill, USC, Univ. of Pennsylvania, NBER DAE and ITI Program Meetings, and
the CEA Meetings for valuable comments. We also thank Sayon Deb, Mary Jirmanus, and Eva Ng
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Daniel Berger, William Easterly, Nathan Nunn, and Shanker Satyanath. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Commercial Imperialism? Political Influence and Trade During the Cold War
Daniel Berger, William Easterly, Nathan Nunn, and Shanker Satyanath
NBER Working Paper No. 15981
May 2010
JEL No. F10,F5,F54,N70

                                            ABSTRACT

We exploit the recent declassification of CIA documents and examine whether there is evidence of
US power being used to influence countries' decisions regarding international trade. We measure US
influence using a newly constructed annual panel of CIA interventions aimed at installing and supporting
leaders during the Cold War. Our presumption is that the US had greater influence over foreign leaders
that were installed and backed by the CIA. We show that following CIA interventions there was an
increase in foreign-country imports from the US, but there was no similar increase in foreign-country
exports to the US. Further, the increase in US exports was concentrated in industries in which the US
had a comparative disadvantage in producing, not a comparative advantage. This is consistent with
US influence being used to create a larger foreign market for American products. Our analysis is able
to rule out decreased bilateral trade costs, changing political ideology, and an increased supply of US
loans and grants as explanations for the increase in US exports to the intervened country. We provide
evidence that the increase in US exports arose through direct purchases of US products by foreign
governments.


Daniel Berger                                      Nathan Nunn
New York University                                Department of Economics
Department of Politics                             Harvard University
New York University, 19 West 4th Street            1805 Cambridge St
New York NY 10012                                  Cambridge, Ma 02138
db1299@nyu.edu                                     and NBER
                                                   nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
William Easterly
New York University                                Shanker Satyanath
Department of Economics                            Department of Politics
19 W. 4th Street, 6th floor                        New York University
New York NY 10012                                  19 West 4th Street
and NBER                                           New York, NY 10012
william.easterly@nyu.edu                           shanker.satyanath@nyu.edu
1. Introduction

The possibility that political influence and power play an important role in international trade has

long been recognized.1 However, despite its importance, empirical evidence identifying the effects

of influence on trade remains rare.2 In this study, we provide evidence that during the Cold War,

US influence over leaders installed and supported by the CIA was used to create a larger foreign

market for US products.

   Our analysis relies on the use of recently declassified CIA documents to generate a time-

and country-specific measure of US political influence. We identify instances where US covert

services engaged in interventions to install and/or support political leaders in other countries.

Our presumption is that the US had greater influence over foreign leaders that were installed

and supported by the CIA. Examining the relationship between US influence and annual bilateral

trade, we find that US influence raised the share of total imports that the intervened country

purchased from the US. We find no change in the total value of goods imported from the world,

i.e. of trade creation. Instead, interventions caused a shift away from the purchase of products

from non-US foreign countries and towards products from the US. Despite the robust finding of

increased imports of goods from the US, intervened-country exports to the US did not increase.

This finding is consistent with US political influence being used to create a larger market for US

products in the intervened country.

   As a further test of the political influence hypothesis, we examine differences in the effect of

interventions on autocratic and democratic regimes. Existing theory and evidence (e.g., Grossman

and Helpman, 1994, Mitra, Thomakos, and Ulubasoglu, 2002) suggests that US influence should

have been greater in autocratic regimes, where leaders are less accountable to the general pop-

ulation and have greater freedom to choose policies. We find that, consistent with the political

influence hypothesis, CIA interventions only increased the share of imports from the US in auto-

cratic regimes, and had no effect in democratic regimes.

   Although our baseline difference-in-difference estimating equations control for country-specific

time-invariant factors (with country fixed effects) and time-specific country-invariant factors (with
   1 See for example Hirschman (1945), Galtung (1971) and Antràs and Padro-i-Miquel (2008). As well, the recent

book by Findlay and O’Rourke (2007), Power and Plenty, uses historical evidence to show that power, influence, and
coercion are central to understanding the history of international trade. Also from a historical perspective, Mitchener
and Weidenmier (2008) document the important role that colonial empires played in international trade during the late
19th and early 20th centuries, and Head, Mayer, and Ries (2010) examine how trade evolved following independence.
   2 One exception is Yeats (1990), which we discuss below.




                                                          1
time-period fixed effects), there is still concern that omitted time- and country-varying factors may

bias the estimates. A primary concern is that interventions may have been more likely following a

temporary decline in imports from the US. This form of selection will result in inflated estimates of

the effect of interventions on imports from the US. We undertake a number of strategies to control

for this. We include controls for pre-trends in the dependent variable and for pre-intervention fixed

effects. We also control for observable factors that are likely determinants of pre-intervention dips

in imports and correlated with the onset of CIA interventions. Specifically, we control for indicator

variables for the existence of US sanctions placed against the foreign country and for the existence

of conflict between the country and the US. The results remain robust to these measures taken to

address the selection of CIA interventions.

   Even taking the correlations as causal, there are many alternative interpretations for the esti-

mated effects. In addition to the political influence explanation, there are three leading alternative

interpretations. The first is that interventions decreased the bilateral trading costs between the US

and the intervened country, and this caused an asymmetric increase in trade flows. The second is

that the newly installed and/or supported leaders were ideologically more aligned with Western

capitalist countries. This caused the foreign country to import more from all Western countries, not

just the US. The third explanation is that following an intervention, US foreign grants and loans

increased, and this caused purchases of US products to rise.

   We test for the trade costs explanation by examining the effects of interventions on imports

from the US in different industries. We show that the increase in imports from the US was

greatest for goods in which the US had a relative comparative disadvantage in producing. That

is, following interventions, the new goods that were shipped from the US to the intervened

country were products that US firms were relatively uncompetitive in producing. This pattern

is inconsistent with decreasing trade costs being the source of increased imports from the US.

Increased integration between two countries should cause each country to specialize more in their

comparative advantage products and export these to the foreign country. Standard models of

international trade do not predict greater specialization in comparative disadvantage industries.

The finding is consistent with US influence being used to create a larger market for US products

that producers would otherwise have difficulty selling internationally.

   We then turn to the political ideology explanation. The increase in imports from the US may

have arisen because the newly installed leaders were more pro-Western and pro-capitalist and


                                                  2
therefore they imported more from all Western countries, including the US. To test this explanation,

we examine the effects of interventions on imports from all countries, not just from the US. We

find no evidence that US interventions caused an increase in imports from countries that were

ideologically aligned with the US.

   Last, we turn to the increased US loans and grants explanation. We test directly whether US eco-

nomic aid, military aid, food aid, or Export-Import Bank loans increased following an intervention.

We find that interventions were followed by a significant increase in economic aid, food aid, and

Export-Import Bank loans. However, we also find that these only account for approximately 20%

of the total effect of interventions on increased imports from the US.

   Having examined alternative explanations, we then turn to mechanisms. We provide evidence

that the increased imports of US products arose through direct government purchases. We find that

the effect of interventions on the purchase of US products is increasing in the government’s share

of GDP. For the countries in the sample with the smallest government share, we find that the effect

of interventions on US imports is close to zero. This suggests that essentially all of the effect can

be explained by government purchases of US products. As well, for a typical country, government

purchases of tradeables is large enough to account for the estimated increase in trade following

an intervention. We also find that interventions immediately led to a surge in imports. This

provides further evidence for government purchases, which could have responded very quickly

to US influence. We also check for additional channels, such as tariff changes or foreign direct

investment, but find no evidence that these play an important role.

   Our use of CIA interventions to measure changes in US political influence links our study to

a small literature that examines other aspects of CIA activities. Most closely related is Berger,

Corvalan, Easterly, and Satyanath (2010), who use lower frequency data at five year intervals to

examine the effect of interventions on democracy. They find that CIA and KGB interventions have

a negative and long-lasting effect on subsequent democracy, a result that dovetails nicely with our

finding that US influence was strongest in autocratic regimes. Following an intervention, the US

would have had little incentive to promote democracy, since this would have made influence less

effective.

   Dube, Kaplan, and Naidu (2008) examine the stock prices of US companies in Iran, Guatemala,

Cuba, and Chile before and after the CIA-authorized plans for covert coups. They find that the

stock returns of companies that were exposed in the foreign-country and well-connected to the


                                                 3
CIA increased immediately after the authorizations, which provides evidence that top-secret plans

were leaked to investors. The focus of their paper complements our analysis here. Since Dube et al.

(2008) are interested in the effects of top-secret information flows (and not of the interventions

themselves), they do not include the period of the actual intervention in their analysis. In contrast,

our analysis looks at the consequences of the interventions being successfully carried out.

   Our analysis also extends previous theoretical analyses of the interplay between political influ-

ence and international trade. The hypothesis that influence and power plays a role in international

trade dates back to at least Hirschman (1945). More recently, the theoretical contribution of Antràs

and Padro-i-Miquel (2008) examines the welfare impacts when political influence can affect trade

and trade policies. Our findings also complement the few existing studies that attempt to empir-

ically estimate the effects of political influence on trade flows. An example is Alexander Yeats’

(1990) analysis, showing that among African countries, former colonies pay a 20 to 30% premium

on the price of imported steel when importing from their former colonizer.3

   The next section of the paper describes our data and their sources. Section 3 reports our baseline

estimating equations and results. We document that CIA interventions were followed by increased

imports of US goods, no increase in exports to the US, and no increase in total trade. We further

show that the increase in imports from the US is found among autocracies only. Sections 4 and 5

then turn to the issues of causality and robustness. In section 6, we test for alternative explana-

tions. We show that the findings cannot be explained by decreased trade costs, changing political

ideology, or an increase in US loans and grants. In section 7 we turn to specific mechanisms and

provide evidence that government purchases play a central role. Section 8 concludes.


2. CIA Intervention Data

As a source of variation in US influence over a country, we rely on historic episodes where the CIA

intervened in a foreign country to either install a new leader or to provide support to an existing

leader to help maintain the power of the regime. To identify these episodes, we rely on a number

of studies examining the history of the Cold War, much of which is based on recently declassified

documents. Using these sources, we have constructed an annual data set of interventions un-
   3 Also related are existing studies that provide evidence for power and influence playing a role in the international
arena. For example, Dreher and Jensen (2007) show that IMF conditionality is correlated with whether countries vote in-
line with the US in the UN General Assembly. Similarly, Kilby (2009) shows that the World Bank’s structural adjustment
conditions are less stringent for countries whose voting in the UN is more aligned with the US. Kuziemko and Werker
(2006) show that when countries have a seat on the UN security council they receive more foreign aid from the US.


                                                           4
dertaken by the CIA. We also construct analogous measures for Soviet KGB interventions, which

we use as a control in the analysis. The most heavily used sources include Blum (2004), Weiner

(2007), Westad (2005), Yergin (1991), and the Library of Congress’ Country Studies Series for the CIA

interventions, and Andrew and Mitrokhin (2000, 2005) for KGB interventions. Full details of the

data construction and sources are reported in a data appendix that will be posted on the authors’

web page upon publication.

   Our baseline measure of CIA interventions is an indicator variable that equals one, in a country

and year, if the CIA either installed a foreign leader or provided covert support for the regime

once in power. We label this variable US influencet,c . The activities used by the CIA to install

and help maintain the power of specific regimes are many and varied. They include the creation

and dissemination of (often false) propaganda, usually through radio, television, newspapers and

pamphlets. They also included covert political operations, which typically consisted of the provi-

sion of funds and expertise for political campaigns. More invasive tactics included the destruction

of physical infrastructure and capital, as well as covert paramilitary operations, that included the

supply of arms and military equipment, direct involvement in insurgency and counterinsurgency

operations, and the coordination of coups and assassinations (Johnson, 1989, 1992).

   There are many instances in which the CIA set out to remove an existing leader and install a new

leader in power. The CIA-organized coups in Iran in 1953, Guatemala in 1954, and Chile in 1973

are the most well-known examples of such cases. For these interventions, the indicator variable

US influencet,c takes on the value of one. In other cases, the CIA began to provide support for

leaders currently in power. In these cases, the CIA did not engage in activities to install the leader

into power, but once in power, at some point, the CIA began to engage in activities to help maintain

the power of the regime. Typically, these were covert counter-insurgency operations undertaken

by the CIA. We code as one cases in which the leader maintains power with the help of the CIA.

A good example of this is the CIA’s involvement in Haiti. Paul Magloire, Papa Doc Duvalier,

and Baby Doc Duvalier, were not installed by the US, but they were reliant on CIA support to

help maintain their power. As a robustness check, we also create a second more narrowly defined

measure that codes as zero interventions where the CIA engaged in activities that propped-up a

leader it did not originally install. As we show in section 5, the results are robust to using this

alternative measure.



                                                  5
                 Table 1: An example: The history of CIA interventions in Chile.

           isocode     year   US influence                      Key Historical Events
           …            …          …
           CHL        1963          0
           CHL        1964          1        Election; CIA propoganda, funding, etc; Frei wins
           CHL        1965          1        Continued support for right wing groups, etc.
           CHL        1966          1        …
           CHL        1967          1        …
           CHL        1968          1        …
           CHL        1969          1        …
           CHL        1970          1        Salvador Allende wins election
           CHL        1971          0
           CHL        1972          0
           CHL        1973          1        CIA planned coup; head of military, Pinochet takes power
           CHL        1974          1        …
           CHL        1975          1        …
           CHL        1976          1        …
           CHL        1977          1        …
           CHL        1978          1        …
           CHL        1979          1        …
           CHL        1980          1        …
           CHL        1981          1        …
           CHL        1982          1        …
           CHL        1983          1        …
           CHL        1984          1        …
           CHL        1985          1        …
           CHL        1986          1        …
           CHL        1987          1        …
           CHL        1988          1        Plebiscite, democratic elections; Pinochet steps down
           CHL        1989          0
           …            …          …




   To illustrate the construction of our variable, consider the history of the CIA in Chile. The

sequence of CIA interventions is reported in table 1. During the 1964 Chilean elections, the CIA

provided covert funding and support for the Christian Democratic Party candidate Eduardo Frei

Montalvo. Eduardo Frei won the presidential election in 1964, and continued to receive CIA

support while he was in power. In the 1970 election, Salvador Allende, a candidate of a coalition of

leftist parties, was elected, and remained in power until the CIA orchestrated coup of 1973. After

the coup, Augusto Pinochet took power and was backed by the CIA. Since US influencet,c equals

one in all periods in which a leader is installed or supported by the CIA, for Chile the variable

equals one from 1964 to 1970 when Eduardo Frei was in power. It equals zero in 1971 and 1972, the

years when Salvador Allende was in office (since he was not supported or installed by the CIA).

It then equals one from 1973 to 1988, the years when Augusto Pinochet, who was installed and




                                                       6
supported by the CIA, was in power.4

   Our sample of 156 countries includes all countries except the United States and countries that

were part of the former Soviet Union.5 We also exclude from the sample countries whose borders

change significantly during the period. This includes Bangladesh, Pakistan, Germany, Vietnam,

and Yemen. Among the 156 countries, 50 were subject to at least one CIA intervention between

1947 and 1989.6

   Figure 1 shows the total number of interventions among all countries in each year between 1947

and 1989. That is, the figure reports the number of countries for which US influencet,c = 1 in each

year. The figure illustrates a number of patterns present in the data. The first is that interventions

were common. In an average year between 1947 and 1989, 24 countries were experiencing a CIA

intervention. Among the group of countries that experienced an intervention between 1947 and

1989, the typical country experienced 21 years of interventions.

   The figure also shows that the total number of interventions increased after 1947, peaked around

the 1970s, and then fell until 1989. This is consistent with the history of the CIA. Between 1953 and

1961 covert action increased significantly, with attention focused on political action, particularly

support to political figures and political parties. The 1960s witnessed a continued presence of CIA

covert activities, although there was a shift towards greater paramilitary activities. The period

from 1964 to 1967 is known to have been the high point of CIA covert activities. The post-1967

slow-down was brought about, in part, by the 1967 Ramparts magazine article that exposed the

CIA’s funding of national student groups and other private organizations (Leary, 1984). Consistent

with this history, figure 1 shows a leveling off of convert interventions in the late 1960s until the

mid-1970s, after which the number falls. The lagged decline after 1967 results from the persistence

of interventions. Typically, newly installed or newly supported leaders remained in power, and

continued to be supported by the CIA, for their remaining tenure.

   An alternative to looking at interventions over time, is to examine the pattern of interventions

across countries. The map shown in figure 2 reports, for each country, the fraction of years
   4 The onset and offset years of CIA intervention episodes could potentially be coded as zero or one, since these are
transition years. We have chosen to code these as one throughout. As we discuss in section 5, none of our results depend
on the decision.
   5 Our panel is unbalanced, since countries do not enter the sample until they gain independence. In 1947, the sample

includes 66 countries. In 1989, the number is 156.
   6 Similarly, 23 countries were subject to at least one KGB intervention. KGB interventions are defined in the analogous

manner as for CIA interventions.




                                                            7
                                            CIA interventions by year



                        40      30
               Number of countries
               10       20
                        0




                                     1950      1960           1970               1980              1990
                                                            Year


   Figure 1: Total number of countries experiencing a successful CIA intervention in each year.



between 1947 and 1989 for which there was a CIA intervention.7 The cross-country distribution of

interventions is consistent with the descriptive history of the CIA during the Cold War era. The

CIA intervened most heavily in Latin America, but also in a few European countries - namely, Italy

and Greece - as well as in a number of countries in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.8

   The map also helps to illustrate exactly what our intervention variable captures and what it does

not capture. For example, our intervention variable is zero for Angola throughout the period. This

is the case despite the heavy and well-known involvement of the CIA in Angola’s civil war (see

e.g. Weissman, 1979). The CIA provided covert support for the anticommunist group Union for

the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). However, the group was never successful at gaining

power from the Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola (MPLA). Because the US-backed

UNITA forces never gained control of the government, our variable is not coded as one for Angola,

despite clear intervention by the CIA in the country. The example illustrates that our intervention

measure is not a measure of all CIA meddling or activities in a country. Rather, it is an indicator of
   7 For countries that did not gain independence until after 1947, we report the fraction of years from independence to
1989 for which there was a CIA intervention.
   8 As shown in the map, Greenland and French Guiana are not in our sample. This is because they are not independent

countries.



                                                           8
9
    Years with US influence = 1
       (percent, 1947-1989)
             60-100%
              30-60%
              10-30%
              0-10%
                0%
           not in sample


                                  Figure 2: Map showing the fraction of years between 1947 and 1989 with a CIA intervention.
CIA activities that were successful at either installing a new leader or in maintaining the power of

an existing leader.

   Using CIA covert activities to measure changes in US influence over foreign countries has a

number of particularly attractive characteristics. First, because these interventions were covert

at the time, they were largely unaffected by US public opinion, and from the opinion of other

countries in the international arena. This reduces one source of endogeneity for our measure.

Further, because the interventions affect the leader in power, they are significant and plausibly

have a significant impact on US influence over the regime.

   Our measure of covert CIA interventions that install and/or support foreign regimes can be

interpreted as a measure of US “client states” or “puppet leaders”, which are well-established

subjects of analysis in the qualitative political science literature (e.g., Sylvan and Majeski, 2009).

Therefore, an alternative interpretation of our analysis is of the effects of US influence on client

states and puppet leaders on bilateral trade flows.


3. Baseline Results

A. Estimating Equations

We now turn to our baseline estimates of the economic consequences of US interventions. Our first

estimating equation looks at the effects of US interventions on the share of total imports from the

US:
                        mUS                                       N         mUS
                                                                  ∑ γn ln mW
                         t,c                                                 t−n,c
                   ln          = αt + αc + βUS influencet,c +                         + Xt,c Γ + ε t,c              (1)
                        mW
                         t,c                                     n =1         t−n,c

mUS                                                      W
 t,c denotes country c’s imports from the US in year t, mt,c denotes country c’s aggregate imports

from all countries.9 Since the time period being considered is the Cold War, t ranges from 1947 to

1989.
                                       mUS
                                        t,c
   The dependent variable, ln          mW
                                            ,   is the natural log of the share of country c’s total imports
                                        t,c

from the US in year t. As we show in Appendix A, the appropriate dependent variable for the

theoretically derived estimating equation is the natural log of the import share, rather than the

import share itself.10
   9 World imports include imports from all countries, even those that are not observations in the estimating equation

e.g., Soviet Union, United States, and countries that experienced significant border changes.
  10 One consequence of this is that a small number of observations, with zero trade flows, are dropped from the sample

in our baseline specifications. As we discuss in section 5, alternative estimation techniques that do not omit the zero-
trade observations provide qualitatively identical results.


                                                          10
   The coefficient of interest is β, the estimated impact of CIA interventions on the log share of

imports that are from the US. Because equation (1) includes year fixed effects and country fixed

effects, αt and αc , our estimating equation takes the form of a difference-in-difference estimation.

Because our sample only includes US trade shares (and not a country’s trade shares with other

countries), country fixed effects are equivalent to country-pair fixed effects. They therefore capture

many of the standard country-pair specific measures that are standard in bilateral gravity regres-

sions, such as the geographic distance between trading partners, a common language, a common

legal/colonial origins, contiguous borders, etc.

   The equation also controls for lags of the dependent variable.11 This is done to capture the

persistence of past trade, which may occur because of the existence of fixed trade costs as in Roberts

and Tybout (1997) or through temporally-persistant determinants of trade. Because equation (1)

includes time-period fixed effects, country fixed effects, as well as lags of the dependent variable,

it suffers from the well-known Nickell (1981) bias. In section 5A, we show that our results are not

affected by the bias. This is not surprising given that the Nickell bias converges to zero as the time

dimension of the panel increases. Since we have a large number of time periods in our panel (43

years), the actual bias can be shown to be small.

   The vector Xt,c includes a set of controls that vary across countries and years. We control for

Soviet/KGB interventions, measured in the same manner as CIA interventions. We also include

two indicator variables that capture a country’s openness to foreign trade, since trade openness

may affect trade with the US differentially relative to other countries of the world. The first is

an indicator variable that equals one if country c is a member of GATT in year t. The second is an

indicator variable that equals one if country c had signed the New York Convention by t.12 We also

include controls for the natural log of per capita income, and the natural log of aggregate income.

These controls, which are typically included in gravity regressions, may influence the share of

imports from the US through scale and/or income effects. They would also have an effect if, for

example, the US trades disproportionately more with higher income or larger countries. Given the

recent studies by Jones and Olken (2005, 2009) and Duflo and Chattopadhyay (2004) that show that

leaders matter, we are also careful to control for leadership turnover and leader tenure. We control
  11 We  choose the number of lags to include by continuing to add lags until they are no longer significant.
  12 The  New York Convention is the common name for the 1958 Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards. The agreement ensures that among signatory countries, in cases involving parties from two countries,
court rulings and arbitration awards made in one country must be recognized in the other country.




                                                         11
for an indicator variable that equals one if there is a change in leadership, as well as a measure

of the tenure of the current leader. Our final control variable is motivated by the findings from

Berger et al. (2010), showing that interventions had an adverse effect on democracy. We control for

the combined Polity measure from the Polity IV Database, which is a variable that takes on integer

values ranging from −10 (strong autocracy) to +10 (strong democracy). We include fixed effects,

one for each value of the polity measure.

   The unit of observation in equation (1) is a country and year. An alternative estimation strategy

is to estimate a standard bilateral gravity model, where the unit of observation is a directional

country-pair in a year, and the dependent variable is the volume of imports from one country

to another country. One could then examine whether a US intervention increases the flow of

imports from the US to the intervened country. Our equation (1) is constructed to capture this

same variation, but the advantage of equation (1) is that it does not include a large number of

observations in which the US is not a trading partner. This alternative strategy, even with clustered

standard errors, runs the risk of producing downward-biased standard errors (see Bertrand, Duflo,

and Mullainathan, 2004). Our estimation strategy aggregates all trade between non-US trade

partners to be part of aggregate World trade, which we use to normalize trade flows with the

US. The result is that we only have N × T observations rather than N ( N − 1) T observations in our

sample (where N is the number of countries and T is the number of time periods). As we show

in section 5, our results are qualitatively identical if we estimate a bilateral gravity model with all

country-pairs.

   Our analysis also examines the effect of CIA interventions on the share of the foreign-country’s

exports that are shipped to the US:

                      xUS                                      N     xUS
                                                              ∑ γn ln xW
                       t,c                                            t−n,c
                 ln          = αt + αc + βUS influencet,c +                   + Xt,c Γ + ε t,c        (2)
                      xW
                       t,c                                    n =1    t−n,c

where xUS                                                             W
       t,c indicates exports from country c to the US in year t, and xt,c denotes exports from

country c to all countries in the world in year t. The set of control variables are identical to equation

(1).


B. Estimation Results

Our core findings can be illustrated if we return to the example of Chile. Figure 3 reports two

graphs. The top graph reports the natural log of the share of Chilean imports that are from the


                                                     12
                                                                                           Chile
         ln (Imports from US / Imports from World)
                                             −.5




                                                                                                                                  1
                                  −1




                                                                                                                                      US influence
            −2        −1.5




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                        1950              1960                          1970            1980   1990
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                       ln(Imports from US/Imports from World)   US influence
         ln (Exports to US / Exports to World)
                                          −.5




                                                                                                                                  1
                                  −1




                                                                                                                                      US influence
         −2.5     −2     −1.5




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                        1950              1960                          1970            1980   1990
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                       ln(Exports to US/Exports to World)       US influence




                                                               Figure 3: CIA interventions and trade flows for Chile.



         mUS
          t,c
US, ln   mW
              ,                                      and the CIA intervention variable, US influence, annually between 1947 and 1989. The
          t,c
                                                                                                                                               US
                                                                                                                                              xt,c
bottom graph reports the natural log of the share of Chilean exports shipped to the US, ln                                                    xW
                                                                                                                                                   ,   and
                                                                                                                                               t,c

US influence. In the top graph one can see that the US import share stayed stable from 1964 to

1970, when Eduardo Frei was in power and was being supported by the CIA (US influence = 1).

The bottom graph shows that, unlike imports, exports to the US declined steadily during this

period. After 1970, when Salvador Allende took power (US influence = 0), imports fell dramatically

(top graph), while there is no dramatic change in exports (bottom graph). After Pinochet took

power (US influence = 1), one observes a larger and more immediate increase for imports than for

exports. Overall, figure 3 illustrates that imports from the US tend to be more responsive to CIA

interventions than exports to the US.

   We now document this pattern more formally by estimating equations (1) and (2). Column 1 of

table 2 reports estimates of equation (1) for the full sample. The coefficient on the US intervention

measure, US influence, is positive and statistically significant. The estimated coefficient indicates


                                                                                                  13
Table 2: The effects of US interventions on imports from and exports to the US for autocracies and
democracies.

                                              ln share of imports from the US: ln (Imports from US /              ln share of exports to the US: ln (Exports to US / Exports
                                                               Imports from world)                                                         to world)
                                                Full sample            Autocracies           Democracies             Full sample            Autocracies           Democracies
                                                     (1)                    (2)                   (3)                     (4)                    (5)                    (6)

US influence                                      0.105***              0.178***                 0.021                   0.026                  0.011                 0.018
                                                   (0.029)               (0.050)                (0.026)                 (0.046)                (0.080)               (0.041)

Lagged dependent variable (t -1)                  0.539***              0.524***               0.555***                0.598***               0.588***              0.539***
                                                   (0.074)               (0.082)                (0.071)                 (0.052)                (0.059)               (0.073)
Lagged dependent variable (t -2)                  0.228***               0.229**                0.176**                 0.119**               0.122**                 0.111
                                                   (0.087)               (0.099)                (0.062)                 (0.048)               (0.054)                (0.068)
Soviet intervention control                           Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                     Y                      Y
ln per capita income, ln total income                 Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                     Y                      Y
ln total income                                       Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                     Y                      Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure                        Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                     Y                      Y
GATT and NY convention controls                       Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                     Y                      Y
Polity fixed effects                                  Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                     Y                      Y
Country fixed effects                                 Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                      Y                     Y
Year fixed effects                                    Y                     Y                      Y                       Y                      Y                     Y
R-squared                                            0.88                  0.86                   0.95                    0.87                   0.85                  0.94
Observations                                        3,864                 2,327                  1,439                   3,601                  2,106                 1,401

Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention
control, two lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT
membership, an indicator variable for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




that an intervention increased the share of imports from the US by 10.5 percent. We also examine

the effects of CIA interventions on the share of a foreign country’s exports shipped to the US

by estimating equation (2). The estimates are reported in column 4 of table 2. The coefficient

for US influence is very small in magnitude and not statistically different from zero. Overall, the

estimates from columns 1 and 4 show that although interventions significantly increased the share

of a country’s imports that are from the US, they had no effects on the share of a country’s exports

that go to the US. As we will see, this asymmetry is extremely robust.

    As an initial test for whether the surge in intervened-country imports from the US arose because

of an increase in US influence, we examine the effect of interventions separately for autocracies and

democracies. The motivation behind this distinction derives from a straightforward logic that is at

the core of a number of models in economics and political science. The best example is Grossman

and Helpman’s (1994) “Protection for Sale” model. In their model, governments set the level of a

socially suboptimal policy, namely trade tariffs. In making their decisions governments trade off

the effects of the policy on aggregate welfare against the private benefits that are received from



                                                                                       14
groups that have political influence. The key parameter affecting the equilibrium policy is a, the

weight the government places on aggregate welfare relative to the private benefits the government

receives from setting a distortionary policy. In reality the parameter a is determined, in part, by

the accountability of the leader to the welfare of its citizens. All else equal, we expect a to be

much higher in democracies than autocracies. Empirical estimates of Grossman and Helpman’s

a parameter across autocracies and democracies provide strong empirical support for this (e.g.,

Mitra et al., 2002).

   Grossman and Helpman’s model provides a testable prediction in our setting. We are interested

in empirically identifying whether CIA interventions allowed the US to exert greater influence over

intervened countries, and whether this was used to persuade foreign leaders to choose policies that

benefited the US. This setting is exactly analogous to the Grossman and Helpman scenario, except

that the US government takes the place of the private lobbies. In their model, those with the ability

to influence policy will be more successful in autocracies where a is low, since the government

is less accountable to its citizens. Therefore, if interventions increased the imports of US goods

because of US influence, we expect to find larger effects of interventions in autocracies than in

democracies.

   To test this, we first group our observations (i.e., country-year pairs) into two categories: au-

tocracies and democracies. A country c in year t is defined as being an autocracy if in both year t

and year t − 1 its Polity scores are zero or less. Estimates of equations (1) and (2), with the sample

restricted to autocracies only, are reported in columns 2 and 5 of table 2. Column 2 shows that

among the sample of autocracies, like the full sample, the estimated effect of US interventions on

the share of imports from the US is positive and statistically significant. Further, the estimated

magnitude is large. An intervention increases the share of imports that are from the US by 17.8

percent. This is much larger than the average increase for the full sample, which is 10.5 percent.

The effect of interventions on the share of exports to the US continues to be close to zero.

   Democracies are defined as observations with a Polity score greater than zero in year t and

t − 1.13 Estimates of equations (1) and (2), with the sample restricted to democracies, are reported

in columns 3 and 6 of table 2. The results show that unlike our full sample of observations and our

subsample of autocracies, we cannot reject a zero relationship between US interventions and the
  13 The democracy and autocracy categories are not mutually exclusive. A small number of observations are democratic

in year t and autocratic in t − 1, or vice versa. These observations are not included in either sample.




                                                         15
share of imports from the US.14 Therefore, consistent with the influence hypothesis, interventions

only have an effect on the share of imports from the US in regimes where the leader is less

accountable to its citizens and has more ability to choose policies freely.

   To gain a better understanding of the increased share of imports from the US, we separately

examine the effect of interventions on imports from the US, and on total imports from all countries.

We re-estimate equations (1) and (2) with either log imports (from the US or the world), or log

exports (to the US or the world) as the dependent variable. Estimates are reported in table 3.

Columns 1–2 report estimates when the dependent variable is the natural log of imports from

the US, while in columns 3–4, the dependent variable is the natural log of total imports from all

countries. The results show that following an intervention there is an increase in the volume of

imports from the US and no change in total imports. Therefore, the increased share of imports

from the US arose from a shift away from imports from other countries’ towards imports from the

US. In other words, the increased share of imports from the US was a result of trade diversion, and

not trade creation. According to the estimates from columns 1–2, a US intervention increased the

volume of US imports in that year by 12.9% for the full sample, and 18.6% for autocracies. These

increases are similar to the shares estimates from table 2. Columns 5–8 report the estimated effects

of interventions on exports. The estimates provide no evidence that CIA interventions affected

exports to the US or to the world. These results are consistent with the findings from table 2.

   To provide the reader with a better sense of the implied magnitudes of the estimates, we under-

take two counterfactual exercises.15 For intervened countries, we can ask how different imports

from the US would have been absent any covert CIA interventions.16 Figure 4a reports, for Chile,

the actual and counterfactual value of log imports from the US in each year using the estimates

from column 1 of table 3.17 Following the CIA interventions, which began in 1964, counterfactual

and actual imports diverge significantly. By 1988, the final period of the CIA intervention episode,

actual imports from the US totaled 1.0 billion US dollars, while the counterfactual value of imports

is estimated to be only 574 million US dollars, just over half of the actual value.
  14 This finding parallels the finding from Jones and Olken (2005) that leader deaths have larger macroeconomic effects

in autocracies than in democracies. As well, MacGillivray and Smith (2004) provide empirical evidence showing that
leadership turnover has little effect in democracies, but has a strong adverse effect on the volume of trade in autocracies.
  15 Since we have not yet addressed the issue of causality, we take these counterfactuals as illustrative only. We consider

potential omitted factors and the selection of CIA interventions in the following section.
  16 See Appendix B for the details behind the counterfactual calculations.
  17 The vertical axis reports the natural log of Chilean imports from the US (measured in millions of nominal US

dollars).


                                                            16
                                 Table 3: The effects of US interventions on imports and exports.

                                                  ln imports from the US                ln imports from the world                 ln exports to the US                 ln exports to the world
                                                Full sample       Autocracies         Full sample        Autocracies         Full sample        Autocracies         Full sample        Autocracies
                                                     (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)                 (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)

US influence                                     0.129***           0.186***              0.025              -0.007              0.065              0.051               0.018             -0.018
                                                  (0.032)            (0.054)             (0.021)            (0.037)             (0.048)            (0.089)             (0.020)           (0.035)

Lagged dependent variable (t -1)                 0.619***           0.590***            0.795***           0.751***            0.616***          0.597***             0.794***          0.736***
                                                  (0.072)            (0.081)             (0.071)            (0.088)             (0.050)           (0.056)              (0.047)           (0.050)
Lagged dependent variable (t -2)                  0.152*             0.168*             -0.113**           -0.132**            0.139***          0.142***               -0.026            -0.015
                                                  (0.078)            (0.089)             (0.048)            (0.059)             (0.047)           (0.053)              (0.028)           (0.034)
Soviet intervention control                          Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                 Y
ln per capita income, ln total income                Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                 Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure                       Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                 Y
GATT and NY convention controls                      Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                 Y
Polity fixed effects                                 Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                 Y
Country fixed effects                                Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                 Y
Year fixed effects                                   Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                 Y
R-squared                                           0.97               0.94                0.98               0.97                0.95               0.93                0.99              0.98
Observations                                       3,864              2,327               4,083              2,542               3,601              2,106               4,079             2,537
Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t , where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control, two lags
of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT membership, an indicator variable for
signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




    Our second calculation quantifies the impact of CIA interventions from the US perspective. For

each intervened country, we first calculate its counterfactual imports from the US. We then con-

struct a counterfactual measure of total US exports to all countries by aggregating each country’s

counterfactual imports from the US. The counterfactual measure of aggregate US exports, as well

as actual US exports, are reported in figure 4b. Although CIA interventions had a large impact on

trade flows from the perspective of intervened countries, the impact of interventions on US total

exports was not particularly large. In 1965, at the height of CIA activity, US exports totalled 25.1

billion dollars. According to the counterfactual calculations, without any covert CIA activities,

total US exports would have been 22.8 billion dollars.18


4. Causality: The Selection of Interventions

There are a number of reasons why one cannot take our estimates of β from equations (1) and (2)

as causal estimates of the effects of US influence on trade. Although our difference-in-difference

estimating equations, which include both country fixed effects and time period fixed effects,

control for country-specific time-invariant factors and time-specific country-invariant factors that
  18 The 25.1 billion dollar figure for 1965 is slightly lower than the official figure reported by the U.S. Census Bureau

which is 26.5 billion. The difference can be explained by the fact that our total does not include trade with the Soviet
Union. It also omits trade with countries that are not included in the sample because of significant border changes. This
includes Bangladesh, Pakistan, Germany, Yugoslavia, Yemen, and Vietnam.


                                                                                                  17
                                     Chilean Imports from the US

          8
ln Imports from the US
       6  5     7




                            1950            1960            1970              1980          1990
                                                          Year

                                         Actual                            Counterfactual


                                          (a) Chilean imports from the US.


                                        US Exports to the World
          13
ln US total exports
 10      11
          9     12




                         1950            1960             1970               1980           1990
                                                          Year

                                         Actual                            Counterfactual


                                            (b) US exports to the world.

                                Figure 4: Actual and counterfactual trade flows.




                                                        18
                                         Table 4: Controlling for the selection of interventions.

                                                                   ln share of imports from the US                                            ln imports from the US
                                                           Full sample                        Autocracies                         Full sample                        Autocracies
                                                                   5-year pre-                       5-year pre-                          5-year pre-                       5-year pre-
                                                    5-year pre- intervention           5-year pre- intervention            5-year pre- intervention           5-year pre- intervention
                                                      trends          FEs                trends         FEs                  trends          FEs                trends          FEs
                                                         (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)                 (5)             (6)               (7)              (8)

US influence                                          0.120***        0.103***          0.217***         0.176***           0.146***         0.115***          0.236***         0.176***
                                                       (0.031)         (0.033)           (0.052)          (0.056)            (0.035)          (0.040)           (0.058)          (0.066)
Five year pre-trend of dependent variable                 Y               N                 Y                N                  Y                N                 Y                N
Five year pre-intervention fixed effect                   N               Y                 N                Y                  N                Y                 N                Y
Lagged dependent variables                                Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
Soviet intervention control                               Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
ln per capita income, ln total income                     Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure                            Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
GATT and NY convention controls                           Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
Polity fixed effects                                      Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
Country fixed effects                                     Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
Year fixed effects                                        Y               Y                 Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                Y
R-squared                                                0.88            0.88              0.84             0.86               0.97             0.97             0.94             0.94
Observations                                            3,377           3,864             2,027            2,327              3,377            3,864             2,027            2,327
Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control,
two lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT membership, an indicator
for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. Odd numbered columns control for 5 year pre-trends of the dependent variable (log changes in the dependent variable between
periods t -1 and t -6). Even numbered columns include an indicator variable that equals one if period t is within 5 years prior to an intervention. Coefficients are reported with robust
standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




may potentially bias our estimates of interest, there remains the possibility of bias resulting from

omitted country- and time-varying factors. In our setting, the primary concern is that there may be

selection in the targeting of CIA interventions (e.g., Aidt and Albornoz, 2010). Of particular con-

cern is the possibility that interventions may have been more likely when a country had recently

experienced a decline in its imports of US products. This is an example of the famous “Ashenfelter

dip”(Ashenfelter, 1978, Ashenfelter and Card, 1985). The presence of pre-intervention dips in US

imports will bias our estimated effects of interventions on US trade upwards.

    We undertake a number of strategies to reduce potential bias that may arise from the endo-

geneity of interventions. Our first strategy controls for pre-trends in the dependent variable. By

doing this, we are hoping to capture the ‘dips’ in imports, which are a source of bias. Estimates

controlling for five-year pre-trends (i.e., ln mUS          US
                                                t−1,c − ln mt−6,c ) are reported in the odd numbered

columns of table 4. In all specifications, the coefficients for US influence are statistically significant,

and the point estimates change little. The results are also similar if we use alternative intervals to

measure the pre-trends e.g., three-years windows. They are also similar whether or not we control

for the lagged dependent variables, which are correlated with the pre-trends.

    Our second strategy is to include a pre-intervention fixed effect in the estimating equation.


                                                                                           19
                              Table 5: Controlling for the selection of the onset of interventions.

                                                                ln share of imports from the US                                                  ln imports from the US
                                                          Full sample                           Autocracies                            Full sample                          Autocracies
                                                5-year pre-      Sanction &          5-year pre-       Sanction &           5-year pre-       Sanction &          5-year pre-      Sanction &
                                                 onset FEs       war controls         onset FEs        war controls          onset FEs        war controls         onset FEs       war controls
                                                    (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)              (7)                 (8)

US influence                                     0.104***          0.099***           0.169***          0.157***             0.123***          0.122***            0.167***          0.153***
                                                  (0.030)           (0.029)            (0.051)           (0.048)              (0.033)           (0.032)             (0.056)           (0.052)
Pre-intervention onset fixed effects                 Y                 N                  Y                 N                    Y                 N                   Y                 N
Sanction and war fixed effects                       N                 Y                  N                 Y                    N                 Y                   N                 Y
Lagged dependent variables                           Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
Soviet intervention control                          Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
ln per capita income, ln total income                Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure                       Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
GATT and NY convention controls                      Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
Polity fixed effects                                 Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
Country fixed effects                                Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
Year fixed effects                                   Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y                   Y                 Y
R-squared                                           0.88              0.88              0.86               0.86                 0.97             0.97                 0.94             0.94
Observations                                       3,864             3,864              2,327             2,327                3,864             3,864               2,327             2,327
Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control, two
lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT membership, an indicator for signing
the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. The odd numbered columns control for an indicator variable that equals one if period t is within 5 years before the onset of an intervention episode.
The even numbered columns include indicator variables that equals one if country c is at war with the US in period t , and if the US has placed a sanction against US exports to country c in
year t . Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




Specifically, we control for an indicator variable that equals one if the observation (country c in

period t) is between 1 and 5 years prior to an intervention. The fixed effects capture average differ-

ences (which may affect the dependent variable) that exist in the periods prior to an intervention.

Results controlling for a 5-year pre-intervention fixed effect are reported in the even numbered

columns of table 4. The results remain robust to this control.19

    Our third strategy controls for the selection-bias that arises from the endogeneity of the onset of

interventions, rather than the endogeneity of all intervention periods. It may be that the beginning

of an intervention episode is the only decision that is affected by selection. To account for this

possibility, we control for an indicator variable that equals one if the observation is between 1 and

5 years prior to the onset of an intervention episode. This specification assumes that there was

selection in the decision to begin an intervention episode, but not in subsequent periods of an

intervention episode. Estimation results are reported in the odd numbered columns of table 5. The

results remain robust to this alternative control.

    The final strategy we undertake is to control for variables that measure poor foreign relations

with the US. This is the most likely factor, affecting both affecting imports from the US and the
  19 Again,      the results are similar if we choose windows other than five years.




                                                                                                20
onset of CIA interventions. We measure poor relations using two indicator variables that capture

the existence of US sanctions and US warfare against foreign countries. The sanctions indicator

variable equals one if in period t, the US has placed an sanction against US exports to country c.

The war indicator variable equals one if the US is at war with country c in year t.20 As reported in

the even numbered columns of table 5, the results remain robust to these controls.


5. Robustness and Sensitivity Analysis

A. Robustness to Alternative Specifications

In the analysis, we have chosen to use a stringent and demanding specification that includes

country fixed effects, time period fixed effects, and lags of the dependent variable. It is well-known

that in specifications with fixed effects and lagged dependent variables, there is the potential for

a Nickell (1981) bias to affect the coefficients of interest. It is importance to recognize, however,

that this is a bias (not an inconsistency) that converges to zero as the total number of time periods

increases. The number of years included in our panel is much greater than the environments

that have typically been associated with the Nickel bias. To obtain a more concrete sense of the

magnitude of the bias in our panel, consider the formula for the bias originally derived by Nickell
                                                                                                                 −(1+γ)
(1981). For an equation without covariates the formula is given by plim N →∞ (γ̂ − γ) '                           T −1 ,

where γ is the relationship between the dependent varable in period t and the dependent variable

in period t − 1. In our setting, T = 43 and γ̂ ≈ 0.56. Assume that γ = .60. Then, the bias is equal to
−(1+.60)
   42      = −0.038. In addition, this is an upper bound, since the bias is strictly lower when there
are covariates.

   We also test for the potential importance of the Nickell bias in our results by estimating alterna-

tive specifications that do not suffer from the bias. We estimate a specification that does not control

for country and time-period fixed effects, and only controls for lags of the dependent variable. We

also estimate standard difference-in-difference estimating equations without lags of the dependent

variable.21 We also estimate these regressions controlling for linear and non-linear country-specific
  20 The  sanctions data are from Hufbauer, Schott, Elliott, and Oegg (2009), and the conflict data are from Barbieri,
Keshk, and Pollins (2008).
  21 Angrist and Pischke (2009, p. 246) suggest that these two alternatives give bounds on the treatment effect, since the

lagged dependent variable specification estimates a treatment effect that is too small if the true model is fixed effects,
while fixed effect specification estimates a treatment effect that is too large if the true model is the lagged dependent
variable.




                                                           21
time trends. The results using these alternative specifications, which we do not report here for

brevity, are qualitatively identical to the estimates from our baseline equations.22

   Our baseline estimating equations are derived from a log-linearization of the theoretically de-

rived gravity model.23 One consequence of the log-linearization is that zero trade observations are

dropped from the sample. Although, the number of observations dropped for this reason is very

small (only 306 of 4,170 potential observations), we check that our omission of these observations

is not significantly affecting our results. We pursue two strategies to assess the importance of the

omission of zero trade flows from our analysis. The first is to re-estimate equation (1) with the share

of imports from the US, rather than the log share of imports from the US, as the dependent variable.

The second is to use the Poisson pseudo-maximum-likelihood (PPML) estimator suggested by

Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006). Because PPML does not use a log-linearized estimating equation,

all observations are used, even ones with zero trade. We find that these alternative specifications

yield results that are very similar to the baseline estimates.


B. Robustness to Alternative Intervention Measures

A potential concern is measurement error in our CIA intervention variable. One source of error

arises from the fact that our data are measured at annual frequencies, while in reality CIA activities

occurred in continuous time. This results in some imprecision when coding US influencet,c . For

example, in the case of Chile, since Salvador Allende won the election on September 4, 1970, it

is unclear whether to code US influencet,c as one or zero for Chile in 1970. The rule we follow in

constructing our baseline measure is to include the years of the onset and offset of interventions as

being an intervention year. Therefore, since 1970 is an offset year of the CIA’s support of Eduardo

Frei, it is coded as one. We have checked that none of our results depend on this decision. Choosing

instead to code onset- and offset-intervention years as zero yields results that are virtually identical

to what we report here.

   We have also conducted a number of robustness checks for alternative plausible codings of our

intervention variable. For eleven interventions, a case could be made for coding the intervention

as a non-intervention, and for two non-interventions a case could be made for coding the non-

intervention as an intervention. A full description of these observations is provided in the online
 22 All   unreported results are available from the authors upon request.
 23 Details  of this are provided in Appendix A.



                                                            22
data appendix. We test the robustness of our findings to these observations and find that our

results are robust to all plausible and internally consistent alternative codings.

   We also test the robustness of our estimates to an alternative, more narrow measure of CIA

interventions. Unlike our baseline variable US influencet,c , the alternative measure only takes on the

value of one if at the beginning of the CIA intervention episode, a new leader was installed by the

CIA. This definition excludes interventions where the CIA began to support a leader that was not

installed by the CIA. Using this alternative measure yields estimates that are qualitatively identical

to the results using the baseline intervention measure. We continue to find that interventions

increase the share of imports from the US, the effect is larger for autocracies, and interventions

have no effect on the share of a country’s exports to the US. The magnitudes of the coefficient

estimates are also similar to the baseline estimates.


C. Estimates using all Bilateral Country-Pairs

In our baseline estimating equations, the unit of observation is a country in a year, and the

dependent variable is a measure of the country’s trade with the US – either the log of the share

of imports from the US or the log of the value of imports from the US. An alternative strategy is to

examine trade between all countries, not just trade between all countries and the US. Testing for

the importance of CIA interventions in this setting results in the following estimating equation:


                  ln mt,c,e = αt + αc,e + β 1 US influencet,c + β 2 US influencet,c × IeUS
                                         N
                                 + γn   ∑ ln mt−n,c,e + Xt,c Γ + Xt,e Ω + ε t,c,e                   (3)
                                        n =1

where, as before, t indexes years, c now indexes importers, and e indexes exporters. The dependent

variable is the natural log of imports shipped by country e into country c in year t. The equation

controls for time period fixed effects αt , and country-pair fixed effects αc,e , which absorb standard

gravity controls, like bilateral distance, common language, a common legal origin, a contiguous

border, etc. As before, the equation also includes lags of the dependent variable, and importer

covariates, Xt,c . It also includes exporter covariates, Xt,e .

   As in equation (1), we include US influencet,c , which equals one if the importing country c

experienced a CIA intervention in year t. Because we now include all country-pairs in the sample,

we allow the effect of an interventions on imports to differ depending on whether the imports are

from the US or not. We allow for this differential effect by also including US influencet,c × IeUS in

                                                      23
                                  Table 6: Results using the full sample of bilateral country-pairs.

                                                                           ln imports               ln (imports / world imports)                   ln exports               ln (exports / world exports)
                                                                Full sample       Autocracies       Full sample       Autocracies       Full sample       Autocracies       Full sample       Autocracies
                                                                     (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)              (7)               (8)

US influence                                                        0.002           -0.035**           0.005            -0.028*             0.018             0.018             0.003            -0.014
                                                                   (0.010)           (0.016)          (0.010)           (0.016)            (0.010)           (0.018)           (0.010)           (0.017)
US influence × US exporter                                        0.137***           0.211**          0.124**           0.207**
                                                                   (0.056)           (0.084)          (0.055)           (0.082)
US influence × US importer                                                                                                                  0.065             0.139             0.039             0.133
                                                                                                                                           (0.059)           (0.095)           (0.058)           (0.095)

Two lags of dependent variable                                        Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
ln per capita income (importer and exporter)                          Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
ln total income (importer and exporter)                               Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure (importer and exporter)                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
GATT and NY convention (importer and exporter)                        Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Polity fixed effects (importer and exporter)                          Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Soviet intervention controls                                          Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Country-pair fixed effects                                           Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Year fixed effects                                                   Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
R-squared                                                          0.91               0.89             0.90               0.88             0.91               0.88             0.90               0.88
Observations                                                      170,575            84,605           170,575            84,605           170,309            80,120           170,309            80,120
Notes : The unit of observation is a country-pair in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country-pair fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control, ln
importer per capita income, ln exporter per capita income, ln importer total income, ln importer total income, an indicator for importer leader turnover, an indicator for exporter leader turnover, importer
current leader tenure, exporter current leader tenure, indicator variable for the importer being a GATT member, indicator variable for the exporter being a GATT member, indicator variable for the
importer signing the NY convention, an indicator variable for the exporter signing the NY convention, importer Polity fixed effects, and exporter Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with
robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




the estimating equation, where IeUS is an indicator variable that equals one if the exporting country

is the US. The interaction captures the differential effect of interventions on imports from the US

relative to the average effect of interventions on imports from other countries.

     We also examine the effect of US interventions in country c on exports from country c to

importing countries, which we index by m:

                                                                                                      US
                                 ln xt,c,m = αt + αc,m + β 1 US influencet,c + β 2 US influencet,c × Im
                                                                    N
                                                             +    ∑ γn ln xt−n,c,m + Xt,c Γ + Xt,m Ω + ε t,c,m                                                                                           (4)
                                                                  n =1

     Estimation results are reported in table 6. Columns 1–4 report estimates of equation (3) and

columns 5–8 report estimates of (4). The odd numbered columns include all countries in the

sample, while the even numbered columns only include autocratic importers (in columns 2 and 4)

or autocratic exporters (in columns 6 and 8). In columns 1, 2, 5 and 6 the dependent variable is the

natural log of the value of trade, while in 3, 4, 7 and 8, the dependent variable is the natural log

of the world trade share. Estimates of equations (3) and (4) provide results that are qualitatively

identical to the baseline estimates. Although US interventions did not increase in imports from

non-US countries, they did cause a significant increase in imports from the US. The effects are



                                                                                                   24
more pronounced if we restrict the sample to autocratic importers. The estimates also show that

interventions did not have an effect on exports to the US or other countries.


6. Testing Alternative Explanations

A. Trade Costs Explanation

To this point, we have documented a robust relationship between CIA interventions and increased

imports from the US. We have interpreted this as evidence of the effect of US influence, gained

through covert CIA interventions, on the sale of US products in the intervened country. An

alternative explanation for the increase in foreign-country imports from the US is a decrease in

bilateral trading costs between the US and the intervened country. To distinguish between these

two mechanisms, we move to the industry level and examine which industries experienced the

greatest surge in imports from the US following an intervention. If the increase in imports from

the US arose because of a decrease in trading costs between the foreign country and the US, then

the increase in shipments from the US should have been in industries in which the US had a

comparative advantage. With a movement towards free trade, countries increasingly export the

goods that they have a relative cost advantage in producing and import the goods they have a

relative disadvantage in producing. This logic of comparative advantage is central to standard

models of international trade ranging from the textbook Ricardian or Heckscher-Ohlin models

of trade to more recent models of comparative advantage with firm heterogeneity (e.g., Bernard,

Redding, and Schott, 2007).

   Testing this prediction of the trade costs explanation requires a measure of US competitiveness

across industries and time periods. For this we use Balassa’s (1965) measure of revealed compara-

tive advantage (RCA). The measure, which captures the degree of specialization of a country in a

particular industry, is given by:

                                                  xt,c,i . ∑i xt,c,i
                                    RCAt,c,i =
                                                 ∑c xt,c,i ∑i ∑c xt,c,i
where xt,c,i denotes the aggregate exports of country c in industry i and year t. The RCA measure is

a ratio of two ratios. The first ratio, the numerator, is country c’s share of world exports in industry

i. The second ratio, the denominator, is country c’s share of world exports in all industries. That is,

RCA compares the country’s share of global exports in industry i to the share for all industries. If

the ratio is above one, then the country captures a greater share of global exports in industry i than

                                                    25
                           Table 7: US revealed comparative advantage (RCA) in 1962.

                          Low RCA industries                                                              High RCA Industries
US RCA in 1962   sitc2   Industry description                                   US RCA in 1962   sitc2   Industry description
    0.043         11     Beverages                                                  0.909         81     Sanitary, plumbing, heating and lighting fixtures
    0.065         07     Coffee, tea, cocoa, spices and manufactures thereof        0.910         88     Photographic apparatus, optical goods, watches
    0.083         03     Fish and fish preparations                                 1.003         43     Animal and vegetable oils and fats, processed
    0.101         06     Sugar, sugar preparations and honey                        1.137         42     Fixed vegetable oils and fats
    0.108         85     Footwear                                                   1.155         62     Rubber manufactures, nes
    0.146         00     Live animals                                               1.203         52     Crude chemicals from coal, petroleum and gas
    0.227         91     Scrap and waste                                            1.207         69     Manufactures of metal, nes
    0.308         33     Petroleum and petroleum products                           1.263         54     Medicinal and pharmaceutical products
    0.314         63     Wood and cork manufactures excluding furniture             1.294         55     Perfume materials, and toilet and cleansing products
    0.377         01     Meat and meat preparations                                 1.335         57     Explosives and pyrotechnic products
    0.386         84     Clothing                                                   1.343         76     Telecommunications and sound recording apparatus
    0.415         24     Wood, lumber and cork                                      1.373         77     Electrical machinery, apparatus and appliances nes
    0.442         34     Gas, natural and manufactured                              1.547         78     Road vehicles
    0.456         65     Textile yarn, fabrics, made up articles, etc.              1.555         51     Chemical elements and compounds
    0.468         02     Dairy products and eggs                                    1.562         09     Miscellaneous food preparations
    0.469         68     Non ferrous metals                                         1.598         89     Miscellaneous manufactured articles, nes
    0.471         29     Crude animal and vegetable materials, nes                  1.626         22     Oil seeds, oil nuts and oil kernels
    0.503         64     Paper, paperboard and manufactures thereof                 1.650         72     Electrical machinery, apparatus and appliances
    0.510         28     Metalliferous ores and metal scrap                         1.654         35     Machinery, except electrical
    0.538         66     Non metallic mineral manufactures, nes                     1.669         74     General industrial machinery, equipment and parts
    0.545         67     Iron and steel                                             1.685         58     Artificial resins and plastic materials, etc.
    0.559         83     Travel goods, handbags and similar articles                1.701         75     Office machines and automatic data process. equip.
    0.579         05     Fruit and vegetables                                       1.788         71     Machinery, other than electric
    0.619         25     Pulp and paper                                             1.877         12     Tobacco and tobacco manufactures
    0.645         21     Hides, skins and fur skins, undressed                      1.927         04     Cereals and cereal preparations
    0.723         27     Crude fertilizers and crude minerals, nes                  1.976         41     Animal oils and fats
    0.736         82     Furniture                                                  1.977         73     Transport equipment
    0.740         61     Leather, leather manuf. Nes, and dressed fur skins         2.058         59     Chemical materials and products, nes
    0.740         23     Crude rubber including synthetic and reclaimed             2.207         87     Professional, scientific and controlling instruments
    0.778         26     Textile fibres, not manufactured, and waste                2.240         32     Coal, coke and briquettes
    0.800         08     Feed stuff for animals excluding unmilled cereals          2.435         79     Other transport equipment
    0.819         53     Dyeing, tanning and colouring materials                    3.133         95     Firearms of war and ammunition
    0.836         56     Fertilizers, manufactured




it does on average. This is then taken as an indicator that the country has a comparative advantage

in producing in industry i. If the ratio is less than one, then the country captures less of the world

export share in industry i than it does on average.

   To provide a reader with a sense of the constructed RCA measures, table 7 reports the RCA

measure for the US in 1962 for all 2-digit SITC (Standard International Trade Classification) indus-

tries. Overall, the measures are consistent with intuition. The US has low relative export shares in

low-end manufacturing industries like beverages, footwear, and textiles, and high export shares in

high-end industries like transport equipment, scientific equipment, chemicals, and firearms.

   We use the RCA measures to test whether following an intervention the increase in imports

was greatest in the industries in which the US had a comparative advantage. We test this with the

following estimating equation:


        ln mUS
            t,c,i = αt + αc + αi + β 1 US influencet,c + β 2 US influencet,c × US RCAt,i


                                                                               26
                       + β 3 US influencet,c × Importer RCAt,c,i + β 4 US RCAt,i + β 5 Importer RCAt,c,i
                            N
                       +   ∑ γn ln mUS
                                    t−n,c,i + Xt,c Γ + ε t,c,i                                                     (5)
                           n =1

In equation (5) the unit of observation is a year t, a country c, and an industry i. The dependent

variable is the natural log of imports into country c in industry i from the United States. The

regression includes year fixed effects, country fixed effects, and industry fixed effects, as well

as the full set of covariates. As before, US influencet,c is our measure of CIA interventions. We

now allow the effect of an intervention to differ across industries depending on whether the

importing country has a comparative advantage in industry i and depending on whether the US

has a comparative advantage in industry i. The variables Importer RCAt,c,i and US RCAt,i measure

each country’s comparative advantage in the production of good i in year t.24 If the increase in

imports is from a decrease in transactions costs, then we expect β 2 > 0. The increase in US imports

should have been greater in industries in which the US had a comparative advantage. As predicted

by standard models of international trade, increased integration should have caused countries to

specialize in (and export more of) the products that they were relatively good at producing.

   If the increase in trade did not arise because of comparative advantage, then we no longer

expect β 2 > 0. There is no reason to expect the increase to necessarily be greater in industries in

which the US had a comparative advantage. Instead, the US may have pushed to sell goods which

it was only marginally competitive in producing, and otherwise would have had difficulty selling.

In this case we expect β 2 ≤ 0. Therefore, the estimated coefficient for β 2 provides a test between

the trade costs and influence explanations.

   Estimates of equation (5) are reported in table 8. Columns 1–6 report estimates for the full

sample, while columns 7–12 report estimates for autocracies only. To be as conservative as possible,

we cluster all standard errors at the country-year level. We also report estimates with industries

defined by the 2-digit, 3-digit and 4-digit SITC classifications. In all specifications, the estimated

coefficients for US influence × US RCA is negative and statistically significant, indicating that inter-

ventions increased imports more in industries in which the US had a comparative disadvantage,

not comparative advantage in producing. This finding is in contrast to what is expected if the
  24 To allow an easy interpretation of the magnitudes of the estimated effects, we have normalized US RCA and
                                                                                                                 t,i
Importer RCAt,c,i to lie between zero and one by subtracting the minimum value of the variable and then dividing by the
maximum value.




                                                          27
               Table 8: Testing the trade costs explanation using revealed comparative advantage.

                                                                                   Full sample                                                                                   Autocracies only

                                             SITC 2-digit industries         SITC 3-digit industries         SITC 4-digit industries          SITC 2-digit industries         SITC 3-digit industries         SITC 4-digit industries
                                                        ln share of             ln share of             ln share of                                      ln share of             ln share of             ln share of
                                            ln imports    imports   ln imports    imports   ln imports    imports                            ln imports    imports   ln imports    imports   ln imports    imports
                                           from the US from the US from the US from the US from the US from the US                          from the US from the US from the US from the US from the US from the US
                                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)                                  (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)

US influence                                 0.067**         0.059**         0.100***        0.066***        0.103***        0.058***         0.168***        0.107***        0.210***        0.094***         0.222***       0.081***
                                             (0.034)          (0.024)         (0.031)         (0.017)         (0.031)         (0.015)          (0.059)         (0.039)         (0.058)         (0.029)          (0.061)        (0.025)
US influence × US RCA                        -0.114*        -0.219***       -0.232***       -0.301***        -0.134**       -0.242***        -0.379***       -0.410***       -0.571***       -0.419***        -0.460***      -0.262***
                                             (0.064)          (0.056)         (0.069)         (0.059)         (0.067)         (0.056)          (0.088)         (0.079)         (0.105)         (0.092)          (0.106)        (0.090)
US RCA                                       0.919***       0.913***         1.791***        1.387***        1.452***        1.333***         1.040***        1.139***        1.759***        1.285***        1.590***        1.260***
                                              (0.099)        (0.081)          (0.096)         (0.074)         (0.078)         (0.060)          (0.165)         (0.147)         (0.167)         (0.133)         (0.168)         (0.122)
US influence × Importer RCA                      Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Importer RCA                                     Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Four lags of dependent variable                  Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Soviet intervention control                      Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Importer RCA and interaction                     Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
ln income per capita, ln total income            Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure                   Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
GATT and NY convention controls                  Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Polity fixed effects                             Y              Y                Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Country fixed effects                            Y               Y              Y               Y                Y              Y                 Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Year fixed effects                               Y               Y              Y               Y                Y              Y                 Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Industry fixed effects                           Y               Y              Y               Y                Y              Y                 Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
R-squared                                       0.91            0.81           0.88            0.80             0.88           0.81              0.88            0.76            0.84            0.74            0.84            0.74
Clusters (country-year pairs)                  2,517           2,517          2,442           2,442            2,367          2,367             1,556           1,556           1,496           1,496           1,442           1,442
Observations                                  95,178          95,178         226,822         226,822          341,056        341,056           47,543          47,543          96,294          96,294          120,800         120,800
Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t in an SITC industry i, where t ranges from 1962 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, industry fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control,
four lags of the dependent variable, importer RCA, importer RCA interacted with US influence , ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT
membership, an indicator variable for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with standard errors clustered at the country-year level in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5
and 10% levels.




increase in trade were from a decrease in bilateral trading costs between the US and the intervened

country.25

     A potential criticism of the RCA measure is that it does not distinguish between a country’s

exports to developed countries (DCs) and its exports to less developed countries (LDCs). If the

two groups of countries represent different markets, then the US may specialize either in products

to serve the LDC markets or products to serve DCs. Since the market size of LDCs is much smaller

than of DCs, when the US serves the LDC market, its share of total world exports may be low, and

therefore its measure of RCA is also low. If interventions decreased bilateral trade costs between

the US and the intervened LDC, then this may have caused greater specialization in the export of

LDC products, and as a result, imports from the US increased most in industries with low measures

of US RCA.

     According to this explanation, the failure of the test results because we are incorrectly mea-

suring RCA. Rather than measuring US RCA for exports to the entire world, we should be con-

structing a measure of RCA based on US exports to LDCs only. We check for this possibility by
  25 The total effect of US influence on imports from the US is given by β 1 + β 2 US RCAt,i + β 3 Importer RCAt,c,i . Exam-
ining this, we find that for nearly all observations (countries, years, and industries), the total effect of US influence is
greater than or equal to zero. That is, CIA interventions had a non-negative effect on the purchase of US products in
nearly every industry, and the effects were greatest in industries in which the US was globally least competitive.


                                                                                                                28
constructing alternative measures of RCA that are calculated using only the share of exports to

LDCs rather than the share of exports globally.26 Because of space constraints we do not report

the estimates here. However, we find that the results are nearly identical using this alternative

measure of RCA. In all specifications the coefficient for US influencet,c × US RCAt,i is negative and

statistically significant, and the magnitudes are close to those reported in table 8.

   Overall, the results provide evidence against the hypothesis that the increase in US imports

following an intervention was the result of a decrease in trade costs between the US and the

intervened country.


B. Political Ideology Explanation

It is possible that countries prefer to import goods from countries with political ideologies more

aligned to their own.27 If this is the case, then the increase in imports from the US may be explained

by a change in the ideology of the intervened country following an intervention. Under this

explanation, the increase in imports from the US arises not because of US influence, but because

the new regime has an ideology that is more aligned with the US. Imports from all ideologically

similar countries increased, and the US just happens to be one of these countries.

   To test this possibility, we use voting information from the UN general assembly to construct

a measure of the similarity of countries’ ideologies and preferences. We take the voting position

of the US as a references point. Define dt,c to be the sum of the vote distance between country c

and the US for all votes in year t, where a vote in opposition to the US is given a distance of 1,

and a vote with the US is given a distance of 0.28 Also define dmax
                                                                t   to be the maximum sum of

vote distances possible in year t. We then construct the following measure of country c’s voting

similarity with the US in year t:
                                                    US          dt,c
                                                  Vt,c ≡ 1−
                                                                dmax
                                                                 t
The measure ranges from 0 to 1, and increases with voting similarity with the US.
            US to test whether following US interventions, imports from countries that were
   We use Vt,c

ideologically similar to the US also increased. We test this by returning to our imports estimating
  26 We define the LDC market to be countries other than Australia, Belgium, Canada, Switzerland, West Germany,

Denmark, Great Britain, Italy, France, Finland, Japan, Luxembourg, Norway, Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal,
Spain, and Sweden.
  27 Evidence for this during the post-Cold War period has been provided by Gupta and Yu (2009).
  28 See Gartzke (2006) for details. The measure we use ignores abstentions. An alternative is to code a value of 2 for

votes against the US, a value of 1 for abstentions, and zero for votes with the US. Using this alternative coding yields
qualitatively identical results to what we report here.


                                                          29
equation with all bilateral observations, equation (3). But, we now allow the effect of interventions

to differ systematically depending on the political ideology of the exporter. This is done by
                              US and US influence in the estimating equation:
including an interaction of Vt,e                 t,c


     ln mt,c,e = αt + αc,e + β 1 US influencet,c + β 2 US influencet,c × IeUS + β 3 US influencet,c × Vt,e
                                                                                                        US

                                     N
                             US
                     + β 4 Vt,e +   ∑ γn ln mt−n,c,e + Xt,c Γ + Xt,e Ω + ε t,c,e                                     (6)
                                    n =1

Equation (6) tests whether imports from countries that were ideologically similar to the US also

increased following CIA interventions. If the ideology explanation is correct, then we expect β 3 to

be positive and significant. We are also interested in how the estimated impact of interventions on
                                                                               US .
imports from the US, β 2 , is affected when we control for US influencet,c × Vt,e

   Estimation results are reported in the first four columns of table 9. The estimates of β 2 remain

robust to the inclusion of the new interaction term. They remain positive and significant, and their

magnitudes barely change.29 The estimates also show that following an intervention, imports from

countries ideologically close to the US did not increase.

   The remaining columns of table 9 report results using an alternative measure of country e’s
                                                                      US with an indicator
alignment with the US. Rather than using UN voting data, we measure Vt,e

variable that equals one if country e was an original 1949 member of NATO. The results are similar

using the alternative measure. There is no increase in imports from non-US NATO countries

following CIA interventions, and the estimated effect of CIA interventions on foreign-country

imports from the US remains robust.

   Overall, the data do not support the hypothesis that the increase in US imports arose because

the newly installed leaders were more pro-Western or pro-Capitalist. The increase in imports was

US specific, and there was no increase in imports from countries that were ideologically similar to

the US.
  29 The coefficients in columns 1–4 of table 9 can be compared to columns 1–4 of table 6. The only difference between
                                              US and US influence × V US , is a slightly different number of observations
the two estimates, besides the inclusion of Vt,e                 t,c  t,e
because of missing voting data.




                                                           30
                                                Table 9: Testing the political ideology explanation.

                                                                            ln imports              ln (imports / world imports)                   ln imports               ln (imports / world imports)
                                                                      All          Autocracies           All          Autocracies            All          Autocracies            All          Autocracies
                                                                      (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)              (7)               (8)

US influence                                                        -0.028            -0.035             0.041           -0.069*           -0.002          -0.046***           0.005            -0.033*
                                                                   (0.030)           (0.043)           (0.030)           (0.043)          (0.011)           (0.018)           (0.011)           (0.017)
US influence × US exporter                                         0.130**           0.208**           0.138**           0.191**          0.122**           0.180**           0.126**           0.194**
                                                                   (0.058)           (0.086)           (0.057)           (0.084)          (0.059)           (0.086)           (0.058)           (0.085)
US influence × US alignment of exporter                              0.043             0.006            -0.041            0.060
                                                                   (0.036)           (0.050)           (0.035)           (0.050)
US influence × Original NATO member                                                                                                         0.020             0.042            -0.003             0.018
                                                                                                                                           (0.021)           (0.031)           (0.021)           (0.030)
US alignment of exporter                                              Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 N                 N                 N                 N
Two lags of dependent variable                                        Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
ln per capita income (importer and exporter)                          Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
ln total income (importer and exporter)                               Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure (importer and exporter)                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
GATT and NY convention (importer and exporter)                        Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Polity fixed effects (importer and exporter)                          Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Soviet intervention control                                           Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Country-pair fixed effects                                            Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
Year fixed effects                                                    Y                Y                  Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
R-squared                                                           0.91              0.89              0.90              0.88             0.91               0.89             0.90               0.88
Observations                                                       159,338           79,047            159,338           79,047           170,575            84,605           170,575            84,605
Notes : The unit of observation is a country-pair in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country-pair fixed effects, a full set of Soviet intervention
controls, ln importer per capita income, ln exporter per capita income, ln importer total income, ln importer total income, an indicator for importer leader turnover, an indicator for exporter leader
turnover, importer current leader tenure, exporter current leader tenure, indicator variable for the importer being a GATT member, indicator variable for the exporter being a GATT member, indicator
variable for the importer signing the NY convention, and an indicator variable for the exporter signing the NY convention, importer Polity fixed effects, and exporter Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are
reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




C. US Loans and Grants Explanation

If interventions were followed by an increase in US foreign aid, particularly tied or conditional aid,

then this may be an alternative explanation for why interventions increased imports from the US.30

To examine this empirically, we use data on the value of US foreign aid received by each country.31

The aid data are disaggregated into economic aid (which includes grants and concessional loans),

military aid (which includes grants, concessional loans, and training), and food aid. As a test of

whether the increase in US imports is explained by an increase in US foreign aid, we check whether

US foreign aid increased following CIA interventions, and if the changes in aid are able to account

for the increase in US imports that followed CIA interventions.

     The results are reported in table 10, which reports estimates of our baseline estimating equation

(1), but with measures of US loans and grants as the dependent variable. Columns 1 and 5 report

estimates when the dependent variable is the natural log of the dollar value of US economic aid
   30 The fact that US imports increased most in low US RCA industries suggests that if this explanation is correct, then

the provision of grants and loans were used to promote US sales in industries in which US firms were less competitive.
This would also be an interesting and important finding.
   31 The data are from the U.S. Agency for International Development’s (USAID) U.S. Overseas Loans and Grants, Obliga-

tions and Loan Authorizations annual report, also known simply as the “Green Book”.




                                                                                                    31
                                   Table 10: The effect of interventions on US loans and grants.

                                                                          Full sample                                                          Autocracies only
                                                                                                   Ex-Im Bank                                                                Ex-Im Bank
                                           Economic aid       Military aid        Food aid            loans           Economic aid       Military aid        Food aid           loans
                                                 (1)                (2)                 (3)             (4)                 (5)               (6)               (7)               (8)

US influence                                  0.348***          0.383***           0.221**           0.318*             0.556***           0.665***          0.427***          0.559**
                                               (0.109)           (0.112)           (0.105)           (0.183)             (0.151)            (0.176)           (0.152)          (0.223)

Two lags of dependent variable                    Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
Soviet intervention controls                      Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
ln per capita income, ln total income             Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure                    Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
GATT, NY convention controls                      Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
Polity fixed effects                              Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
Country fixed effects                             Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
Year fixed effects                                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
R-squared                                       0.87               0.87              0.83              0.48                0.84               0.86             0.79              0.50
Observations                                    3,779             3,779             3,779             3,779               2,243              2,243             2,243             2,243
Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control,
two lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT membership, an indicator
variable for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.




provided to country c in year t. Columns 2 and 6 report results for military aid, and columns 3 and

7 report results for food aid. The results show that all forms of US aid tended to increase following

CIA interventions. We also examine loans given by the US Export-Import Bank (Ex-Im Bank). The

mandate of the Bank is to provide loans to foreign firms wanting to import US products. Because

the Bank only provides loans that would not be provided by private lenders, they enable foreign

customers to purchase US goods, thereby increasing US exports. Columns 4 and 8 of table 10 show

that Ex-Im Bank loans also increased following CIA interventions.

    Table 11 reports estimates that test whether the increase in foreign aid is able to account for the

increase in US imports following an intervention. We do this by estimating (1) while controlling

for the amount of US loans and grants received by a country in a year. Our baseline estimates

without additional controls are reported in columns 1 and 6. In columns 2 and 7, we include

the measures of economic and military aid. Economic aid enters with positive and significant

coefficients, while military aid enters with positive, but insignificant coefficients. This suggests

that part of US economic aid is used to purchase US products, which is unsurprising considering

that US economic aid is often tied to purchases from US producers. The insignificant coefficient for

military aid is not surprising, since much of military aid goes to supporting overseas US personnel,

and these goods are not included in IMF DOT statistics (International Monetary Fund, 1993).

Columns 3 and 8 control for food aid, and columns 4 and 9 control for Ex-Im Bank loans. Both


                                                                                              32
                                                  Table 11: Accounting for US loans and grants.

                                                                                                ln share of imports from the US
                                                                     Full sample                                                              Autocracies only
                                            (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)            (9)           (10)

US influence                            0.104***       0.087***       0.094***       0.102***       0.084***         0.174***      0.148***       0.158***       0.167***       0.138***
                                         (0.029)        (0.028)        (0.028)        (0.028)        (0.028)          (0.049)       (0.047)        (0.490)        (0.048)        (0.047)
ln (1+US economic aid)                                 0.019***                                     0.013***                       0.030***                                     0.022***
                                                        (0.004)                                      (0.004)                        (0.007)                                      (0.007)
ln (1+US military aid)                                   0.000                                        0.000                          0.002                                        0.002
                                                        (0.003)                                      (0.003)                        (0.006)                                      (0.006)
ln (1+US food aid)                                                    0.021***                      0.014***                                      0.028***                      0.016***
                                                                       (0.004)                       (0.004)                                       (0.006)                       (0.006)
ln ( 1+Ex-Im Bank loans)                                                              0.004**       0.004**                                                      0.010***       0.010***
                                                                                      (0.002)        (0.002)                                                      (0.003)        (0.003)

Two lags of dependent variable               Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
Soviet intervention controls                 Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
ln per capita income, ln total incom         Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure               Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
GATT, NY convention controls                 Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
Polity fixed effects                         Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
Country fixed effects                        Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
Year fixed effects                           Y             Y              Y              Y              Y                Y             Y              Y              Y              Y
R-squared                                  0.88          0.88           0.88           0.88           0.88             0.86          0.86           0.86           0.86           0.86
Observations                               3,780         3,780          3,780          3,780          3,780            2,244         2,244          2,244          2,244          2,244
Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control,
two lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT membership, an indicator
variable for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.




variables enter with positive and significant coefficients.

    Lastly, in the columns 5 and 9, we simultaneously control for all measures of US loans and

grants. Controlling for the variables together has the largest impact on the estimated coefficient for

US influence. However, the size of the declines is modest. The coefficient magnitudes are reduced

by about 20% for both the full sample and the subsample of autocracies. The results suggest that

although increases in US loans and grants are able to explain some of the effect of interventions

on imports from the US, it is a modest proportion of the total. This is consistent with the fact

that foreign aid flows are not large enough to account for the observed increase in imports from

the US. The ratio of US total aid to US imports is 0.15 for the median observation in the sample.

Therefore, even if an intervention-induced increase in US aid was transformed one-for-one into

imports (which in reality is far from true), a CIA intervention would need to increase aid by 127%

to increase imports by 19% (127% × 0.15 = 19%), which is the estimated impact of an intervention

from column 2 of table 3. The estimated effects of interventions on US aid found in columns 5–8 of




                                                                                           33
table 10 are much lower than this, ranging instead from 40 to 65%.32


7. Underlying Mechanisms

In this section, we examine evidence for the mechanisms underlying the increase in imports from

the US following CIA interventions. There are a number of ways in which US influence could be

used to increase the foreign sale of US products. First, the foreign government could be influenced

to directly purchase US products. Second, the government could be influenced to alter domestic

policies, which create an incentive for individuals to purchase more US products. One such

policy is regulations against foreign direct investment (FDI). If US influence was used to allow

greater foreign investment in the intervened country, particularly US investment, then this may

have translated into greater imports of US products, since US-owned firms tend to import more

from the US. The other policy is tariffs and other trade barriers. If following an intervention,

tariffs were reduced, particularly tariffs that protected against competition from US producers,

then this could have resulted in increased imports from the US. We consider each of these three

mechanisms. As we show below, we find evidence that the full effect can be explained by an

increase in foreign-government purchases of US products. We do not find evidence that US FDI or

tariffs play a role.

   It is well-established that government purchases are highly discriminatory, with producers cho-

sen based on a number of other criterion besides lowest costs (see e.g., Baldwin, 1970, Lowinger,

1976, Audet, 2002). As a share of GDP, government purchases have typically been around 20

percent of GDP for industrialized nations and 15 percent for developing nations (Baldwin, 1970,

p. 58, Audet, 2002). Included in these purchases are compensation to employees. Removing these,

and focusing only on purchases of goods, the figures become 10.3 and 8.8 percent, respectively

(Audet, 2002). These figures can be compared to the predicted intervention-induced increase in

imports based on our estimates. According to the estimates from column 1 of table 3, the average

observation in the sample experienced an increase in US imports equal to 8.5 percent of GDP. (For

the median observation, the figure is 7.7 percent.) Therefore, from a purely quantitative standpoint,

  32 An explanation, similar to the US loans and grants explanation, is that the US may have sold goods at a discount to

intervened countries. If the demand for US products was sufficiently elastic, then this could explain the increase in the
total value of US imports. Using unit value data from Feenstra (1997), we have examined the prices of imports from the
US, and find that they are not affected by CIA interventions.




                                                           34
                                              Table 12: The government purchases mechanism.

                                                                   ln share of imports from the US                                            ln imports from the US
                                                              Full sample                        Autocracies                         Full sample                        Autocracies
                                                        (1)                 (2)            (3)                 (4)             (5)                 (6)            (7)                 (8)

US influence                                         0.128***           -0.067         0.219***            -0.112           0.111***           -0.084          0.194***           -0.106
                                                      (0.031)          (0.059)          (0.057)           (0.096)            (0.035)          (0.067)           (0.062)          (0.106)
US influence × Gov't expenditure share                                0.971***                           1.515***                            0.976***                           1.387***
                                                                       (0.313)                            (0.471)                             (0.355)                            (0.502)

Government expenditure share                            N                 Y                N                Y                   N                Y                 N               Y
Two lags of dependent variable                          Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
Soviet intervention control                             Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
ln per capita income, ln total income                   Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
Leader turnover, leader tenure                          Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
GATT and NY convention controls                         Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
Polity fixed effects                                    Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
Country fixed effects                                   Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
Year fixed effects                                      Y                 Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                 Y               Y
R-squared                                              0.91              0.91             0.89             0.89                0.97             0.98              0.96            0.96
Observations                                          3,339             3,339            1,919            1,919               3,339            3,339             1,919           1,919
Notes: The unit of observation is a country c in year t , where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention control,
two lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, government expenditure share, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for
GATT membership, an indicator variable for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




the purchase of goods by governments is large enough to potentially account for the observed

increase in imports from the US following a CIA intervention.

    We explicitly test for this mechanism by examining whether the estimated impact of CIA inter-

ventions on imports from the US is stronger in countries where the government controls a greater

share of the economy, which we measure using the share of government expenditures in GDP,

taken from the Penn World Tables Mark 6.2. Estimation results are reported in table 12. Because

data on government expenditure share are unavailable for all countries, and are only available

from 1950 onwards, the sample size is reduced to 3,339 observations in the full sample, and 1,919

observations in the subsample of autocracies. The odd numbered columns of the table reproduce

the baseline estimates with the smaller sample sizes. The even numbered columns report estimates

that allow the effect of CIA interventions to differ depending on the government’s share of GDP.

As shown, the interaction between US influence and the government expenditure share is positive

and statistically significant in every specification.

    To get a sense of the magnitude of the heterogeneity, first note that the government expenditure

share ranges from .03 (i.e., 3%) to .73, and has a mean value of .21. Consider the estimation results

for the full sample with the log of the US import share as the dependent variable (reported in

columns 1 and 2). For the mean observation in the sample, the estimated effect of CIA interventions

on the share of imports from the US is −.067 + .21 × .971 = .137. This is very close to the


                                                                                            35
estimated coefficient of .128 from column 1, where the effect is constrained to be the same for

all observations. For the observation with the lowest government share, the estimated effect is

−.067 + .03 × .971 = −.038, which is not statistically different from zero. For the observation with
the highest government share, the estimated effect is −.067 + .73 × .971 = .642. Therefore, there is

substantial heterogeneity in the effects of CIA interventions. The effect of an intervention ranges

from essentially zero to an increase of 64 percent.

   The coefficient for US influence is also of interest. It provides the estimated effect of US inter-

ventions for a hypothetical country with zero government expenditure. The coefficient reports the

estimated effect of interventions after shutting down the channel that works through the govern-

ment. Although this interpretation relies strongly on the structural form of the estimating equation,

it is still informative. In all four estimates, the estimated coefficient is not statistically different from

zero, suggesting that there is no additional effects of interventions other than through government

expenditures.

   Overall, the estimates of table 12 indicate that a large portion, and possibly all, of the effect of

CIA interventions worked through foreign government purchases. We now turn to the possibility

that the effects of US interventions worked through tariffs or FDI. Using data from the BEA we

examine whether interventions were followed by increases in US FDI in the intervened country.

The estimates, using a number of different measures of outward US FDI, are reported in table 13.

Although five of the six specifications report a positive coefficient for US interventions, none of the

coefficients are statistically significant. This provides weak or no support for the notion that CIA

interventions result in a subsequent increase in US FDI.

   An ideal test of the tariff channel would rely on annual industry-level ad valorem tariffs for

all countries. Unfortunately, these data are decades from being constructed. Instead, we pursue

an alternative strategy using information from the International Customs Journal published by the

International Customs Tariff Bureau (BITD). The BITD, which was established in 1890, translates

and publishes countries’ tariff schedules on a continuous basis. When a country significantly

changes its tariff structure, a new ‘volume’ is published for the country. If minor changes to the

tariff structure are made, then a ‘supplement’ to the most recent volume is published. We take the

publication of a new volume as an indicator of a significant change in a country’s tariff structure.

   Using this information, we examine whether US interventions had a greater impact on US



                                                     36
                                    Table 13: CIA interventions and US outward FDI.

                                                                    Full sample                                      Autocracies only
                                                    Number of                         Foreign          Number of                        Foreign
                                                      foreign          Foreign        affiliate          foreign         Foreign        affiliate
                                                     affiliates     affiliate sales employment          affiliates    affiliate sales employment
                                                         (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)

              US influence                             0.001            0.105           0.006            -0.027           0.035            0.043
                                                      (0.051)          (0.116)         (0.055)           (0.083)         (0.156)          (0.066)

              Lags of the dependent variable             Y                Y               Y                 Y               Y                Y
              ln per capita income                       Y                Y               Y                 Y               Y                Y
              ln total income                            Y                Y               Y                 Y               Y                Y
              Leader turnover, leader tenure             Y                Y               Y                 Y               Y                Y
              Soviet intervention controls               Y                Y               Y                 Y               Y                Y
              Country fixed effects                      Y                Y               Y                 Y               Y                Y
              Year fixed effects                         Y                Y               Y                 Y               Y                Y
              R-squared                                0.90             0.86            0.86              0.86            0.77             0.80
              Observations                             2,475            2,475           2,475             1,562           1,562            1,562

              Notes : The unit of observation is a an autocratic country c , in year t , where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. The dependent variables are
              measured as the natural log of one plus their value. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, two lags of the
              dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, a GATT membership
              indicator, an indicator for signing the NY Convention, and Polity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported with standard errors in
              brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




imports after a revision to the intervened-country’s tariff schedule. If interventions affected US

imports through tariff changes, then we should observe that during an intervention episode, the

greatest effects occur in the years after the tariffs were altered. We check for this by constructing

a variable that equals one for intervention years that follow a change in the tariff structure that

occurred during the intervention episode, where an intervention episode is defined as continuous

years of intervention.

   The variable can be illustrated by returning to the example of Chile. Consider the intervention

episode, lasting from 1964 to 1970, when Eduardo Frei was backed by the CIA. The first change

in the tariff structure during this period was in 1967. Therefore, the new variable takes on the

value of one from 1967 to 1970. These are the years during the intervention episode that followed

a restructuring of industry tariffs.

   The estimates are reported in table 14. Columns 1 and 4 first estimate whether US interventions

increased the probability of a change in the tariff structure.33 The estimates provide no evidence

of this. The remaining columns in the table report estimates of our baseline estimating equations

including the new post-tariff change intervention variable. The estimates show no evidence that

within intervention episodes, the periods after a tariff change experienced a greater increase in US
 33 We   estimate a linear probability model. Logit and Probit models provide qualitatively identical estimates.



                                                                                 37
                                Table 14: Interventions, tariff changes, and US imports.

                                                                    Full sample                                          Autocracies only
                                                 Tariff change        ln imports     ln US import        Tariff change       ln imports     ln US import
                                                   indicator           from US           share             indicator          from US           share
                                                       (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)

       US influence                                   0.031           0.184***         0.145***              0.011           0.236***         0.214***
                                                     (0.030)           (0.051)          (0.045)             (0.038)           (0.071)          (0.062)
       US influence × Post tariff change                                -0.065           -0.059                                -0.068           -0.047
                                                                       (0.045)          (0.037)                               (0.069)          (0.056)
       Two lags of dependent variable                   Y                 Y                Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       ln per capita income                             Y                 Y                Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       ln total income                                  Y                 Y                Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       Leader turnover, leader tenure                   Y                 Y                Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       GATT and NY convention controls                  Y                 Y                Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       Polity fixed effects                             Y                 Y                Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       Soviet intervention control                      Y                 Y                Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       Country fixed effects                           Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       Year fixed effects                              Y                 Y                 Y                   Y                 Y                Y
       R-squared                                      0.16              0.97              0.88                0.14              0.94             0.85
       Observations                                   2715              3592              3592               1,622             2,087            2,087
       Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed
       effects, a Soviet intervention control, two lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover,
       current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT membership, an indicator variable for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects.
       Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




imports. In none of the specifications is the post-tariff change intervention variable positive.


A. Additional Evidence from Timing

The evidence reported to this point suggests that most, if not all, of the increase in foreign-country

imports from the US arose through government purchases, and not through government policies

that affected tariffs or FDI. In this section, we undertake an additional test, based on the timing of

the effects of interventions, which allows us to further assess these findings. Among the channels

we have considered, government procurement of foreign products can respond most quickly to

US influence. Foreign governments can immediately switch to the purchase of US products. Other

mechanisms, like tariffs and FDI, require a change in government policies, and this takes time.

Further, these mechanisms also require that private actors in the economy respond to the changed

policies, which also takes time. Therefore, the speed at which interventions cause an increase in

imports from the US provides evidence about the underlying causal mechanism. If US influence

immediately increased imports from the US, then this is added evidence for the government

procurement channel.

   We undertake two strategies to examine timing. The first is to disaggregate US influence into


                                                                                38
                                          Table 15: Timing and the effects of US interventions.

                                                                ln share of imports from the US                                            ln imports from the US
                                                           Full sample                     Autocracies                            Full sample                     Autocracies
                                                     (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)                (5)                 (6)            (7)              (8)

  US influence (onset year)                       0.191**                            0.330***                            0.174**                            0.330**
                                                   (0.075)                            (0.121)                             (0.088)                            (0.143)
  US influence (intermediate year)                0.097***                           0.167***                            0.125***                           0.176***
                                                   (0.029)                            (0.050)                             (0.033)                            (0.055)
  US influence (offset year)                      0.177***                           0.247**                             0.175**                            0.256**
                                                   (0.053)                            (0.101)                             (0.069)                            (0.130)
  US influence                                                     0.140***                          0.176***                             0.154***                          0.206***
                                                                    (0.042)                           (0.060)                              (0.046)                           (0.066)
  US influence × intervention year                                   -0.006                            -0.001                               -0.005                            -0.005
                                                                    (0.005)                           (0.007)                              (0.005)                           (0.008)
  US influence × intervention year 2                                  0.000                             0.000                                0.000                             0.000
                                                                    (0.001)                           (0.001)                              (0.001)                           (0.001)
  Lagged dependent variables                          Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  Soviet intervention control                         Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  ln per capita income, ln total income               Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  Leader turnover, leader tenure                      Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  GATT and NY convention controls                     Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  Polity fixed effects                                Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  Country fixed effects                               Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  Year fixed effects                                  Y                 Y                Y                Y                  Y                 Y                Y                Y
  R-squared                                         0.88               0.88            0.86              0.86              0.97               0.97            0.94              0.94
  Observations                                      3,864             3,864            2,327            2,327              3,864             3,864            2,327            2,327
  Notes : The unit of observation is a country c in year t, where t ranges from 1947 to 1989. All regressions include year fixed effects, country fixed effects, a Soviet intervention
  control, two lags of the dependent variable, ln per capita income, ln total income, an indicator for leader turnover, current leader tenure, an indicator variable for GATT
  membership, an indicator for signing the NY convention, and Polity fixed effects. The odd numbered columns control for an indicator variable that equals one if period t is within
  5 years before the onset of an intervention episode. The even numbered columns include indicator variables that equals one if country c is at war with the US in period t , and if the
  US has placed a sanction against US exports to country c in year t . Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5
  and 10% levels.




three variables. The first is an indicator variable that equals one in the first year of an intervention

episode, US influence (onset year). The second is an indicator for the last year of the episode,

US influence (offset year). The third is an indicator for interventions in the years between the onset

and offset years, US influence (intermediate year). We include the three variables in the estimating

equations rather than US influence. By doing this, we are able to identify which interventions have

the largest effects on trade. The results are reported in the odd numbered columns of table 15. The

estimates suggest that interventions, even in their first year, have large effects. In other words, US

influence immediately causes an increased purchase of US products. Moreover, the effect of the

interventions does not appear to change over the tenure of the intervention episode. In all four

specifications, standard F-tests cannot reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients for the three

intervention variables are equal.

   The second strategy we employ allows the effect of US influence to differ depending on the

number of previous consecutive periods of intervention years experienced by the country. This

tests explicitly whether, during an intervention episode, a year of intervention begins to have a


                                                                                           39
stronger or weaker impact on trade over time. In practice, we interact US influence with how many

years into the intervention episode period t is, and with this measure squared (this allows the

differential effect to be non-linear).34 The results are reported in the even numbered columns of

table 15. Again, there is no evidence of a differential effect of an intervention depending on the

number of previous intervention years.


8. Conclusions

Our analysis has provided evidence that increased political influence, arising from CIA interven-

tions during the Cold War, was used by the US to create a larger foreign market for its products. We

show that following CIA interventions, foreign-country imports from the US increased dramati-

cally. Further, the increase was greatest in industries in which the US was the least competitive in

producing, and there was no similar increase in US purchases of intervened-country exports.

   The empirical analysis first addressed the issue of causality by explicitly correcting for the

potential endogeneity of CIA interventions. We did this by controlling for pre-trends in the

dependent variable, pre-intervention fixed effects, and for observable factors potentially correlated

with the onset of CIA interventions and trade flows.

   We then turned to alternative explanations for the increase in imports from the US. We showed

that the surge in US imports cannot be explained by decreased trade costs. A testable implication

of the trade costs explanation is that the increase in US imports should have been concentrated in

industries in which the US had a comparative advantage. We showed that instead, the increase

was greatest in industries in which the US had a comparative disadvantage. We then tested the

hypothesis that the increase in US imports arose because the newly installed leaders were more ide-

ologically aligned with the US, being more pro-capitalist and more pro-Western. The US-specific

increase in imports that we identify may have been part of a more general increase in imports from

all countries that were more ideologically aligned with the new regime. We showed that the data

do not support this explanation. We observe no increase in imports from non-US countries with

similar ideologies, measured using either voting behavior in the UN general assembly or NATO

membership. The last alternative explanation we considered was that the increase in US imports

arose because the US provided more loans and grants to the new regime. This would have enabled,

and encouraged, intervened countries to import more US products. We tested for this and found
 34 We   reach the same conclusion if we restrict the interaction to be linear.


                                                             40
that although loans and grants, measured by economic aid, military aid, food aid, and Ex-Im Bank

loans, did increase following an intervention, they 4are only able to account for, at most, 20% of

the observed increase in imports from the US.

   We then turned to the channels underlying the relationship between CIA interventions and

imports from the US. We provided evidence that most, and possibly all, of the effect arose through

government purchases. Following CIA interventions, the government was influenced to directly

purchase US products, and this influence was greatest for products in which US producers were

uncompetitive in producing.


Appendix A. Relationship Between the Theoretically Derived Gravity Model and the
                Estimating Equations

This section explicitly derives the relationship between our estimating equations and the theoreti-

cally derived gravity model from Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). Consider the equation for the

theoretically derived gravity model with symmetric trade costs (e.g., Anderson and van Wincoop,

2003):
                                                                           1− σ
                                                Yt,c Yt,e        τt,c,e
                                     mt,c,e   =                                                  (A 1)
                                                 YtW            Pt,c Pt,e
where mt,c,e denotes imports into country c from exporter e in year t. Yt,c is total GDP of the

importing country c in year t, Yt,e is total GDP of the exporting country e in year t, and YtW is world

GDP in year t. The parameter σ is the elasticity of substitution between all goods. τt,c,e measures

bilateral trade related costs when shipping goods from e to c, and Pt,c and Pt,e are multilateral

resistance terms for countries c and e, respectively. These are complex non-linear functions of the

full set of bilateral cost terms {τt,c,e }. See equation (12) of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) for

derivation and a general discussion.

   Our estimating equations can be derived from equation (A 1). First consider equation (1) where

the dependent variable is imports from the US into country c in year t. Let YtUS denote US income,

PtUS denote the multilateral resistance term for the US, and τt,c
                                                              US denote trade frictions between the


US and country c. Then country c’s imports in year t that are from the US is given by:
                                                            "               # 1− σ
                                                                   US
                                             Yt,c YtUS            τt,c
                                    mUS
                                     t,c   =                                                     (A 2)
                                               YtW              Pt,c PtUS




                                                      41
Taking natural logs gives:
                                                                                             US
                                                    YtUS                                    τt,c
                        ln mUS
                            t,c = ln Yt,c + ln           − ( 1 − σ ) ln Pt
                                                                          US
                                                                             + ( 1 − σ ) ln                            (A 3)
                                                    YtW                                     Pt,c

    Equation (A 3) is the theoretical counterpart to the variant of estimating equation (1) where the

dependent variable is the natural log of imports from the US. The first term in the estimating

equation, ln Yt,c , is controlled for explicitly in (1) by the natural log of country c’s year t total
                                                             YtUS
income. The second term in equation(A 3), ln                 YtW
                                                                    − (1 − σ) ln PtUS , is absorbed by        the year fixed
                                                                τ US
effects in equation (1). The final term (1 −             σ) ln Pt,ct,c is the channel through which           the CIA inter-

vention variable, US influencet,c , affects trade flows. Therefore, the coefficient β in (1) captures the

reduced-form effect of CIA interventions on trade through both country c’s trade costs with the
     US , and through its trade costs with all other countries, P . The additional control variables
US, τt,c                                                         t,c

in equation (1) are included to control for additional factors that may also affect the costs of trading
                                                                                        US
                                                                                       τt,c
with the US and other countries, and therefore may also influence                      Pt,c .

    Unlike the famous border effect setting, our variable of interest US influencet,c not only directly

affects trade frictions between c and the US, but also frictions between country c and other (non-

US) exporters e. US interventions, for example, affected the “costs” of a country’s trade with the

Soviet Union, communist or socialist countries, and even neutral countries. As a result, we are not
                                                            US and P . Instead we are only able to
able to separately identify the effect of interventions on τt,c     t,c

identify the reduced form impact of CIA interventions on the relative costs of trading with the US,
 US
τt,c                                                                              US , we do not have
Pt,c .   Given that we are not interested in estimating the structural parameter τt,c

to worry about separately identifying the parameter from the multilateral resistance term as in

Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). Therefore, our estimating equation does not control explicitly

for the multilateral resistance term.

    Next consider equation (1) (where the dependent variable is the natural log of the share of total

imports that are from the US). To see the relationship with equation (A 1), first note that world

imports are given by:
                                                            1− σ                                   1− σ
                                 Yt,c Yt,e        τt,c,e                Yt,c                 τt,c,e
                       mW
                        t,c   =∑                                     = W 1− σ   ∑ Yt,e                                 (A 4)
                               e  YtW            Pt,c Pt,e            Yt Pt,c      e         Pt,e

Dividing (A 2) by (A 4) gives:
                                                                                      
                                    mUS                                  US )1−σ
                                                     YtUS              (τt,c
                                                                
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                     t,c
                                           =                                    i 1− σ 
                                    mW           ( PtUS )1−σ
                                                                        h
                                     t,c                         ∑ Yt,e τt,c,e
                                                                                      
                                                                   e      Pt,e


                                                                42
Taking natural logs gives:
                                                                                            
                                   mUS                                     US )1−σ
                                                     YtUS                (τt,c
                                                                
                                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                    t,c
                             ln           = ln               + ln
                                   mW            ( PtUS )1−σ                        τt,c,e 1−σ 
                                                                                h         i
                                    t,c                               ∑e Yt,e
                                                                  
                                                                                              
                                                                                    Pt,e

   The first term is captured by the time period fixed effects in equation (1). The second term

is the channel through which CIA interventions are expected to affect the natural log of the US

import share. As above, our estimates capture the reduced form effects of CIA interventions on
                              US )1−σ
                           (τt,c
the composite term            h τ i 1− σ .   Again, because we are uninterested in identifying the effect of
                                 t,c,e
                       ∑e Yt,e P  t,e
CIA interventions on the structural parameters, {τt,c,e }, our estimating equations do not separately

control for the multilateral resistance terms of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). Instead, we

estimate the full reduced form effect of CIA interventions on trade with the US.


Appendix B. Calculating Counterfactual Trade Flows

Recall that γ1 and γ2 are coefficients for the one- and two-year lags of the dependent variables, and

β is the coefficient for US influence. Counterfactual measures are denoted by an overline. We use

the following to construct counterfactual imports from the US had no interventions taken place,

ln mUS
    t,c :


                   US                             US                            US
     ln mUS                                                   US                            US
         t,c = ln mt,c − β US influence − γ1 (ln mt−1,c − ln mt−1,c ) − γ2 (ln mt−2,c − ln mt−2,c )    (A 5)


The first term subtracted from ln mUS
                                   t,c is the adjusted to actual trade flows for the direct effect of an

intervention in period t on imports from the US in the same period. The second term adjusts for

the persistent effect of an intervention in period t − 1 on imports in period t. This works through

the impact that lagged trade has on current trade. The third term is the adjustment for the effect of

intervention in period t − 2 on trade in period t.

   The calculations are made recursively beginning in 1947, the first period of the sample. For

these observations the last two terms of (A 5) are equal to zero. The calculations are then made for

1948, which use the calculated counterfactual trade flows from 1947. In 1948 the second term in

(A 5) is non-zero, while the third term is zero. The 1949 calculation uses the counterfactual trade

flows from 1947 and 1948. The procedure is continued until the final year 1989.




                                                           43
Appendix C. Data Appendix

We use trade data from two different sources. When we are only concerned with total value of

annual bilateral trade across all industries, we use trade data from the Correlates of War (COW)

Project (Barbieri et al., 2008), which reports aggregate bilateral trade flows (measured in millions

of nominal US dollars) annually between 1870 and 2006. The data are originally from the Inter-

national Monetary Fund’s Direction of Trade Statistics. Data on trade flows at the industry level

are taken from the United Nations’ Comtrade Database. Unlike the aggregate-level COW trade

data, the Comtrade data only begin in 1962. Our industry-level analysis therefore only examines

interventions between 1962 to 1989.

   Data on real per capita income and aggregate GDP are from Maddison (2003). The figures are

given in 1990 International Geary-Khamis dollars. The controls for leadership turnover and lead-

ership tenure are from Bueno de Mesquita, Smith, Siverson, and Morrow (2004). Our democracy

fixed effects are constructed from the revised Polity2 measure from the Polity IV Database. The

variable is a composite measure that is increasing in the extent of institutionalized democracy in a

regime. The measure ranges from −10 (strongly autocratic) to +10 (strongly democratic).

   The   GATT     membership      indicator   variable   is   constructed   from    the   date   coun-

tries signed the GATT. This information is available from the WTO’s web page:

www.wto.org/english/theWTO_e/gattmem_e.htm.               Similarly,   the New York Convention

indicator variable is constructed using the date the country ratified the convention.              The

information is from the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL):

www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/uncitral_texts/arbitration/NYConvention_status.html.

Information on country voting patterns in the UN General Assembly are from Gartzke (2006).

Sanctions data are from Hufbauer et al. (2009), and the conflict data are from Barbieri et al. (2008).



References

Aidt, Toke S. and Facundo Albornoz. 2010. Political regimes and foreign intervention. Mimeo,
  University of Cambridge.

Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the border
 puzzle. American Economic Review 93(1):170–192.

Andrew, Christopher and Vasili Mitrokhin. 2000. The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive
 and the Secret History of the KGB. New York: Basic Books.



                                                  44
Andrew, Christopher and Vasili Mitrokhin. 2005. The World Was Going Our Way. New York: Basic
 Books.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton: Prince-
 ton University Press.

Antràs, Pol and Gerard Padro-i-Miquel. 2008. Foreign influence and welfare. Mimeo, Harvard
 University.

Ashenfelter, Orley A. 1978. Estimating the effects of training programs on earnings. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 60:47–57.

Ashenfelter, Orley A. and David Card. 1985. Using the longitudinal structure of earnings to
  estimate the effect of training programs. Review of Economics and Statistics 67:648–660.

Audet, Denis. 2002. Government procurement: A synthesis report. OECD Journal of Budgeting
 2(3):149–194.

Balassa, Bella. 1965. Trade liberalization and ‘revealed’ comparative advantage. The Manchester
  School of Economics and Social Studies 32(2):99–123.

Baldwin, Robert E. 1970. Nontariff Distortions of International Trade. Washington D.C.: The Brookings
  Institution.

Barbieri, Katherine, Omar M.G. Keshk, and Brian Pollins. 2008. Correlates of war project trade
  data set codebook, version 2.0. Mimeo, June 17, 2008.

Berger, Daniel, Alejandro Corvalan, William Easterly, and Shanker Satyanath. 2010. Superpower
  interventions and their consequences for democracy: An empirical inquiry. Mimeo, New York
  University.

Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2007. Comparative advantage and
  heterogeneous firms. Review of Economic Studies 74(1):31–66.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How much should we trust
  differences-in-differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1):249–275.

Blum, William. 2004. Killing Hope: U.S. Military and C.I.A. Interventions since World War II. Monroe,
  ME: Common Courage Press.

Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow. 2004. The
  Logic of Political Survival. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Dreher, Axel and Nathan M. Jensen. 2007. Independent actor or agent? An empirical analysis
  of the impact of U.S. interests on International Monetary Fund conditions. Journal of Law and
  Economics 50(1):105–124.

Dube, Arindrajit, Ethan Kaplan, and Suresh Naidu. 2008. Coups, corporations, and classified
 information. Mimeo, University of California Berkeley.

Duflo, Esther and Raghabendra Chattopadhyay. 2004. Women as policy makers: Evidence from a
 randomized policy experiment in India. Econometrica 72(5):1409–1443.

Feenstra, Robert. 1997. U.S. exports, 1972–1994. Working Paper 5990, NBER.

Findlay, Ronald and Kevin H. O’Rourke. 2007. Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World Economy
  in the Second Millennium. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

                                                 45
Galtung, Johan. 1971. A structural theory of imperialism. Journal of Peace Research 8(2):81–117.

Gartzke, Erik. 2006. The affinity of nations index, 1946–2002. Mimeo, Columbia University.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. Protection for sale. American Economic Review
  84(4):833–850.

Gupta, Nandini and Xiaoyun Yu. 2009. Does money follow the flag? Mimeo, Indiana University.

Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, and John Ries. 2010. The erosion of colonial trade linkages after
 independence. Journal of International Economics 81(1):1–14.

Hirschman, Albert O. 1945. National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade. Berkeley: University
  of California Press.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Jeffrey J. Schott, Kimberly Ann Elliott, and Barbara Oegg. 2009. Economic
 Sanctions Reconsidered, 3rd Edition. Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Eco-
 nomics.

International Monetary Fund. 1993. A Guide to Direction of Trade Statistics. Washington, D.C.: IMF
  Statistics Department.

Johnson, Loch K. 1989. Covert action and accountability: Decision-making for America’s secret
  foreign policy. International Studies Quarterly 33(1):81–109.

Johnson, Loch K. 1992. On drawing a bright line for covert operations. American Journal of
  International Law 86(2):284–309.

Jones, Benjamin and Benjamin Olken. 2005. Do leaders matter? National leadership and growth
  since World War II. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3):835–864.

Jones, Benjamin and Benjamin Olken. 2009. Hit or miss? The effect of assassinations on institutions
  and war. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(2):55–87.

Kilby, Christopher. 2009. The political economy of conditionality: An empirical analysis of World
  Bank loan disbursements. Journal of Development Economics 89(1):51–61.

Kuziemko, Ilyana and Eric Werker. 2006. How much is a seat on the security council worth?
 Foreign aid and bribery at the United Nations. Journal of Political Economy 114(5):905–930.

Leary, William M. 1984. The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents. Tuscaloosa, AL:
  University of Alabama Press.

Lowinger, Thomas C. 1976. Discrimination in government procurement of foreign goods in the
  U.S. and Western Europe. Southern Economic Journal 42(3):451–460.

MacGillivray, Fiona and Alastair Smith. 2004. The impact of leadership turnover on trading
 relations between states. International Organization 58:567–600.

Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD.

Mitchener, Kris James and Marc Weidenmier. 2008. Trade and empire. Economic Journal 188:1805–
 1834.

Mitra, Devashish, Dimitrios D. Thomakos, and Mehmet A. Ulubasoglu. 2002. Protection for sale in
 a developing country: Democracy vs. dictatorship. Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3):497–
 508.

                                                 46
Nickell, Stephen J. 1981. Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica 49:1417–1426.

Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout. 1997. The decision to export in Colombia: An empirical
  model of entry with sunk costs. American Economic Review 87(4):545–564.

Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. The log of gravity. Review of Economics and Statistics
  88(4):641–658.

Sylvan, David and Stephen Majeski. 2009. U.S. Foreign Policy in Perspective: Clients, Enemies and
  Empire. New York: Routledge.

Weiner, Tim. 2007. Legacy of Ashes. New York: Doubleday.

Weissman, Stephen R. 1979. CIA covert action in Zaire and Angola: Patterns and consequences.
 Political Science Quarterly 94(2):263–286.

Westad, Odd Arne. 2005. The Global Cold War: Third World Interventions and the Making of our Times.
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Yeats, Alexander J. 1990. Do African countries pay more for imports? Yes. World Bank Economic
  Review 4(1):1–20.

Yergin, Daniel. 1991. The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power. New York: Simon &
  Schuster.




                                                  47
