                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TARGETING THE POOR:
                 EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN INDONESIA

                                            Vivi Alatas
                                          Abhijit Banerjee
                                           Rema Hanna
                                         Benjamin A. Olken
                                            Julia Tobias

                                        Working Paper 15980
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15980


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




We thank Ritwik Sarkar, Prani Sastiono, Ririn Purnamasari, Hendratno Tuhiman, Matthew Wai-Poi,
Chaeruddin Kodir, and Octavia Foarta for outstanding research assistance. We thank Mitra Samya,
 the Indonesian Central Bureau of Statistics, and SurveyMeter for their cooperation implementing
the project. Most of all we thank Lina Marliani for her exceptional work leading the field implementation
teams and data analysis. Funding for this project came from a World Bank – Royal Netherlands Embassy
trust fund. All views expressed are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the World Bank, the Royal Netherlands Embassy, Mitra Samya, the Indonesian Central Bureau of
Statistics, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Vivi Alatas, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia Tobias. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia
Vivi Alatas, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia Tobias
NBER Working Paper No. 15980
May 2010
JEL No. I38,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

In developing countries, identifying the poor for redistribution or social insurance is challenging because
the government lacks information about people’s incomes. This paper reports the results of a field
experiment conducted in 640 Indonesian villages that investigated two main approaches to solving
this problem: proxy-means tests, where a census of hard-to-hide assets is used to predict consumption,
and community-based targeting, where villagers rank everyone on a scale from richest to poorest.
When poverty is defined using per-capita expenditure and the common PPP$2 per day threshold, we
find that community-based targeting performs worse in identifying the poor than proxy-means tests,
particularly near the threshold. This worse performance does not appear to be due to elite capture.
Instead, communities appear to be using a different concept of poverty: the results of community-based
methods are more correlated with how individual community members rank each other and with villagers’
self-assessments of their own status than per-capita expenditure. Consistent with this, the community-based
methods result in higher satisfaction with beneficiary lists and the targeting process.


Vivi Alatas                                          Benjamin A. Olken
World Bank                                           Department of Economics
Jakarta Stock Exchange Building                      MIT
Tower 2, 12th & 13th Floor                           50 Memorial Drive
Jakarta, Indonesia                                   Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
valatas@worldbank.org                                and NBER
                                                     bolken@mit.edu
Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics                              Julia Tobias
MIT                                                  Stanford University
E52-252d                                             Department of Political Science
50 Memorial Drive                                    616 Serra St.
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                             Stanford, CA, 94305
and NBER                                             julia.tobias@gmail.com
banerjee@mit.edu

Rema Hanna
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rema_hanna@ksg.harvard.edu
I. Introduction
Targeted social safety net programs have become an increasingly common tool used to address

poverty (Coady, Grosh and Hoddinott, 2004). In developed countries, the selection of the

beneficiaries for these programs (“targeting”) is frequently accomplished through means-testing:

only those with incomes below a certain threshold are eligible. However, in developing

countries, where most potential recipients work in the informal sector and lack verifiable records

of their earnings, credibly implementing a conventional income-based means test is much more

challenging.

       Consequently, in developing countries, there is an increased emphasis on targeting

strategies that do not rely on directly observing incomes. In particular, there are two such

strategies: proxy means tests (PMTs) and community-based targeting. In a PMT, which has been

used in the Mexican Progresa/Oportunidades and Colombian Familias en Acción programs, the

government collects information on assets and demographic characteristics to create a “proxy”

for household consumption or income, and this proxy is in turn used for targeting. In

community-based methods, such as the Bangladesh Food-For-Education program (Galasso and

Ravallion, 2005) and the Albanian Economic Support safety net program (Alderman, 2002), the

government allows the community or some part of it (e.g. local leaders) to select the

beneficiaries. Both methods aim to address the problem of unobservable incomes: in the PMTs,

the presumption is that household assets and demographic characteristics are harder to conceal

from government surveyors than income; in community-based targeting, the presumption is that

wealth is harder to hide from ones’ neighbors than from the government.

       From the perspective of a central government choosing how to design a targeted transfer

program, the choice between the two approaches is generally framed as a tradeoff between the

better information that communities might have versus the risk of elite capture in the community



                                                                                                 2
process. By focusing on assets, the PMTs aim to capture the permanent component of

consumption. In the process, however, they miss out on transitory or recent shocks. For example,

a family might have fallen into poverty because one of its members has fallen ill and cannot

work, but because the family has a large house, the PMT may still classify it as non-poor.

Neighbors, on the other hand, might know the family’s true economic situation, either from

spending time with them or by merely observing the way they live (e.g. the way they dress, what

they buy).1 If the community perceives that the PMT gets it wrong, political instability and a lack

of legitimacy may ensue.2

         However, while community targeting allows the use of better local information, it also

opens up the possibility that targeting decisions may be based on a wide range of factors beyond

poverty as defined by the government. This may be due to genuine disagreements about what

“poverty” means: the utility function used by the central government to evaluate households

might be based only on consumption (i.e., the government allocates transfers to maximize Ug=Σ

λgi uig (c)), whereas the utility function used by local communities may include other factors,

such as a household’s earning potential or its number of dependants (i.e., the community

maximizes Uc= Σλciuc i(c,X)). Or the weights may be different (λg ≠ λc). In general, it is possible

that the community’s decision process actually results in outcomes that are closer to what the

government really wants (which is to maximize Σ λgi ui (c) where ui (c) is the true utility function

that the government does not observe) than the government could achieve by maximizing Ug.

However, the community process could also favor friends and relatives of the villages elites (in

which case, the outcome could be worse than either maximizing Ug or maximizing Σ λgi ui (c)).


1
  Seabright (1996) makes the theoretical argument that greater local information is one of the advantages of the
community methods. Alderman (2002) and Galasso and Ravallion (2005) provide empirical evidence that
communities may have additional information beyond the PMTs.
2
  See, for example, “Data Penerima BLT di Semarang Membingungkan” (BLT Beneficiary List in Semarang
Confuses)” Kompas (5/15/08), “Old data disrupts cash aid delivery,” Jakarta Post (9/6/08); “Poorest still waiting for
cash aid,” Jakarta Post (6/24/08); “Thousands protest fuel plan, cash assistance,” Jakarta Post (5/22/08).


                                                                                                                    3
         Given the tradeoffs involved, which method works best is ultimately an empirical

question. If elite capture of community targeting is empirically important, then the PMT could

dominate community targeting either based on the government’s consumption-based metric or a

more holistic welfare metric, since the PMT limits the opportunity for capture. If better local

information is empirically important, then community targeting could dominate the PMT on both

of these metrics. If a different local conception of welfare is empirically important, then the PMT

may best match the government’s consumption-based metric, while community targeting may

work best based on alternative welfare metrics.3

         To investigate these tradeoffs, we conducted a field experiment in 640 villages in

Indonesia in collaboration with the government. In each village, the government implemented a

cash transfer program that sought to distribute 30,000 Rupiah (about $3) to households that fell

below location-specific poverty lines. In a randomly selected one-third of the villages, the

government conducted PMT to target the poor (“PMT Method”). In another third of these

villages, once again chosen at random, it employed community-based targeting (“Community

Method”). Specifically, the community members were asked to rank everyone from richest to

poorest during a meeting, and this ranking determined eligibility. In the remaining villages, a

hybrid of the two methods was used (“Hybrid Method”): communities engaged in the ranking

exercise, and then the ranks were used to limit the universe of individuals whom the government

would survey. Eligibility was then determined by conducting PMT on this limited list. This

hybrid method aimed to utilize the communities’ knowledge, while at the same time using the

3
  Existing evidence is summarized by Coady, Grosh and Hoddinott (2004), who conduct a meta-analysis of 111
targeted anti-poverty programs in 47 countries, including 7 PMTs and 14 cases of community-based targeting. They
find no difference in the performance of these two models, as measured by the fraction of total targeted resources
that went to the bottom 40 percent. This may be due, in part, to the small sample sizes in these studies. Moreover, at
least two sources of opposing bias may be present. First, the authors suggest that community targeting is often
chosen when state capacity is limited and the community functions well together. In such places, the PMT would
have fared worse had it been tried. Second, the authors suggest that many relatively small projects have used the
community model, but fail to systematically report data. As such, the included examples of community-based
targeting tend to be bigger and, potentially, better run than the average. These two types of biases in existing studies
suggest that comparing PMT and community targeting in the same setting is an open empirical question.


                                                                                                                       4
PMT as a check on potential elite capture. The total number of beneficiaries in each village was

pre-determined and held constant all three treatment groups.

        We begin by evaluating the methods from the perspective of the central government.

More specifically, we evaluate which method best targeted the poor according to the central

government’s welfare function (i.e., consumption-based poverty) and which method produced

the highest satisfaction with the beneficiary list.4 To measure targeting accuracy, we conducted a

baseline survey that collected per capita expenditure data from a set of households prior to the

experiment and then defined a household as poor if it fell below the common PPP$2 per day

cutoff. We find that both the community and hybrid methods perform worse than the PMT: in

both methods, there was a 3 percentage point (10 percent) increase in mis-targeting rates relative

to the PMT. However, the community-based strategies actually do as well (if not better) at

finding the very poor – those with consumption below PPP$1 per day.

        Despite the worse targeting outcomes, the community methods resulted in higher

satisfaction levels and greater legitimacy of the process along all dimensions that we considered.

For example, community targeting resulted in 60 percent fewer complaints than the PMT, and

there were many fewer reports of difficulties in distributing the actual funds in the community

treatment villages. When asked ex-post about the targeting process, the community treatment

villages suggested fewer modifications to the beneficiary list and reported being much more

satisfied with the process.

        To understand why the community methods exhibit these differences from the PMT, we

examine several explanations: elite capture, the role of community effort, local concepts of

poverty beyond per-capita expenditure, and local information about poverty.

        To test for elite capture in the community treatment, we randomly divided the community

4
  Note that the Indonesian government’s definition of poverty is based on the cost of a food and non-food bundle
typical for the poor in attaining basic minimum needs.


                                                                                                                   5
and hybrid villages so that, in half of these villages, everyone in the community was invited to

participate in the ranking meeting, whereas in the other half, only the “elites” (i.e. local

community leaders such as the sub-village head, teachers, religious leaders, etc.) were invited. In

addition, we gathered data in the baseline survey on which households were related to the local

elites. We find no evidence of elite capture. The mis-targeting rates were the same, regardless of

whether only the elites attended the meeting. Moreover, we find no evidence that households that

are related to the elites are more likely to receive funds in the community treatments relative to

the PMT. In fact, we find the opposite: in the community treatments, elites and their relatives are

much less likely to be put on the beneficiary list, regardless of their actual income levels.

       To examine the role of effort, we randomized the order in which households were

considered at the meetings. This allows us to test whether the effectiveness of community

targeting differs between those households that were ranked first (when the community members

were still full of energy) and those ranked last (when fatigue may have set in). We find evidence

that effort matters: at the start of the community meeting, targeting performance is better than in

the PMT, but it worsens as the meeting proceeds.

       To examine the role of preferences and information, we created and studied alternative

metrics of evaluating perceptions of poverty in our baseline survey. First, we asked every survey

respondent to rank a set of randomly chosen villagers from rich to poor (“survey ranks”).

Second, we asked the head of the sub-village to conduct the same exercise. Finally, and perhaps

most importantly, we asked each household we interviewed to subjectively assess its own

welfare level. We find that the community treatment produces a ranking of villagers that is much

more correlated with these three alternate metrics than the ranking produced by PMT. In other

words, the community treatments moved the targeting outcomes away from a ranking based




                                                                                                      6
purely on per-capita consumption and towards the rankings one would obtain by polling different

classes of villagers or by asking villagers to rate themselves.

       There are two ways of explaining these findings: either the community has less

information about different household’s per-capita consumption than the PMT, or the

community’s conception of poverty is different from that based solely on per-capita

consumption. The evidence suggests that the latter theory is what is predominantly driving the

results. First, the correlation of the self-assessments with the survey ranks is higher than the

correlation of the self-assessments with per-capita consumption. Thus, in assessing their own

poverty, individuals (who presumably have complete information about their own poverty) use a

welfare metric that looks more like what community members use to assess each other than their

own per-capita consumption. Second, the survey ranks from when community members rank

each other contain information about those villagers’ per-capita consumption, even controlling

for all variables in the PMT; i.e. the community has residual information about consumption

beyond the PMT. Finally, when we investigate how the survey ranks differ from consumption,

we find that communities place greater weight on factors that predict earnings capacity than

would be implied simply by per-capita consumption. For example, conditional on actual per

capita consumption levels, the communities consider widowed households poorer than the

typical household. The fact that communities employ a different concept of poverty explains why

community targeting performance might differ from the PMT, as well as why the community

targeting might result in greater satisfaction levels.

       The paper proceeds as follows. We discuss the empirical design in Section II, and we

describe the data in Section III. In Section IV, we compare how each of the main targeting

methods fared in identifying the poor. Section V tests for evidence of elite capture, while Section

VI aims to understand the role of effort. In Section VII, we test whether the community and the



                                                                                                   7
government have different maximands. Section VIII explores the differences in the community’s

maximand in greater depth. Section IX concludes.

II. Experimental Design and Data
II.A. Setting
This project occurred in Indonesia, which is home to one of the largest targeted cash transfer

programs in the developing world, the Direct Cash Assistance (Bantuan Langsung Tunai, or

BLT) program. Launched in 2005, the BLT program provides transfers of about US $10 per

month to about 19.2 million households. The targeting in this program was accomplished

through a combination of community-based methods and proxy-means tests. Specifically,

Central Statistics Bureau (Badan Pusat Statistik, or BPS) enumerators met with village leaders to

create a list of households who could potentially qualify for the program. The BPS enumerators

then conducted an asset survey and a PMT only for the listed households.

        Targeting has been identified by policymakers as one of the key problems in the BLT

program. Using the common PPP$2 per day poverty threshold, the World Bank estimates that 45

percent of the funds were mis-targeted to non-poor households and 47 percent of the poor were

excluded from the program in 2005-2006 (World Bank, 2006).5 Perhaps more worrisome from

the government’s perspective is the fact that citizens voiced substantial dissatisfaction with the

beneficiary lists. Protests about mis-targeting led some village leaders to resign rather than

defend the beneficiary lists to their constituents.6 In fact, over 2,000 village officials refused to

participate in the program for this reason.7 The experiment reported in this paper was designed

and conducted in collaboration with BPS to investigate the two primary targeting issues:


5
  Targeting inaccuracy has been documented in many government anti-poverty programs that offer subsidized rice,
basic commodities, health insurance, and scholarships for poor households. See, for example, Olken (2006); Daly
and Fane (2002); Cameron (2002); and Conn, Duflo, Dupas, Kremer and Ozier (2008).
6
  See for example: “BLT Bisa Munculkan Konflik Baru” (BLT May Create New Conflicts), Kompas (5/17/08), and
“Kepala Desa Trauma BLT” (A Village Head’s Trauma with BLT) Kompas (5/24/08).
7
  See for example: “Ribuan Perangkat Desa Tolak Salurkan BLT” (Thousands of Village Officials Refuse to
Distribute BLT), Kompas 5/22/08 and “DPRD Indramayu Tolak BLT,” (Village Parliament of Indramayu Refuses
BLT), Kompas, 5/24/08.


                                                                                                                  8
improving targeting performance and increasing popular acceptance of the targeting results.

II.B. Sample
The sample for the experiment consists of 640 sub-villages spread across three Indonesian

provinces: North Sumatra, South Sulawesi, and Central Java. The provinces were chosen to

represent a broad spectrum of Indonesia’s diverse geography and ethnic makeup. Within these

three provinces, we randomly selected a total of 640 villages, stratifying the sample to consist of

approximately 30 percent urban and 70 percent rural locations.8 For each village, we obtained a

list of the smallest administrative unit within it (a dusun in North Sumatra and Rukun Tetangga

(RT) in South Sulawesi and Central Java), and randomly selected one of these sub-villages for

the experiment. These sub-village units are best thought of as neighborhoods. Each sub-village

contains an average of 54 households and has an elected or appointed administrative head, whom

we refer to as the sub-village head.

II.C. Experimental Design
In each sub-village, the Central Statistics Bureau (BPS) and Mitra Samya, an Indonesian NGO,

implemented an unconditional cash transfer program, where beneficiary households would

receive a one-time, Rp. 30,000 (about $3) cash transfer. The amount of the transfer is equal to

about 10 percent of the median beneficiary’s monthly per-capita consumption, or a little more

than one day’s wage for an average laborer.9

         Each sub-village was randomly allocated to one of the three targeting treatments that are

described in detail below.10 The number of households that would receive the transfer was set in


8
  An additional constraint was applied to the district of Serdang Bedagai because it had particularly large-sized sub-
villages. All villages in this district with average populations above 100 households per sub-village were excluded.
In addition, five of the originally-selected villages were replaced prior to the randomization due to an inability to
reach households during the baseline survey, the village head’s refusal to participate, or a conflict.
9
  While the amount of the transfer is substantially smaller than in the national BLT program (which distributed Rp.
100,000 per month), the amount is substantial enough that poor households would want to receive it. In fact, in
September 2008, more than twenty people were killed during a stampede involving thousands when a local wealthy
person offered to give out charity of Rp. 30,000 per person (Kompas, 9/15/08).
10
   Administrative costs of the three programs were $65 per village for the community targeting, $146 for the PMT,
and $166 for the hybrid. Including the value of the community members’ time, the cost of the community targeting


                                                                                                                    9
advance through a geographical targeting approach, which was applied identically in all villages

such that the fraction of households in a sub-village that would receive the subsidy was held

constant, on average, across the treatments. We then observed how each treatment selected the

set of beneficiaries.

         After the beneficiaries were finalized, the funds were distributed. To publicize the

beneficiary lists, the program staff posted two copies of the list in visible locations such as

roadside food stalls, mosques/churches, or the sub-village head’s house. They also placed a

suggestion box and a stack of complaint cards next to the list, along with a reminder about the

program details and the complaint process. Depending on the sub-village head’s preference, the

cash distribution could occur either through door-to-door handouts or by gathering the recipients

at a central location. After at least three days, the program staff collected the suggestion box.

Main Treatment 1: PMT
In the PMT treatment, the government created formulas that mapped easily observable

household characteristics into a single index using regression techniques. Specifically, it created

a list of 49 indicators similar to those used in Indonesia’s registration of the poor in 2008,

encompassing the household’s home attributes (wall type, roof type, etc.), assets (TV, motorbike,

etc.), household composition, and household head’s education and occupation. Using pre-

existing survey data, the government estimated the relationship between these variables and

household per-capita consumption.11 While it collected the same set of indicators in all regions,

the government estimated district-specific formulas due to the high variance in the best

predictors of poverty across districts. On average, these PMT regressions had an R2 value of 0.48

(Appendix Table 1).

was $110, the cost of the PMT was $153, and the cost of the hybrid is $213. The high cost of targeting in the
community and hybrid methods was due in part to high fixed costs of setting up the targeting systems; we expect the
administrative costs to fall if the methods were scaled up.
11
  Data from Indonesia’s SUSENAS (2007) and World Bank’s Urban Poverty Project (2007) datasets were used to
determine the weights on the PMT formula.


                                                                                                                10
         Government enumerators collected these indicators from all households in the PMT

villages by conducting a door-to-door survey. These data were then used to calculate a computer-

generated poverty score for each household using the district-specific PMT formula. A list of

beneficiaries was generated by selecting the pre-determined number of households with the

lowest PMT scores in each sub-village.

Main Treatment 2: Community Targeting
In the community treatment, the sub-village residents determine the list of beneficiaries through

a poverty-ranking exercise. To start, a local facilitator visited each sub-village, informed the sub-

village head about the program, and set a date for a community meeting. The meeting dates were

set several days in advance to allow the facilitator and sub-village head sufficient time to

publicize the meeting. Facilitators made door-to-door household visits in order to encourage

attendance. On average, 45 percent of households attended the meeting.

         At the meeting, the facilitator first explained the program. Next, he displayed a list of all

households in the sub-village (from the baseline survey), and asked the attendees to correct the

list if necessary. The facilitator then spent 15 minutes having the community brainstorm a list of

characteristics that differentiate the poor households from the wealthy ones in their community.12

         The facilitator then proceeded with the ranking exercise using a set of randomly-ordered

index cards that displayed the names of each household in the sub-village. He hung a string from

wall to wall, with one end labeled as “most well-off” (paling mampu) and the other side labeled

as “poorest” (paling miskin). Then, he presented the first two name cards from the randomly-

ordered stack to the community and asked, “Which of these two households is better off?” Based

on the community’s response, he attached the cards along the string, with the poorer household

placed closer to the “poorest” end. Next, he displayed the third card and asked how this


12
  These characteristics or criteria were not used explicitly in the ranking; they were instead used to help
communities think about how they would differentiate households while making the ranking decisions.


                                                                                                              11
household ranked relative to the first two households. The activity continued with the facilitator

placing each card one-by-one on the string until all the households had been ranked.13 By and

large, the community reached a consensus on the ranks.14 Before the final ranking was recorded,

the facilitator read the ranking aloud so adjustments could be made if necessary.

         After all meetings were complete, the facilitators were provided with “beneficiary

quotas” for each sub-village based on the geographic targeting procedure. Households ranked

below the quota were deemed eligible. Note that prior to the ranking exercise, facilitators told the

meeting attendees that the quotas were predetermined by the government, and that all households

who were ranked below this quota would receive the transfer. Facilitators also emphasized that

the government would not interfere with the community’s ranking.

Main Treatment 3: Hybrid
The hybrid method combines the community ranking procedure with a subsequent PMT

verification. In this method, the ranking exercise, described above, was implemented first.

However, there was one key difference: at the start of these meetings, the facilitator announced

that the lowest-ranked households, those ranked 1.5 times below the “beneficiary quotas,” would

be independently checked by government enumerators before the list was finalized.

         After the community meetings were complete, government enumerators visited the

lowest-ranked households to collect the data needed to calculate their PMT score. Beneficiary

lists were then determined using the PMT formulas. Thus, it was possible, for example, that

some households could become beneficiaries even if they were ranked as slightly wealthier than

the beneficiary quota cutoff line on the community list (and vice versa).

13
   When at least 10 households had been ranked, the facilitator began comparing each card to the middle card (or if it
was higher than the middle card, to the 75th percentile card), and so on, in order to speed up the process.
14
   If the community did not know a household or if the household’s status could not be decided upon, the facilitator
and several community members visited the household after the meeting and then added it to the rank list based on
the information gained from the visit. In practice, only 2 of the 431 community or hybrid villages had any
households that could not be ranked at the meetings (19 out of 67 households at one meeting, all of whom were
boarders at a boarding house, and 5 out of 36 households at the second meeting.).



                                                                                                                   12
       The hybrid treatment aims to take advantage of the relative benefits of both methods.

First, as compared to the community method, the hybrid method’s additional PMT verification

phase may limit elite capture. Second, in the hybrid method, the community is incentivized to

accurately rank the poorest households at the bottom of the list, as richer households would later

be eliminated by the PMT. Third, as compared to the PMT treatment, the hybrid method’s use of

the community rankings to narrow the set of households that need to be surveyed may be

potentially more cost-effective, in light of the fewer household visits required.

Community Sub-Treatments
We designed several sub-treatments in order to test three hypotheses about why the results from

the community process might differ from those that resulted from the PMT treatment: elite

capture, community effort, and within-community heterogeneity in preferences.

       First, to test for elite capture, we randomly assigned the community and hybrid sub-

villages to two groups: a “whole community” sub-treatment and an “elite” sub-treatment. In

“whole community” villages, the facilitators actively recruited all community members to

participate in the ranking. In the “elite” villages, meeting attendance was restricted to no more

than seven invitees that were chosen by the sub-village head. Inviting at least one woman was

mandatory and there was some pressure to invite individuals who are usually involved in village

decision-making, such as religious leaders or school teachers. The elite meetings are smaller and

hence easier to organize and run. Moreover, the elites may have the legitimacy needed (and

possibly even better information) to make difficult choices. However, the danger of the elite

meetings is that the elites will use their influence to funnel aid to their friends and family

(Bardhan and Mookherjee, 2005).

       Second, we introduced two treatments to investigate whether the efficacy of the

community approach is limited by the ability or willingness of the community to put in the effort

needed to make accurate community rankings. First, the order in which households were ranked


                                                                                                    13
was randomized in order to compare the accuracy at the start and the end of the meeting.15 The

ranking procedure is tedious: on average, it took 1.68 hours for the community to complete the

rankings. For a community with the mean number of households (54), even an optimal sorting

algorithm would require making 6 pair-wise comparisons by the time the last card was placed. It

is thus plausible that towards the end of the longer meetings, the community members may be

too tired to rank accurately. Second, in half of the meetings, the facilitator led an exercise to

identify the ten poorest households in the sub-village before the ranking exercise began (“10

poorest treatment”). If effort is important, this treatment should increase accuracy by ensuring

that the poor are identified before fatigue sets in.

         The third set of hypotheses concerns the role of preferences. If the community results

differ from the PMT results because of preferences, it is important to understand whether these

preferences are broadly shared or are simply a function of who attends the meeting. Meeting

times were therefore varied in order to attract different subsets of the community. Half of the

meetings were randomly assigned to occur after 7:30 pm, when men who work during the day

could easily attend. The rest were in the afternoon, when we expected higher female attendance.

Randomization Design and Timing
We randomly assigned each of the 640 sub-villages to the treatments as follows (see Table 1). In

order to ensure experimental balance across geographic regions, we created 51 geographic strata,

where each stratum consists of all villages from one or more sub-districts (kecamatan) and is

entirely located in a single district (kabupaten).16 Then, we randomly allocated sub-villages to

one of the three main treatments (PMT, community, or hybrid), stratifying such that the

proportion of sub-villages allocated to each main treatment was identical (up to integer

15
   Any new household cards that were added to the stack during this process were ranked last due to the logistical
complexity of re-randomizing the order of the entire stack.
16
   Specifically, we first assigned each of the 68 subdistricts (kecamatan) in the sample to a unique stratum. We then
took all subdistricts with 5 or fewer sampled subdistricts and merged them with other kecamatans in the same
district, so that each of the resulting 51 strata had at least 6 sampled villages. Note that a subdistrict is the next-
highest administrative unit above a village, and consist of 5-20 villages and 15,000 – 50,000 inhabitants.


                                                                                                                     14
constraints) within each stratum. We then randomly and independently allocated each

community or hybrid sub-village to the sub-treatments, with each of these three sub-treatment

randomizations stratified by stratum and main treatment.

           From November to December 2008, an independent survey company conducted a census

in each sub-village and then collected the baseline data. The targeting treatments and the creation

of the beneficiary lists started immediately after the baseline survey was completed (December

2008 and January 2009). Fund distribution, the collection of the complaint form boxes, and

interviews with the sub-village heads occurred during February 2009. Finally, the survey

company conducted the endline survey in late February and early March 2009.

III. Data
We collected four main sources of data: a baseline household survey, household rankings

generated by the treatments, data on the community meeting process (in community/hybrid

treatments only), and data on community satisfaction. In this section, we describe the data

collection effort, and then provide summary statistics and a test of the randomization.

III.A. Baseline Data
We conducted a baseline survey in November and December 2008. The survey was administered

by SurveyMeter, an independent survey organization. At this point, there was no mention of the

experiment to households.17 We began by constructing a complete list of all households in the

sub-village. From this census, we randomly sampled eight households from each sub-village plus

the head of the sub-village, for a total sample size of 5,756 households.18 To ensure gender

balance among survey respondents, in each sub-village, households were randomized as to

whether the household head or spouse of the household head would be targeted as the primary

respondent. The survey included questions on demographics, their family networks in the sub-



17
     In fact, SurveyMeter enumerators were not told about the targeting experiment.
18
     In four of the sub-villages, there were seven respondents rather than eight due to respondent refusals.


                                                                                                               15
village, participation in community activities, relationships with local leaders, access to existing

social transfer programs, and detailed data on the households’ per capita consumption.

         The baseline survey also included a variety of measures of the household’s subjective

poverty assessments. In particular, we asked each household to rank the other eight households

surveyed in their sub-village from poorest to richest. We also asked each respondent to list the

five poorest and five richest households in the sub-village, as well as any households whom they

considered formal or informal leaders in the sub-village. To measure “elite connectedness,” we

asked respondents to identify any household in the sub-village that was related by marriage or

blood to those that they identified as poor, rich, or leaders. Finally, we asked respondents several

subjective questions to determine how they assessed their own poverty levels.

III.B. Data on treatment results
Each of our treatments – PMT, community, and hybrid – produces a rank ordering of all

households in the sub-village (“targeting rank list”). For the PMT treatment, this is the rank

ordering of the PMT score, i.e. predicted per capita expenditures. For the community treatment,

it is the ranking of households that was constructed during the community meetings. For the

hybrid treatment, it is the final ranked list (where all households that were verified are ordered

based on their PMT score, while those that were not are ordered based on their rank at the

community meeting). For all treatments, we additionally collected data on which households

actually received the transfer (i.e. which households fell below each sub-village quota).

III.C. Data on community meetings
For the community and hybrid sub-villages, we collected data on the meetings’ functioning. We

collected attendance lists, including the number of female participants.19 The facilitators

recorded the household identifiers of the ten poorest households listed in the “10 poorest


19
  The attendance form that was used in the elite sub-treatment was somewhat different than in the whole community
treatment, so we verified the attendance results by treatment using data from the endline household survey. All other
forms were identical across all sub-treatments.


                                                                                                                  16
treatment.” After each meeting, the facilitators filled out a questionnaire on their perceptions of

the community’s interest and satisfaction with the ranking exercise.

III.D. Data on community satisfaction
After the cash disbursement was complete, we collected data on the community’s satisfaction

level using four different tools: suggestion boxes, sub-village head interviews, facilitator

feedback, and household interviews. First, facilitators placed suggestion boxes in each sub-

village along with a stack of complaint cards. Each anonymous complaint card asked three

yes/no questions in a simple format: (1) Are you satisfied with the beneficiary list resulting from

this program? (2) Are there any poor households not included on the list? (3) Are there any non-

poor households included on the list? Second, on the day when suggestion boxes were collected,

the facilitators interviewed the sub-village heads and asked about complaints submitted to them

verbally.20 Sub-village heads were also asked if they were personally satisfied with the targeting

outcome. Third, each facilitator filled out feedback forms on the ease of distributing the transfer

payments. Finally, in Central Java province, SurveyMeter conducted an endline survey of three

households that were randomly chosen from the eight baseline survey households, using

questions that were similar to those asked of the sub-village head.21

III.E. Summary statistics
Table 2 provides sample statistics of the key variables. Panel A shows that average monthly per

capita expenditures are approximately Rp. 558,000 (about $50).

         Panel B provides statistics on the mis-targeting rates. By construction, about 30 percent

of the households received the cash transfer. We calculate how many households were mis-

targeted using the per capita consumption data from the baseline survey to determine eligibility.

Specifically, we calculated the per-capita consumption level in each province (separately by

20
   We intended to randomly re-assign facilitators’ designated sub-villages after the fund distribution so that no
facilitator would collect the sub-village head’s feedback from an area that he or she had already visited. While this
proved logistically impossible in North Sumatra, the re-assignment was implemented in the other provinces.
21
   Time and budget constraints prevented the possibility of surveying in North Sumatra and South Sulawesi.


                                                                                                                        17
urban and rural areas) that corresponded to the percentage of households who were supposed to

receive the transfer. This threshold level is approximately equal to the PPP$2 poverty line.22 We

defined “mis-target” to be equal to 1 if either the household’s per capita consumption was below

the threshold line and it did not receive the transfer (exclusion errors) or if it was above the

threshold line and did receive it (inclusion errors). We also calculate mis-target for subsets of the

population: those below the threshold, whom we call the “poor” (divided in half into the “very

poor,” with per-capita consumption below approximately PPP$1, and the “near poor,” with per-

capita consumption between approximately PPP$1 and PPP$2) and those above the threshold,

whom we call the “non-poor” (divided in half into “middle income” and “rich”). As shown in

Panel B, 32 percent of the households were mis-targeted. Twenty percent of the non-poor

households received it, while 53 percent of the poor were excluded. Specifically, the rich are the

least likely to be mis-targeted (14 percent), while the near poor are the most likely (59 percent).23

         Panel C provides summary statistics for several alternative metrics that can be used to

gauge targeting: the rank correlation for each sub-village between one of four different metrics of

household well-being and results of the targeting experiment (“targeting rank list”). By using

rank correlations, we can flexibly examine the relationship between the treatment outcomes and

various measures of well-being on a comparable scale. First, we compute the rank correlation

with per capita consumption, which tells us how closely the final outcome is to the government’s

metric of well-being. Second, we compute the rank correlation with the ranks provided by the

eight individual households during the baseline survey. This allows us to understand how close


22
   To see this, note that adjusting the 2005 International Price Comparison Project’s PPP-exchange rate for Indonesia
for inflation through the end of 2008 yields a PPP exchange rate of PPP$1 = Rp. 5549 (author’s calculations based
on World Bank 2008 and the Indonesian CPI). The PPP$2 per day per person poverty line therefore corresponds to
per-capita consumption of Rp. 338,000 per month. In our sample, the average threshold below which households
should have received the transfer is Rp. 320,000 per month, or almost exactly PPP$2 per day. The slight discrepancy
is due to different regional price deflators used in the geographic targeting procedure.
23
   Note that measurement error in our consumption survey means that these mis-targeting rates are likely over-
estimates of the “true” mistargeting rates. This measurement error will be identical in treatment and control,
however, so it will not affect our estimate of changes in mistargeting across treatment conditions.


                                                                                                                  18
the targeting rank list is to the community member’s individual beliefs about their fellow

community members’ well-being. Third, we compute the rank correlation with the ranks

provided by the sub-village head in the baseline survey, which does the same thing for the sub-

village head’s views. Finally, we compute the rank correlation with respondents’ self-assessment

of poverty, as reported in the baseline survey.24 This allows us to understand how closely the

treatment result matches individuals’ beliefs about their own well-being.

         While targeting rank lists are associated with consumption rankings, they are more highly

associated with the community’s rankings of well-being. While the mean rank correlation

between the targeting rank lists and the consumption rankings is 0.41, the mean correlation of the

targeting rank list with the individual community members’ ranks is 0.64, and the correlation

with the sub-village head’s ranks is 0.58. Finally, we observe a 0.40 correlation between the

ranks from the targeted lists with the individuals’ self assessments of their own poverty.

III.F. Randomization Balance Check
Before turning to the results, we first examine whether the randomization for the main treatments

appears balanced across covariates. We chose ten variables for this check prior to obtaining the

data from the experiment.25 Specifically, we examined the following characteristics from the

baseline survey: per capita expenditures, years of education of the household head, calculated

PMT score, the share of households that are agricultural, and the years of education of the sub-

village head. We also examined five village characteristics from the 2008 PODES, a census of

villages conducted by BPS: log number of households, distance to district center in kilometers,

log size of the village in hectares, the number of religious buildings per household, and the

number of primary schools per household. We present the results from this analysis in Table 3.

24
   Specifically, each household was asked “Please imagine a six-step ladder where on the bottom (the first step) stand
the poorest people and on the highest step (the sixth step) stand the richest people. On which step are you today?”
Each respondent responded with a number from 1 to 6, and we use the rank of this response among respondents in a
village in computing the rank correlation.
25
   In fact, we specified and documented all of the main regressions in the paper before examining the data (April 3,
2009). The document is available from the authors upon request.


                                                                                                                   19
In Columns 1, 2, and 3, we present the mean of each variable for the sub-villages assigned to the

PMT, community, and hybrid treatments, respectively. Standard deviations are listed below the

means in brackets. We present the difference in means between the community and the PMT

groups in Column 4, between the hybrid and the PMT in Column 5, and between the hybrid and

the community in Column 6. In Columns 7 – 9, we replicate the analysis shown in Columns 4-6,

but additionally control for stratum fixed effects. Robust standard errors are shown in

parentheses in Columns 4 – 9. All variables are aggregated to the sub-village level; thus each

regression includes 640 observations. In the final row of Table 3, we provide the p-value of a test

of joint significance of the difference across each of the outcome variables.

       The sub-villages appear to be generally well-balanced across the ten characteristics. Out

of the sixty individual differences presented, three are statistically significant at the 5 percent

level – precisely what one would expect from random chance. All of these significant differences

are in Column 9, which compares the community and hybrid methods, controlling for stratum

fixed effects. Specifically, controlling for stratum fixed effects, households in community

locations have less education and are less likely to be agriculturists than households in the hybrid

treatment, and hybrid villages have 8 percent fewer households than community villages.

Looking at the joint significance tests across all ten variables considered, without stratum fixed

effects, the only jointly significant difference is between the hybrid and the community (Column

6, p-value 0.089); with stratum fixed effects (Column 9), the p-value is 0.028. All results in this

paper are robust to specifications that include these additional ten control variables.

IV. Results on Targeting Performance and Satisfaction
We begin by evaluating the treatments from the government’s perspective. Specifically, we

examine (1) how the treatments performed in terms of targeting the poor based on per-capita

consumption, the metric the government uses to assess poverty, and (2) how the treatments

performed in terms of satisfaction with and legitimacy of the targeting results.


                                                                                                      20
IV.A. Targeting performance based on per-capita consumption
We begin by comparing how the different targeting methods performed based on per-capita

consumption levels, the metric of poverty used by the government. Specifically, as discussed

above we compute location-specific poverty lines based on the PPP$2 per day consumption

threshold, and then classify a household as mis-targeted if its per capita consumption levels is

below the poverty line and it was not chosen as a beneficiary, or if it was above the poverty line

and it was identified as a recipient (MISTARGETivk). We then examine which method

minimized mis-targeting by estimating the following equation using OLS:

         MISTARGETivk= α + β1COMMUNITYivk + β2HYBRIDivk + γk + εivk                                                (1)

where i represents a household, v represents a sub-village, k represents a stratum, and γk are

stratum fixed effects.26 Note that the PMT treatment is the omitted category, so β1 and β2 are

interpretable as the impact of the community and the hybrid treatments relative to the PMT

treatment. Since the targeting methods were assigned at the sub-village level, the standard errors

are clustered to allow for arbitrary correlation within a sub-village.

         The results, shown in Table 4, indicate that the PMT method outperforms both the

community and hybrid treatment in terms of the mis-target rate that is based on consumption.

Under the PMT, 30 percent of the households are mis-targeted (Column 1).27 Both the

community and hybrid methods increase the mis-targeting rate by about 3 percentage points —or

about 10 percent— relative to the PMT method (significant at the ten percent level).28


26
   For simplicity of interpretation, we use OLS / linear probability models for all dependent variables in Table 4.
Using a probit model for the binary dependent variables produces the same signs of the results, and the same levels
of statistical significance.
27
   Fluctuations in consumption between the date of the baseline survey and that of targeting could lead to
overinflated mistargeting rates. To minimize this, we ensured that the targeting quickly followed the baseline
survey: the average time lapse was only 44 days. We also ensured that the time elapsed between the baseline survey
and the targeting was orthogonal to the treatment. Appendix Table 2 also shows that the time between survey and
targeting date has no effect empirically on the mis-targeting rates, and that the interaction of time elapsed with the
treatment dummies is never significant.
28
   The community treatment provides a relative ranking of households; it does not provide any indication of the
absolute level of poverty. As a result, we chose the fraction of households in each sub-village that would become
beneficiaries of the program through geographic targeting. For consistency, we use the geographic targeting across


                                                                                                                    21
         Adding a rich household to the list may have different welfare implications than adding a

household that is just above the poverty line. To examine this, Figure 1 graphs the log per capita

consumption distribution of the beneficiaries (left panel) and non-beneficiaries (right panel) for

each targeting treatment. The vertical lines in the graphs indicate the PPP$1 and PPP$2 per day

poverty lines. Overall, the graphs confirm that all methods select relatively poorer households:

for all methods the mode per-capita consumption for beneficiaries is below PPP$2 per day,

whereas it is above PPP$2 per day for non-beneficiaries.

         Examining the impact of the treatments, the left panel shows that the consumption

distribution of beneficiaries derived from the PMT is centered to the left of the distribution under

the community and hybrid methods. Thus, on average, the PMT identifies poorer individuals.

However, the community methods select a greater percentage of beneficiaries whose log daily

per-capita consumption is less than PPP$1 (the leftmost part of the distribution). Thus, the

figures suggest that despite doing worse on average, the community methods may capture more

of the very poor. Moreover, the figures suggest that all three methods contain similar proportions

of richer individuals (with log income greater than about 6.5). The difference in mis-targeting

across the three treatments is driven by differences in the near poor (PPP$1 to PPP$2) and the

middle income group (those above the PPP$2 poverty line, but with log income less than 6.5).

         We more formally examine the findings from Figure 1 in the remaining columns of Table

4. In Columns 2 and 3, we examine mis-targeting separately for the poor and the non-poor. In

Columns 4 and 5, we disaggregate the non-poor into rich and middle, and in Columns 6 and 7,

we disaggregate the poor by splitting them into near poor and very poor. The results confirm that

much of the difference in the error rate between the community methods and the PMT occurs


all three treatments. However, by imposing this constraint on the PMT, we do not take full advantage of the fact that
the PMT provides absolute measures of poverty. Taking advantage of this information, the error in the PMT is
further reduced by 3-percentage points. Thus, the full-information PMT would perform 6-percentage points (or 20
percent) better that the community methods in selecting the poor. This analysis is available upon request.


                                                                                                                   22
near the cutoff for inclusion. Specifically, the community and hybrid methods are respectively

6.7 and 5.2 percentage points more likely to misclassify the middle non-poor (Column 5, both

statistically significant at 5 percent). They are also more likely to misclassify the near poor by

4.9 and 3.1 percentage points, respectively, although these results are not individually

statistically significant. In contrast, we observe much less difference between the PMT and

community methods for the rich and the very poor, and in fact the point estimate suggests that

the community method may actually do better among the very poor.29

         In Column 8, we examine the average per capita consumption of beneficiaries across the

three groups. As expected, given that the community treatment selects more of the very poor and

also selects more individuals who are just above the PPP$2 poverty line, the average per capita

consumption of beneficiaries is not substantially different between the various treatments. This

suggests that even though the community treatments are more likely to mis-target the poor as

defined by the PPP$2 cutoff, the welfare implications of the three methods appear similar based

on the consumption metric.30

         To end this sub-section we explore the heterogeneity in the results along several key sub-

village characteristics.31 First, we examine whether the community methods do worse in urban

areas, where individuals may not know their neighbors as well. Our sample was specifically

stratified along this dimension. Second, we hypothesized that the community methods may work

better in areas with higher inequality, where inequality is defined as the range between the 20th

and the 80th percentile per capita consumption levels, since greater inequality implies that the


29
   In results not reported in the table, we find that the difference in the community treatment’s impact on mis-
targeting rates between the very poor and the non-poor is statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
30
   To maximize social welfare, the targeting method should select households with the highest average marginal
utility. If utility is quadratic in per-capita consumption, marginal utility is exactly equal to per-capita consumption,
so the regression in column (8) shows that there are no difference in average marginal utility across the three
treatments based on this metric. In results not reported in the table, we have also confirmed that the average
marginal utility of beneficiaries is the same across treatments using alternate specifications for the utility function as
well, including CRRA utility with ρ = 1 (log), 2, 3, 4, and 5.
31
   Note that we specified these hypotheses regarding the heterogeneity of the treatment prior to obtaining the data.


                                                                                                                        23
rich and poor are more sharply differentiated. Third, we hypothesized that in areas where many

people are related to one other by blood or marriage, they have more information about their

neighbors, so the community method should work better. The results are presented in Appendix

Table 3. There was less mis-targeting in the community treatment (relative to the PMT) in urban

areas, in areas with high inequality, and in areas where many households are related. However,

these effects are not significant at conventional levels.

IV.B. Satisfaction
In Table 5, we study the impacts of the treatments on the communities’ satisfaction levels and

the legitimacy of the targeting. Panel A presents data from the endline household survey. Panel B

presents data from the follow-up survey of sub-village heads. Panel C presents the results from

the anonymous comment box, the community’s complaints to the village head, and the facilitator

comments on the ease of distributing the transfer payments.32

        The results from the endline survey (Panel A) show that individuals are much more

satisfied with the community treatment than with the PMT or hybrid treatments. For example, in

the community treatment, respondents wish to make fewer changes to the beneficiary list; they

would prefer to add about one-third fewer households to the list of beneficiaries (Column 4) and

subtract about one-half as many households (Column 5) than in the PMT or the hybrid

treatments. Individuals in the community treatment are more likely to report that the method

used was appropriate (Column 1) and are also more likely to state that they are satisfied with the

program (Column 2). A joint test of the dependent variables in Panel A indicates that the

community treatment differences are jointly statistically significant (p-value < 0.001).

        Sub-village heads are also much more satisfied (Panel B). The sub-village head was 38

percentage points more likely to say that the targeting method was appropriate when community-

32
  For simplicity of interpretation, we use OLS/linear probability models for all dependent variables in Table 5.
Using ordered probit for categorical response variables and probit for binary dependent variables produces the same
signs of the results, and the same levels of statistical significance.


                                                                                                                 24
based targeting was used and 17 percentage points less likely to name any households that

should be added to the list.

         The higher levels of satisfaction were manifested in fewer complaints (Panel C). There

were on average 1.09 fewer complaints in the comment box for the community treatment sub-

villages relative to the PMT sub-villages, and 0.55 fewer complaints in the hybrid sub-villages

relative to the PMT (Column 2). The sub-village head also reported receiving 2.68 and 2.01

fewer complaints in the community and hybrid treatment, respectively (Column 3).

         The higher satisfaction levels in the community treatment led to a smoother disbursal

process. First, the facilitators who distributed the cash payment were 4-6 percentage points less

likely to experience difficulties while doing so in sub-villages assigned to the community or

hybrid method (Panel C, Column 4). Second, the sub-village heads had a choice of how the

facilitator would conduct the disbursals: they could do so in an open community meeting or, if

the head felt that they would encounter problems in the village, the facilitator could distribute the

transfer door-to-door. Facilitators were 8 percentage points more likely to distribute the cash in

an open meeting in the sub-villages assigned to the community treatment (Panel D, Column 5).

They were also 5 percentage points more likely to do so in sub-villages that were assigned to the

hybrid treatment, but this result is not significant at conventional levels.33



33
  An important question is whether these differences in satisfaction represent changes from the act of directly
participating in the process (as in Olken (forthcoming)), from knowing that some local process was followed, or
from changes in the final listing of beneficiaries. Two pieces of evidence shed light on this question. First, we find
no differences in our measures of satisfaction between the whole community treatments (when 48 percent of
households attended the meeting) and elite community treatments (when only 17.6 percent of households attended
the meeting). This finding suggests that it is either differences in the list or knowing that some type of local process
was followed that drives the differences in satisfaction. Second, we computed an approximate PMT score for each
individual who was surveyed in the baseline, regardless of treatment, and then we computed the rank correlation
between this score and the targeting rank list that resulted from the experiment. This gives us a measure of how
close the community’s list would “match” the PMT. We also created a dummy variable that indicates a high
correlation between these two measures, and interacted this variable with the community and hybrid treatments.
There is no discernable difference across the different satisfaction measures; this implies that the higher satisfaction
that was observed in the community treatment was not affected by the degree to which the community’s list would
match the PMT. Thus, this suggests that knowing that some type of local process was followed seems to drive the
satisfaction levels. These tables were omitted for brevity, but are available from the authors upon request.


                                                                                                                      25
IV.C Understanding the differences between PMT and community targeting
The findings present an interesting puzzle. The results on mis-targeting suggest that the

community-based methods actually do somewhat worse at identifying the poor. However, the

community method results in much greater satisfaction among both citizens and the sub-village

head. The following sections explore alternative explanations of why the PMT and the

community methods differ: elite capture, community effort problems, heterogeneity in

preferences within the villages, and differences in information.

V. Elite Capture
Community-based targeting may involve a tradeoff: it allows the government to make use of

local knowledge, but it also potentially opens the door for elite capture. To the extent that elites

have different social welfare weights from the community as a whole (λe ≠ λc), greater elite

control over the process should lead to more resources being directed at those households with

high λe and worse overall targeting performance. The increased latitude for elite capture is one

potential explanation for why the community targeting fared worse than the PMT.

       We test for elite capture by examining the community sub-treatments that vary the level

of elite control. Specifically, we would expect less elite capture in the hybrid treatment, where

there is ex-post verification of the community’s ranking. We would also expect more elite

capture in the elite sub-treatment, when only elite members were invited to participate in the

rankings. We start by re-estimating equation (1), including a dummy for the ELITE sub-

treatment and, in some specifications, the interaction of ELITE and HYBRID. The results are

presented in Table 6.

       We first verify that the treatment had an impact on meeting attendance. Columns 1 and 2

calculate the attendance rate using data collected at the meeting, while Columns 3 and 4 calculate




                                                                                                       26
it using the data from the endline household survey.34 Both measures confirm that the whole

community meetings were substantially better attended than the elite-only meetings. For

example, the survey data (Column 3) show that 48 percent of households attended the targeting

meetings in the whole community treatment, compared to 18 percent in the elite sub-treatment.

         Despite these differences in attendance, the mis-targeting rate for the elite treatment was

not significantly different than for the whole community treatment (Column 5 of Table 6). In

Column 6, we examine the interaction of elite and hybrid. We would expect less elite capture in

hybrid treatment, where the government verifies the results. In fact, if anything we find more

mis-targeting in the hybrid methods when only the elites are invited.

         Overall, while the whole community meetings were more inclusive than the “elite”

meetings, it does not appear that the presence of the full community affected the degree of elite

capture. However, while the evidence presented in Table 6 is consistent with no elite capture, it

is also consistent with the elite dominating the whole community meetings, leading to the result

that both types of meetings reflect their preferences.35 To test this, we examine whether the elites

and their relatives (those with high λe) were more likely to be selected in both the whole

community and elite meetings relative to the PMT in Table 7. Specifically, we estimate the

following equation:

MISTARGETivk= α + β1COMMUNITYivk + β2 HYBRIDivk + β3 ELITEivk + β4 CONNivk + β5

(COMMUNITYivk × CONNivk)+ β6 (HYBRIDivk × CONNivk) + β7 (ELITEivk × CONNivk) + γk + εivk                           (2)




34
   Since the data in columns 1 and 2 come from the actual meetings, they are only available for the community and
hybrid treatments. Since the data in columns 3 and 4 come from questions about generic targeting meetings, it is
possible to report having attended a meeting (such as a meeting during the socialization of the program or a meeting
about another targeted related activity) even though our project held no ranking meeting in their villages.
35
   This second story seems unlikely: the facilitators report that a few individuals dominated the conversation in only
15 percent of the meetings, and that otherwise the meetings were a full community affair.


                                                                                                                    27
where CONNivk is an indicator that equals one if the household is related to any of the sub-village

leaders/elites, or is one of the leaders themselves.36 Columns 1 and 2 examine the mis-targeting

rate as the dependent variable, and columns 3 and 4 examine whether a household received the

transfer as the dependent variable. We find little evidence of elite capture. In fact, the point

estimates suggest the opposite: the elite connected households are less likely to be mis-targeted

in the community and elite treatments, although the effect is not significant at conventional

levels. In fact, we find that elites are actually penalized in the community meetings: elites and

their relatives are about 6.7 to 7.8 percent less likely to be on the beneficiary list in the

community meetings relative to PMT meetings (Columns 3 and 4).37

         Overall, these findings suggest that the reason that the mis-targeting is worse under the

community method is not due to increased elite capture of the community process.

VI. Problems with Community Effort
The community-based ranking process requires human effort to make each comparison. For

example, ranking 75 households would require making at least 363 pair-wise comparisons.38 One

might imagine that the worse targeting in the community methods could result simply from

fatigue as the ranking exercise progresses. We introduced two treatments to investigate the role

of effort: randomization of the order in which the ranking happened and the 10 poorest treatment.


36
   Specifically, we defined an “elite connected” household as any household where 1) we interviewed the household
and found that a household member held a formal leadership position in the village, such as village or sub-village
head, 2) at least two of the respondents we interviewed identified the household as holding either a formal or
informal (tokoh) leadership role in the village, or 3) a household connected by blood or marriage to any household
identified in (1) or (2).
37
   It is possible that elite connected households are more likely to be connected to other households in the sub-
village in general. In this case, the penalty in columns (3) and (4) may not be due to the fact that they are elite, but
instead be due to the fact that the community believes that they will be “taken care of” by their relatives. In
Appendix Table 4, we re-run the specifications in Table 7, now including both main effects and interacted effects of
the households’ general connectedness within the village (specifically, a dummy variables for whether the household
is related by blood or marriage to any other household in the village) as well as elite connectedness. The elite results
stay robust (both in magnitude and significance) when controlling for general connectedness.
38
   The community sorting algorithm facilitators were instructed to use is called a binary insertion sort, which has
been shown to require in expectation log2(n!) pairwise comparisons to sort a list of size n, which is the theoretical
lower bound for comparison sorting (Knuth, 1998). In practice, the community may not perfectly implement this
algorithm, so the number of comparisons may be even higher.


                                                                                                                     28
       Figure 2 graphs the relationship between mis-targeting and the randomized rank order

from a non-parametric Fan regression, with cluster-bootstrapped 95 percent confidence intervals

shown as dashed lines. The mis-targeting rate is lowest for the first few households ranked, but

then rises sharply by the 20th percentile of households. The magnitude is substantial – the point

estimates imply that mis-targeting rates are between 5-10 percentage points lower for the first

household than for households ranked in the latter half of the meeting.

       Table 8 reports results from investigating these issues in a regression framework. Column

1 reports the results from estimating the relationship between the mis-targeting rate and the

randomized rank order, which varies from 0 (household was ranked first) to 1 (the household

was ranked last). The point estimate is positive, indicating a higher mis-targeting rate for

households ranked later, but it is not statistically significant. In Column 2, we interact the order

with the hybrid treatment. The results show that in the community treatment, there is

substantially more mis-targeting at the end of the process: the first household ranked is 5.9

percentage points less likely to be mis-targeted than the last household ranked (p-value 0.11). On

net, the community treatment actually does slightly better than the PMT in the beginning, but

substantially worse towards the end. This effect is completely undone in the hybrid, where the

random rank order and the mis-targeting rate appear unrelated. Columns 5 and 6 examine how

the rank order affects whether a household receives the transfer. The results show that on

average, households ranked at the end of the meeting are 4.9 percentage points more likely to be

on the beneficiary list than those ranked at the start (significant at the 10% level). The additional

mis-targeting from being late in the list thus comes largely from richer households ranked toward

the end of the process being more likely to be on the list.

       On the other hand, the ten poorest treatments, in which the poorest were identified first,

had no effect on mis-targeting as shown in Columns 3 and 4. However, this may be due to the



                                                                                                       29
fact that most of the mis-targeting error was comprised of the near poor rather than the very poor.

       Overall, what is striking is that despite conventional wisdom which emphasizes the risks

of elite capture, the main weakness of the community treatment appears instead to have been the

amount of sustained attention it requires from the participants in order to be effective.

VII. Does the Community Have a Different Maximand?
A third potential reason why the community produced a different outcome than the PMT is that

the community is actually doing its best to identify the poor, but has different ideas about how to

define a poor population. The next section tries to explain why the community’s views on

poverty might differ from that of per-capita consumption.

VII.A. Alternative welfare metrics
We begin by examining how the targeting outcomes compare not just against the government’s

metric of welfare ug (captured by rg,, the ranking based on per-capita consumption), but also

against alternative welfare metrics. In our baseline survey, we asked eight randomly chosen

members of the community to confidentially rank each other from poorest to richest. We average

the ranks to construct each household’s wealth rank according to the other community members,

denoted rc. To capture welfare as measured from an elite perspective, denoted re, we examine

how the sub-village head ranked these eight other households. To measure how people assess

their own poverty, denoted ri, we asked all respondents to rate their own poverty level on a scale

of 1 to 6. We computed the percentile rank of each measure to put them on the same scale.

       Table 9 presents the matrix of rank correlations between these alternative welfare

metrics. The correlation matrix shows that while all of the welfare metrics are positively

correlated, they clearly capture different things. Of particular note is the bottom row, which

shows the correlations with self-assessments. While the rank correlation of self-assessments (ri)

with consumption (rg) is only 0.26, that with community survey ranks (rc) is 0.45 and with the




                                                                                                 30
sub-village head survey ranks (re) is 0.41. Thus, the community and sub-village head ranks

appear to capture how individuals feel about themselves better than per capita consumption.

            To assess the poverty targeting results against these alternative welfare metrics, we

compute the rank correlation between targeting rank list derived from the experiment and each of

four welfare metrics. We then examine the effectiveness of the various targeting treatments

against these different measures of well-being by estimating:

            RANKCORRvkR= α + β1 COMMUNITYvk + β2 HYBRIDvk + γk + εvkR                                              (3)

where RANKCORRvkR is the rank correlation between the targeting rank list and the well-being

measure R in sub-village v. Stratum fixed effects (γk) are included. The results are reported in

Table 10. As the data is aggregated to the village level, each regression has 640 observations.39

            The results provide striking evidence that per capita consumption as we measure it does

not fully capture what the community calls welfare. Column 1 confirms the mis-targeting results

that are shown in Table 4: both the community and hybrid treatment result in lower rank

correlations with per-capita consumption than the PMT. Specifically, they are 6.5-6.7 percentage

points, or about 14 percent, lower than the rank correlations obtained with PMT. However, they

move away from consumption in a very clear direction – the community treatment increases the

rank correlation with rc by 24.6 percentage points, or 49 percent above the PMT level. The

hybrid also increases the correlation with rc but the magnitude is about half that of the

community treatment. Thus, the verification in the hybrid appears to move the final outcome

away from the community’s perception of well-being. These differences are statistically

significant at the 1 percent level. Results using the rank list obtained in the survey from the sub-

village head (our measure of re) are virtually identical to the survey list obtained by the




39
     Self-assessments have 637 observations due to non-response on the self-assessment question in several villages.


                                                                                                                       31
community, and are also statistically significant at the 1 percent level. This provides further

evidence that the community at large and the elite broadly share similar assessments of welfare.

       Perhaps most importantly, we find that the community treatment increases the rank

correlation between the targeting outcomes and the individual self-assessments of their own

poverty (rs) by 10.2 percentage points, or about 30 percent of the level in the PMT (significant at

1 percent). The hybrid treatment increases the same rank correlation by 7.5 percentage points.

The community targeting methods are thus more likely to conform with people’s self-identified

welfare status.

VII.B. Are these preferences broadly shared?
The results above suggest that the ranking exercise moves the targeting process towards a

welfare metric identified by community members. An important question is the degree to which

this reflects the view of one group within the community about who is poor. One experimental

sub-treatment was designed precisely to get at this question. In Table 11, we report the effect of

changing the composition of the meeting by holding the meeting during the day, when women

are more likely to be able to attend. We also consider the other sub-treatments (elite and 10

poorest) in this analysis, as they could also plausibly have affected the welfare weights of those

at the meeting.

       We begin by investigating the impact of having a daytime meeting on attendance. This

treatment does not change the share of households in the village that attend (Columns 1 and 2).

However, Column 3 confirms that the percentage of households that are represented by women

is about 10 percentage points (for a total of 49 percent) higher in the day meetings than during

the evening meetings.

       Although the day meeting treatment affected the gender composition of the meetings,

Columns 4 - 8 show that it did not affect the targeting outcomes. The elite treatment also did not

affect the rank correlations with any of the various welfare metrics. Interestingly, the only sub-


                                                                                                     32
treatment that affected the rank correlations was the 10 poorest treatment, which increased the

correlation of the treatments with ranks from self assessments. Overall, there seems to be no

evidence that the identity of the subgroup doing the ranking mattered.

VIII. Understanding the Community’s Maximand
The evidence so far suggests that the community has a systematic, broadly shared, notion of

welfare that is not based on per-capita consumption, and that the community-based targeting

methods reflect this different concept of welfare. This raises several key questions: Is the

community simply mis-measuring consumption? Or does it value something other than

consumption in evaluating individual welfare, i.e. is ug ≠ uc? And is that the whole story or does

the community also weigh the welfare of some households more than others due to other social

or political reasons– i.e., are the differences also because λg ≠ λc?

VIII.A. Does the Community Lack Information to Evaluate Consumption?
While there is no definitive way to prove that the community has all the information that is

available in the PMT, the fact that those ranked early in the process were ranked at least as well

as in the PMT suggests that information is not the main constraint. We can, however, test

whether the community has information about consumption beyond that in the PMT.

Specifically, we estimate:

RANKINDijvk = α + β1 RANKCONSUMPTIONivk + β2 RANKPMTSCOREjvk + νj + εijvk                         (4)

where RANKINDijvk is household j’s rank of household i (all ranks are in percentiles),

RANKCONSUMPTIONivk is the rank of household i’s per capita consumption in village v, and

RANKPMTSCOREivk is the rank of household i’s PMT score that is computed using the baseline

data. Fixed effects for the individual providing the ranking are included (νj), and standard errors

are clustered at the village level. The results of this analysis are presented in Column 1 of Table

12. In Column 2, we instead include all of the variables that enter the PMT score separately

rather than including the rank of the PMT score.


                                                                                                  33
       Table 12 illustrates that the community has residual information. Consumption is still

highly correlated with individuals’ ranks of other households from the baseline survey even after

we control for the rank from the PMT. Controlling for the rank from the PMT, a one percentile

increase in consumption rank is associated with a 0.132 percentile increase in individual

household ranks of the community (Column 1). This is significant at the 1 percent level. In the

more flexible specification presented in Column 2, the correlation between consumption rank

and survey rank remains positive (0.088) and significant at the 1 percent level.

       The findings in Table 12 suggest that the community has residual information about

consumption beyond that contained in the PMT score or even in the PMT variables. Moreover,

the fact that almost all the PMT variables enter into the community ranks with plausible signs

and magnitudes suggests that the community has most of the information in the PMT as well, but

chooses to aggregate it in different ways. While we cannot completely rule out that the

community lacks some information that is present in the PMT, the evidence here suggests that

differences in information are not the primary drivers of the different results.

VIII.B. A Different View of Individual Welfare
Table 13 explores the relationship between the welfare metrics (community survey rank rc, elite

survey rank re, and self-assessment rank rs), the targeting results in PMT, community, and hybrid

villages, and a variety of household characteristics that might plausibly affect either the welfare

functions (u) or the social welfare weights used in targeting (λ). In Columns 1 - 3, we present

results of specifications where the dependent variable is the within-village rank of each

household in the baseline survey according to different survey-based welfare metrics. In

Columns 4 – 6, the dependent variable is the treatment rank, put on a corresponding metric

where the lowest ranked (poorest) household in the dataset in each village is ranked 0 and the




                                                                                                  34
highest ranked (richest) household in the dataset in each village is ranked 1.40 We control for the

log of per capita consumption in all regressions, and therefore the coefficients can be interpreted

as conditional on per-capita consumption. Thus, we identify where the community rankings

deviate from ranking based on consumption. The current sub-section focuses on some of the

possible deviations that come from sources of differences in u, while the next sub-section deals

with potential differences in the λs.

        We find several dimensions of differences in the u’s. First, we find adjustments for

equivalence scales. The PMT in our setting is explicitly defined using per-capita consumption.

Thus, it makes no adjustment for economies of scale in the household. By contrast, all of the

community welfare functions (Columns 1-3) reveal that the community believes that there are

household economies of scale, so that conditional on per-capita consumption, those in larger

households are considered to have higher welfare (as in Olken, 2005). Likewise, the same is true

for the community ranking – which assigns almost an identical household size premium (Column

5). Interestingly, for a given household size and consumption, all methods rank households with

more kids as poorer, even though children generally cost less than adults (Deaton, 1997).

        Second, the community may know more about current consumption than the PMT, which

aims to capture the permanent component of consumption. For example, if two families have the

same per capita consumption, the one that is more elite connected may, for example, worry less

about bad shocks because it can expect to get help from rich relatives and hence have higher

welfare. The community might therefore feel that elite connected households are richer than their

consumption indicates. Whether or not this is the correct theory, it aligns perfectly with what we

find. The community survey ranks put about a 9 percentage point premium on being elite

connected, and even the elite and self-assessed survey ranks place a 4.4 and 2.5 percentage point
40
  Note that some of the variables included as explanatory variables – including household size, share of kids,
household head education, and widowhood – were explicitly included in the PMT regression, which may explain
why some of these variables are significant predictors of targeting in the PMT regressions.


                                                                                                                 35
premium, respectively. The community treatment ranks place a 5.1 percentage point premium on

elite connectedness.

       Similarly, there appears to be a premium for being better connected to the financial

system. While total savings does not affect the rank, households that have a greater share of

savings in a bank are classified as richer in both the individual surveys (Column 1-3) and the

community meeting (Column 5).

       Finally, households with family outside the village (who can presumably send

remittances), are ranked as less poor in terms of individual ranks, sub-village head ranks and the

self-assessment, though not in the community meetings.

VIII.C. A Different Weighting of Individual Welfares
There are multiple reasons why all families may not get the same effective weights (λ) in the

social welfare function. The simplest story is that of discrimination against ethnic or religious

minorities or other marginal community members. We find no evidence of this: ethnic minorities

are more likely to be ranked as poor in the community treatment, suggesting perhaps that even

extra care is paid to them in the interest of social harmony (Column 5). In addition, we find no

evidence of favoring families that are more engaged with the community. Contributing labor to

village projects does not affect a family’s status. However, those who contribute money are

viewed as rich (Column 1-3), though they are also likely to be ranked as richer by the PMT

(Column 4).

       Another form of discrimination may result from the community’s desire to provide the

“right” incentives to households. For example, a transfer may have less of a distortionary effect

for “hardworking” or “deserving” families than for those that are below their earning potential.

In this case, the former should get a higher weight in the community’s utility function. To test

this theory, we first look at the education level of the household head. Households where the

household head has a primary education or less rank 2-4 percentage points poorer, conditional on


                                                                                                    36
their actual consumption. Similarly, households headed by a widow, those with a disability, and

those where there is a serious illness are all rated poorer, conditional on actual consumption. The

adjustment for widowhood is also reflected in the community treatment ranking, but not the

disability and serious illness adjustments (Column 5).41 Finally and rather interestingly, the

village does not penalize those who spend a lot of money on smoking and drinking. Families

with these attributes are actually ranked lower both in community surveys (Column 1-3), and

community meetings (Column 5), suggesting that the village treats these preferences as problems

for the family as a whole rather than as behaviors that should be punished.

IX. Conclusion
The debate regarding decentralization in targeting is usually framed in terms of the benefits of

utilizing local information versus the costs of some form of malfeasance, such as elite capture.

While we started with an experiment that took both of these ideas very seriously, our results

point to a third (and possibly a fourth) factor as being very important: the community seems to

have a widely shared objective function that the government does not necessarily share, and

implementing this objective is a source of widespread satisfaction in the community. Moreover,

what makes this objective function different is neither nepotism (elite capture) nor majoritarian

prejudices. Rather, these preferences appear to be informed by a better understanding of factors

that affect the earning potential or vulnerability of the household, such as the returns to scale

within the family, incentives, and insurance, as compared to relying purely on consumption as

the government does. Nor is there any evidence that the community lacks the information to

identify the poor effectively—before fatigue sets in, the community process does at least as well

as the PMT. The main constraint on the community’s effectiveness in identifying poor families

41
  There are, of course, two interpretations of these findings. One interpretation is that households are conditioning
on earnings ability – i.e., if you are highly educated but do not earn much, that is your fault and you should not
receive subsidies for it. Another interpretation, however, is that education is merely another signal of poverty that is
more easily observable to the community than actual consumption, though communities would need to be over-
weighting this signal for this effect to produce a negative coefficient conditional on actual consumption.


                                                                                                                      37
based on the consumption metric appears to be the onset of fatigue. Future designs of community

based methods will need to contend with this factor.

       Given these findings, if targeting the poor based on consumption is the only objective, the

PMT does dominate the community methods. However, it is not evident that there is a strong

enough case to overrule the community’s preferences in favor of the traditional consumption

metric of poverty, especially given the gain in satisfaction and legitimacy. On the other hand,

what is clear is that based on our evidence, there is no case for the intermediate hybrid method: it

resulted in both poor targeting performance and low legitimacy. This may be because its main

theoretical advantage—preventing elite capture—was not important in our setting. It is possible

that perhaps alternative hybrid designs that allow the community to add some very poor

households to the PMT might perform better than those that limit the universe to the PMT

surveys, as the community does better at identifying those under PPP$1 per day.

       The findings in this paper raise several interesting questions for further research. First,

while we found little evidence of elite capture or general malfeasance of the targeting methods, it

is possible that this might change over time as individuals learn to better manipulate the system.

Manipulation over time has been shown to occur in some kinds of PMT systems (Camacho and

Conover, 2008), but whether it would occur when the per-village allocation is fixed, and whether

it would be more or less severe in community-targeted systems, are important open questions.

Second, given how well the community outcomes match individual self-assessments, an

important question is whether some form of self-targeting system (perhaps connected to an

ordeal mechanism as in Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982)) could provide a more cost-effective

method of targeting the poor. We regard these as important questions for future research.




                                                                                                     38
Works Cited
Alderman, Harold. 2002. “Do Local Officials Know Something We Don’t? Decentralization of
Targeted Transfers in Albania.” Journal of Public Economics, 83(2): 375-404.
Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee. 2005. “Decentralizing Antipoverty Program Delivery in
Developing Countries.” Journal of Public Economics, 89 (4): 675-704.
Camacho, Adriana, and Emily Conover. 2008. “Manipulation of Social Program Eligibility:
Detection, Explanations, and Consequences for Empirical Research.” Mimeo, University of
California, Berkeley.
Cameron, Lisa A. 2002. “Did Social Safety Net Scholarships Reduce Drop-Out Rates During
the Indonesian Economic Crisis?” Policy Research Working Paper Series 2800, The World
Bank.
Coady, David, Margaret Grosh, and John Hoddinott. 2004. “Targeting Outcomes Redux,” World
Bank Research Observer, 19 (1): 61-85.
Conn, Katharine, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, Michael Kremer and Owen Ozier. 2008.
“Bursary Targeting Strategies: Which Method(s) Most Effectively Identify the Poorest Primary
School Students for Secondary School Bursaries?” Mimeo.
Daly, Anne, and George Fane. 2002. “Anti-Poverty Programs in Indonesia.” Bulletin of
Indonesian Economic Studies, 38(3): 309-239.
Deaton, Angus S. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconomic Approach to
Development Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Galasso, Emanuela, and Martin Ravallion. 2005. “Decentralized Targeting of an Antipoverty
Program.” Journal of Public Economics, 89(4): 705-727.
Knuth, Donald. 1998. The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 3: Sorting and
Searching, Second Edition. Addison-Wesley: 80–105.
Nichols, Albert L., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. "Targeting Transfers through Restrictions
on Recipients." American Economic Review, 72(2): 372-77.
Olken, Benjamin A. 2006. “Corruption and the Costs of Redistribution: Micro Evidence From
Indonesia,” Journal of Public Economics, 90(4-5): 853-870.
Olken, Benjamin A. forthcoming. “Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods: Evidence from a
Field Experiment in Indonesia.” American Political Science Review.
Olken, Benjamin A. 2005. “Revealed Community Equivalence Scales.” Journal of Public
Economics 89(2-3): 545-566.
Seabright, Paul. 1996. "Accountability and Decentralization in Government: An Incomplete
Contracts Model." European Economic Review, 40: 61-89.
The World Bank. 2008. Global Purchasing Power Parities and Real Expenditures: 2005
International Comparison Program. Washington, DC: The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.
The World Bank. 2006. “Making the New Indonesia Work for the Poor: Overview.”
Washington D.C: The World Bank.



                                                                                               39
Table 1: Randomization Design

        Community/Hybrid Sub-Treatments                                              Main Treatments
                                                                  Community              Hybrid                   PMT
                                            Day                      24                    23
                       10 Poorest First
                                            Night                    26                    32
  Elite
                                            Day                      29                    20
                       No 10 Poorest First
                                            Night                    29                    34
                                            Day                      29                    28
                       10 Poorest First
  Whole                                     Night                    29                    23
  Community                                 Day                      28                    33
                       No 10 Poorest First
                                            Night                    20                    24
                                           TOTAL                     214                   217                     209
Notes: This table shows the results of the randomization. Each cell reports the number of sub-villages randomized to each combination of treatments.
Note that the randomization of sub-villages into main treatments was stratified to be balanced in each of 51 strata. The randomization of community
and hybrid subvillages into each sub-treatment (elite or full community, 10 poorest prompting or no 10 poorest prompting, and day or night) was
conducted independently for each sub-treatment, and each randomization was stratified by main treatment and geographic stratum.




Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                                                                                                Std.
    Variable                                                                           Obs         Mean         Dev.
    Panel A: Consumption from baseline survey
    Per capita consumption (Rp. 000s)                                                  5753         557.501     602.33

    Panel B: Mis-targeting variables:
    On beneficiary list                                                                5756            0.32        0.46
    Mis-target                                                                         5753            0.32        0.47
    Mis-target -- nonpoor (rich + middle)                                              3725            0.20        0.40
    Mis-target -- poor (near + very poor)                                              2028            0.53        0.50
    Mis-target -- rich                                                                 1843            0.14        0.35
    Mis-target -- middle income                                                        1882            0.27        0.44
    Mis-target -- near poor                                                            1074            0.59        0.49
    Mis-target -- very poor                                                            954             0.46        0.50

    Panel C: Rank correlations between treatment results and…
    Per capita consumption                                                              640            0.41        0.34
    Community (excluding sub-village head)                                              640            0.64        0.33
    Sub-village Head                                                                    640            0.58        0.41
    Self-Assessment                                                                     637            0.40        0.34




                                                                                                                                                 40
      Table 3: Testing Balance Between Treatment Groups

                                                                                                                                                          Differences, Controlling for Stratum
                                                                     Means                                Differences, No Fixed Effects                              Fixed Effects

                                                                                                     Community         Hybrid -      Hybrid -           Community         Hybrid -       Hybrid -
                                                     PMT          Community         Hybrid             - PMT            PMT         Community             - PMT            PMT          Community
                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)             (5)            (6)                 (7)             (8)             (9)
Average per capita expenditure (Rp. 000s)           558.576         550.579         564.295           -7.997            5.719        13.716              -1.331           11.980         13.312
                                                   [245.845]       [220.237]       [337.172]         (22.728)         (28.535)      (27.416)            (20.661)         (25.973)       (24.913)
Average years of education of household              7.360           7.566           7.087             0.206           -0.273        -0.4785*             0.219           -0.255         -0.4739**
head among survey respondents                       [2.616]         [2.644]         [2.627]           (0.256)          (0.254)       (0.254)             (0.204)          (0.200)        (0.209)
PMT score                                           12.467          12.519          12.474             0.052            0.007        -0.045               0.053            0.011         -0.043
(calculated from Baseline survey)                   [0.436]         [0.414]         [0.423]           (0.041)          (0.042)       (0.040)             (0.037)          (0.037)        (0.037)
Pct. of households that are agricultural            45.827          42.887          48.438            -2.940            2.612         5.5515*            -3.7806*          1.264          5.0442**
                                                   [34.889]       [33.789]         [35.038]           (3.343)          (3.391)       (3.318)             (2.060)          (2.096)        (2.027)
Years of education of RT head                        8.856           8.860           8.604             0.003           -0.253        -0.256               0.033           -0.206         -0.238
                                                    [4.018]         [4.244]         [3.796]           (0.402)          (0.379)       (0.388)             (0.352)          (0.336)        (0.335)
Log number of households                             3.832           3.895           3.810             0.063           -0.022        -0.0853*             0.057           -0.028         -0.0846**
                                                    [0.491]         [0.489]         [0.460]           (0.048)          (0.046)       (0.046)             (0.044)          (0.043)        (0.041)
Distance to kecamatan in km                          0.444           0.416           0.482            -0.028            0.039         0.067              -0.029            0.038          0.0673*
                                                    [0.652]         [0.473]         [0.431]           (0.056)          (0.054)       (0.044)             (0.050)          (0.046)        (0.037)
Log size of villages in hectares                     3.105           3.271           3.282             0.166            0.177         0.011               0.1435*          0.1376*       -0.006
                                                    [1.278]         [1.197]         [1.187]           (0.121)          (0.120)       (0.115)             (0.075)          (0.075)        (0.076)
Religious building per household                     0.0070          0.0060          0.0060           -0.0004          -0.0004       -0.0001             -0.0004          -0.0005        -0.0001
                                                    [0.0050]        [0.0050]        [0.0050]          (0.0005)         (0.0005)      (0.0005)            (0.0004)         (0.0004)       (0.0003)
Primary school per household                         0.0030          0.0030          0.0030            0.0001          -0.0002       -0.0003              0.0000          -0.0002        -0.0003
                                                    [0.0030]        [0.0030]        [0.0020]          (0.0003)         (0.0002)      (0.0002)            (0.0002)         (0.0002)       (0.0002)

P-value from joint test                                                                                 0.275           0.689          0.089               0.165            0.322          0.028

      Notes: An observation is a sub-village, and therefore, there are 640 observations. Standard deviations are shown in brackets in columns (1) – (3); robust standard errors are shown in
      parentheses in columns (4) – (9).




                                                                                                                                                                                                   41
Table 4: Results of Different Targeting Methods on Mis-targeting Rate


                                   (1)                      (2)           (3)                           (4)                 (5)              (6)                    (7)                     (8)
                                                               By Income Status                                             By Detailed Income Status                                        Per-capita
Sample:                               Full                  Non-poor         Poor                          Rich              Middle         Near Poor               Very Poor             consumption of
                                   population                                                                                income                                                        beneficiaries
Community treatment                0.031*                   0.046**             0.022                   0.028               0.067**          0.49                   -0.013                  9.933
                                  (0.017)                  (0.018)             (0.028)                 (0.021)             (0.027)          (0.038)                 (0.039)               (18.742)
Hybrid treatment                   0.029*                   0.037**             0.009                   0.020               0.052**          0.031                  -0.008                 -1.155
                                  (0.016)                  (0.017)             (0.027)                 (0.020)             (0.025)          (0.037)                 (0.037)               (19.302)
Observations                       5753                     3725                2028                    1843                1882             1074                    954                    1719
Mean in PMT treatment              0.30                     0.18                0.52                    0.13                0.23             0.55                    0.48                   366

Notes: All regressions include stratum fixed effects. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the village level. All coefficients are interpretable relative to the
PMT treatment, which is the omitted category. The mean of the dependent variable in the PMT treatment is shown in the bottom row. All specifications include stratum fixed effects. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     42
       Table 5: Satisfaction
                                          (1)                            (2)                      (3)                                  (4)                            (5)                       (7)
                                                                            Panel A: Household Endline Survey
                             Is the method applied to       Are you satisfied with     Are there any poor HH                Number of HH that               Number of HH that              P-value
                              determine the targeted        P2K08 activities in this   which should be added               should be added from            should be subtracted            from joint
                             households appropriate?        sub-village in general?          to the list?                           list                        from list                   test
                               (1=worst,4=best)              (1=worst,4=best)             (0=no, 1 = yes)

Community treatment             0.161***                       0.245***                      -0.189***                      -0.578***                      -0.554***                         <0.001
                               (0.056)                        (0.049)                        (0.040)                        (0.158)                        (0.112)
Hybrid treatment                0.018                          0.063                          0.020                          0.078                         -0.171                             0.762
                               (0.055)                        (0.049)                        (0.042)                        (0.188)                        (0.129)
Observations                    1089                           1214                           1435                           1435                           1435
Mean in PMT treatment           3.243                          3.042                          0.568                          1.458                          0.968

                                                                         Panel B: Sub-village Head Endline Survey
                             Is the method applied to        In your opinion, are       Are there any poor HH      Are there any poor HH
                              determine the targeted        villagers satisfied with    which should be added         which should be
                             households appropriate?        P2K08 activities in this           to the list?       subtracted from the list?
                                   (0=no, 1=yes)            sub-village in general?          (0=no, 1=yes)             (0=no, 1=yes)
                                                               (1=worst,4=best)
Community treatment             0.378***                      0.943***                    -0.169***                 -0.010                                                                   <0.001
                               (0.038)                       (0.072)                      (0.045)                   (0.020)
Hybrid treatment                0.190***                      0.528***                    -0.065                    -0.019                                                                   <0.001
                               (0.038)                       (0.071)                      (0.043)                   (0.019)
Observations                    636                            629                         640                       640
Mean in PMT treatment           0.565                         2.456                        0.732                     0.057

                                                                  Panel C: Comment forms and fund disbursement results
                             Number of comments in          Number of complaints in   Number of complaints     Did facilitator encounter                  Fund distributed in a
                               the comment box                 the comment box       received by sub-village       any difficulty in                            meeting
                                                                                               head             distributing the funds?                      (0=no, 1=yes)
                                                                                                                     (0=no, 1=yes)
Community treatment            -0.944                        -1.085***                 -2.684***                 -0.062***                                  0.082**                           0.0014
                               (0.822)                       (0.286)                   (0.530)                   (0.023)                                   (0.038)                            0.177
Hybrid treatment               -0.364                        -0.554**                  -2.010***                 -0.045*                                    0.051
                               (0.821)                       (0.285)                   (0.529)                   (0.026)                                   (0.038)
Observations                    640                           640                       640                       621                                       614
Mean in PMT treatment           11.392                        1.694                     4.34                      0.135                                     0.579
       Notes: All estimation is by OLS with stratum fixed effects. Using ordered probit for multiple response and probit models for binary dependent variables produces the same signs and statistical
       significance as the results shown. These results are available from the authors upon request.




                                                                                                                                                                                                      43
Table 6: Elite Treatments
                                           (1)           (2)                      (3)               (4)                    (5)               (6)
                                       Attendance (Meeting Data)               Attendance (Survey Data)                      Mis-target Dummy
  Community treatment                                                        0.367***           0.360***                0.029             0.044**
                                                                            (0.038)            (0.044)                 (0.018)           (0.020)
  Hybrid treatment                        0.021         0.019                0.370***           0.378***                0.027             0.013
                                         (0.029)       (0.036)              (0.037)            (0.043)                 (0.018)           (0.020)
  Elite sub-treatment                  -0.062**        -0.064               -0.301***          -0.287***                0.004            -0.025
                                         (0.029)       (0.041)              (0.034)            (0.050)                 (0.016)           (0.023)
  Elite × hybrid                                        0.004                                  -0.029                                     0.058*
                                                       (0.058)                                 (0.068)                                   (0.032)
  Observations                           431            431                  287                287                     5753              5753
  Mean in PMT treatment                  N/A            N/A                  0.11               0.11                    0.30              0.30

Notes: In columns (1) – (4), an observation is a village. In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is the number of households attending the meeting (as observed on the meeting
attendance list) divided by the number of households in the village. In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is the share of households surveyed in the endline survey where at least 1
household member attended a targeting meeting. The PMT mean in columns (3) and (4) is not zero, because the question was worded generically to be about any targeting meeting, not just
meetings associated with our project. The dependent variable in column (5) and (6) is the mis-targeting dummy, as in column (1) of Table 4. Robust standard errors in parentheses, and standard
errors are adjusted for clustering at the village level in columns (5) and (6). All specifications include stratum fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Table 7: Are Households Connected to Elites Treated Differently?
                                                     (1)              (2)                      (3)                 (4)
                                                        Mis-target dummy                     On beneficiary list dummy
  Elite connectedness                               -0.025         -0.025                 -0.063***         -0.063***
                                                    (0.021)        (0.021)                (0.021)           (0.021)
  Elite connectedness                               -0.015         -0.013                 -0.067**          -0.078**
  × community treatment                             (0.035)        (0.038)                (0.033)           (0.036)
  Elite connectedness                                0.010          0.010                 -0.013            -0.001
  × hybrid treatment                                (0.033)        (0.035)                (0.033)           (0.035)
  Elite connectedness                               -0.029         -0.034                  0.041             0.064
  × elite treatment                                 (0.031)        (0.047)                (0.030)           (0.042)
  Elite connectedness                                               0.003                                   -0.047
  × elite treatment × hybrid                                       (0.063)                                  (0.060)
  Observations                                       5753           5753                   5756               5756

Notes: All specifications include dummies for the community, hybrid, and elite treatment main effects, as well as stratum fixed effects;
columns (2) and (4) also include a dummy for elite × hybrid. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the village
level. Dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the mis-target dummy for the full sample, as in column (1) of Table 4. Dependent variable
in columns (3) and (4) is a dummy for being a beneficiary of the program. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                            44
Table 8: Effort
                                                          (1)                      (2)                (3)                           (4)                    (5)                   (6)
                                                                                     Mis-target dummy                                                    On beneficiary list dummy
   Household order in ranking                      0.030                    0.059                                                                     0.049*               0.048*
   (percentile)                                   (0.026)                  (0.037)                                                                   (0.026)              (0.029)
   Household order in ranking                                              -0.056                                                                                          0.001
   × hybrid                                                                (0.052)                                                                                        (0.028)
   Poorest 10 framing sub-treament                                                                  -0.006                   -0.007
                                                                                                    (0.016)                  (0.023)
   Poorest 10 framing sub-treatment                                                                                           0.002
   × hybrid                                                                                                                  (0.031)
   Observations                                    3784                     3784                     3874                     3874                    3785                     3785

Notes: All specifications are limited to community and hybrid villages. Columns (1) – (4) include a hybrid dummy and stratum fixed effects; columns (5) and (6) include
stratum fixed effects since the total number of beneficiaries is constant in all treatments. The dependent variable in columns (1) – (4) is the mis-target dummy for the full
sample, as in column (1) of Table 4. The dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) is a dummy for being chosen as a recipient, as in column (3) of Table 6.*** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




Table 9: Rank correlation matrix of alternative welfare metrics
                                                          (1)                    (2)                            (3)                         (4)
                                                                          Community survey              Sub-village head            Self-Assessment
                                                Consumption (rg)             ranks (rc)                 survey ranks(re)                   (rs)
   Consumption (rg)                              1.000
   Community survey ranks (rc)                   0.376                       1.000
   Sub-village head survey ranks(re)             0.334                       0.737                       1.000
   Self-Assessment(rs)                           0.263                       0.445                       0.407                       1.000

Notes: This table reports the correlation matrix between the within-village ranks of the four variables listed. All correlations are statistically significantly different from 0 at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     45
      Table 10: Assessing targeting treatments using alternative welfare metrics
                                                      (1)                       (2)                        (3)                         (4)
                                                                       Community survey            Sub-village head           Self-Assessment
                                             Consumption (rg)               ranks (rc)             survey ranks(re)                   (rs)
         Community treatment                 -0.065**                    0.246***                   0.248***                   0.102***
                                             (0.033)                    (0.029)                    (0.038)                    (0.033)
         Hybrid treatment                    -0.067**                    0.143***                   0.128***                   0.075**
                                             (0.033)                    (0.029)                    (0.038)                    (0.033)
         Observations                         640                        640                        640                        637
         Mean in PMT treatment                0.451                      0.506                      0.456                      0.343

      Notes: The dependent variable is the rank correlation between the treatment outcome (i.e., the rank ordering of households generated by the
      PMT, community, or hybrid treatment) and the welfare metric shown in the column, where each observation is a village. Robust standard
      errors are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




      Table 11: Do community meetings reflect broadly shared preferences?
                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)                        (4)                         (5)                (6)              (7)                   (8)
                                                                                                                                                  Rank Correlations with:
                                Attend                                 Female                                                                  Community
                                Meeting            Attend              Attends                                                                 (excluding
                               (Meeting         Meeting (HH           (Meeting                                                                 sub-village      Sub-village               Self-
                                 Data)             Data)                Data)                    Mis-target                Consumption            head)            Head               Assessment
Community treatment                               0.349***                                        0.027                     -0.089**             0.232***         0.180***              0.072
                                                 (0.042)                                         (0.021)                    (0.045)             (0.040)          (0.052)               (0.044)
Hybrid treatment               0.020              0.353***             0.008                      0.026                     -0.089**             0.130***         0.064                 0.046
                              (0.029)            (0.041)              (0.017)                    (0.021)                    (0.044)             (0.039)          (0.051)               (0.044)
Day meeting treatment         -0.021              0.013                0.104***                   0.008                      0.019               0.004            0.055                 0.014
                              (0.029)            (0.033)              (0.017)                    (0.016)                    (0.033)             (0.029)          (0.038)               (0.033)
Elite treatment               -0.064**           -0.300***            -0.085***                   0.005                     -0.004              -0.023            0.034                -0.017
                              (0.029)            (0.033)              (0.017)                    (0.016)                    (0.033)             (0.029)          (0.038)               (0.033)
10 Poorest treatment           0.022              0.023               -0.010                     -0.006                      0.031               0.047            0.044                 0.062*
                              (0.029)            (0.034)              (0.018)                    (0.016)                    (0.033)             (0.029)          (0.038)               (0.032)
Observations                   431                287                  428                        5753                       640                 640              640                   637
Mean in PMT treatment                             0.110                                           0.300                      0.451               0.506            0.456                 0.343

      Notes: For column (3), the dependent variable is the percentage of households in the village in which a female attends the meeting, using data collected from the meeting attendance lists. ***
      p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                        46
Table 12: Information
                                         Survey rank   Survey rank                                         Survey rank
                                              (1)           (2)                                           (2 continued)
  Rank per capita consumption within       0.132***      0.088***
  village in percentiles                  (0.014)       (0.012)
  Rank per capita consumption from         0.368***
  PMT within village in percentiles       (0.014)
  Household floor area per capita                       0.001***     Has this Household ever got            0.027**
                                                        0.000        credit?                               (0.011)
  Not earth floor                                       0.060***     Number of children 0-4                 0.000
                                                       (0.010)                                             (0.006)
  Brick or cement wall                                  0.065***     Number of Children in                  0.003
                                                       (0.007)       Elementary School                     (0.005)
  Private toilet                                        0.047***     Number of Children in Junior           0.007
                                                       (0.008)       High School                           (0.007)
  Clean drinking water                                  0.008        Number of Children in Senior           0.022***
                                                       (0.009)       High School                           (0.008)
  PLN electricity                                       0.064***     Highest Education Attainment           0.007
                                                       (0.008)       within HH is Elem. School             (0.016)
  Concrete or corrugated roof                           0.027*       Highest Education Attainment           0.01
                                                       (0.014)       within HH is Junior School            (0.016)
  Cooks with firewood                                   0.031***     Highest Education Attainment           0.051***
                                                       (0.008)       within HH is Senior High or higher    (0.017)
  Own house privately                                   0.034***     Total Dependency Ratio                 0.004
                                                       (0.008)                                             (0.006)
  Household size                                        0.004        AC                                     0.049**
                                                       (0.006)                                             (0.023)
  Household Size Squared                               -0.001        Computer                               0.045***
                                                       (0.001)                                             (0.011)
  Age of head of household                              0.011***     Radio / Cassette Player                0.001
                                                       (0.002)                                             (0.006)
  Age of head of household squared                     -0.000***     TV                                     0.043***
                                                        0.000                                              (0.010)
  Head of household is Male                             0.047**      DVD/VCD player                         0.017**
                                                       (0.019)                                             (0.007)
  Head of household is married                          0.119***     Satellite dish                         0.021*
                                                       (0.022)                                             (0.011)
  Head of household is male and                        -0.043*       Gas burner                             0.030***
  Married                                              (0.026)                                             (0.008)
  Head of household works in                           -0.006        Refrigerator                           0.069***
  agriculture sector                                   (0.041)                                             (0.008)
  Head of household works in industry                  -0.043        Bicycle                               -0.004
  Sector                                               (0.042)                                             (0.007)
  Head of household works in service                   -0.018        Motorcycle                             0.078***
  Sector                                               (0.042)                                             (0.007)
  Head of household works in                            0.071        Car / Mini-bus / Truck                 0.116***
  formal sector                                        (0.045)                                             (0.012)
  Head of household works in                            0.048        HP                                     0.014*
  informal sector                                      (0.045)                                             (0.007)
  Education Attainment of HH                            0.008        Jewelry                                0.034***
  Head is Elementary School                            (0.008)                                             (0.006)
  Education Attainment of HH                            0.036***     Chicken                               -0.001
  Head is Junior School                                (0.010)                                             (0.006)
  Education Attainment of HH                            0.041***     Caribou / Cow                          0.065***
  Head is Senior High School or higher                 (0.011)                                             (0.012)
  Observations                            40398         38336




                                                                                                                     47
Table 13: What is the community maximizing?

                                          Rank according to welfare metric…                      Targeting Rank List in…
                                     Community Sub-village               Self-
                                     survey ranks head survey Assessment                    PMT          Community           Hybrid
                                           (rc)       ranks(re)           (rs)            villages          villages         villages
                                           (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)               (5)              (6)
  Log PCE                              0.176***       0.145***       0.087***            0.132***         0.197***         0.162***
                                        (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.004)            (0.013)           (0.014)          (0.014)
  Log HH size                          0.164***       0.134***       0.073***              -0.028         0.154***         0.078***
                                        (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.006)            (0.019)           (0.019)          (0.021)
  Share kids                           -0.125***     -0.094***       -0.037***           -0.296***          -0.068*        -0.141***
                                        (0.021)        (0.021)         (0.012)            (0.035)           (0.041)          (0.039)
  HH head with primary                 -0.028***     -0.025***       -0.037***           -0.108***           -0.011        -0.066***
  education or less                     (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.005)            (0.017)           (0.018)          (0.017)
  Elite connected                      0.092***       0.044***       0.025***            0.062***         0.051***         0.043***
                                        (0.008)        (0.009)         (0.005)            (0.016)           (0.015)          (0.015)
  Ethnic minority                       -0.024*         -0.019          -0.003             0.012           -0.051**           -0.011
                                        (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.008)            (0.026)           (0.025)          (0.024)
  Religious minority                      0.012         -0.007         -0.014*             -0.018             0.025            0.012
                                        (0.018)        (0.017)         (0.008)            (0.030)           (0.032)          (0.033)
  Widow                                -0.104***     -0.083***          -0.012             0.009          -0.108***           -0.026
                                        (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.008)            (0.027)           (0.024)          (0.028)
  Disability                           -0.045***     -0.037***       -0.026***           -0.079***            0.009            0.012
                                        (0.016)        (0.014)         (0.008)            (0.027)           (0.026)          (0.027)
  Death                                 -0.041*         -0.031          -0.010           -0.111***           -0.013           -0.059
                                        (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.015)            (0.042)           (0.048)          (0.043)
  Sick                                 -0.038***     -0.041***       -0.028***             0.007             -0.018         -0.044**
                                        (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.006)            (0.018)           (0.019)          (0.019)
  Recent shock to                        -0.001         -0.005        -0.013**             -0.019             0.009           -0.012
  income                                (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.005)            (0.016)           (0.016)          (0.017)
  Tobacco and alcohol                 -0.0002*** -0.0002***         -0.0001***          -0.0002***       -0.0002***       -0.0001***
  consumption                           (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
  Total savings                           0.000         0.000           0.000              0.000              0.000            0.000
                                        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
  Share of savings in a                0.096***       0.069***       0.052***            0.121***         0.103***         0.075***
  bank                                  (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.006)            (0.018)           (0.021)          (0.020)
  Share of debt                        0.005***       0.004***       0.002***              0.002          0.007***         0.008***
                                        (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.000)            (0.002)           (0.001)          (0.001)
  Connectedness                        -0.039***      -0.021**       -0.015***             -0.016            -0.019        -0.054***
                                        (0.010)        (0.009)         (0.005)            (0.017)           (0.017)          (0.019)
  Number of family members             0.012***       0.010***       0.006***            0.020***             0.001            0.001
  outside sub-village                   (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.002)            (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.006)
  Participation in religious           0.027***       0.033***        0.014**             0.033**             0.012            0.029
  groups                                (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.006)            (0.016)           (0.017)          (0.017)
  Participation through work to           0.002       0.021**           0.005              0.000              0.010            0.003
  community projects                    (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.006)            (0.018)           (0.019)          (0.019)
  Participation through money          0.061***       0.041***       0.024***            0.056***         0.058***           0.034*
  to community projects                 (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.005)            (0.016)           (0.016)          (0.018)
  Observations                            5337           4680            5724               1814              1876             1889

   Notes: Note that the children and household head education variables are explicitly included in the PMT regression (see Table 12). The PMT
   regression also includes dummies for the household head being male, married, and male * married, which together will be closely correlated
   with the widow variable.




                                                                                                                                                48
Figure 1: PDF of log per-capita consumption of beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries, by treatment status
                                 Beneficiaries                                              Non Beneficiaries
   1




                                                                       1
   .8




                                                                       .8
   .6




                                                                       .6
   .4




                                                                       .4
   .2




                                                                       .2
   0




                                                                       0
          4       5         6          7          8      9        10        4     5         6           7         8    9        10
                                Log Consumption                                                 Log Consumption
                      PMT            COMMUNITY               HYBRID                   PMT            COMMUNITY             HYBRID



Notes: The left panel shows the PDF of log per-capita consumption for those households chosen to receive the transfer, separately by each treatment.
The right panel shows the PDF of log per-capita consumption for those households not chosen to receive the transfer, separately by treatment. The
vertical lines show the PPP$1 and PPP$2 per day poverty lines (see footnote for more information on the calculation of these poverty lines.)

Figure 2: Effect of order in ranking meeting on mis-target rate
    .4
    .35
    .3
    .25
    .2




              0             .2                    .4           .6               .8                  1
                                                 Random rank order

Notes: This figure graphs the relationship between mis-targeting and the randomized rank order from a non-parametric Fan regression. The dashed
lines represent cluster-bootstrapped 95th percentile confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                                                  49
Appendices: Not For Publication
Appendix Table 1: PMT Regressions by district
                                      Humbang     Serdang   Pematang   Purba-                                                                    Tana
 District                            Hasundutan   Bedagai    Siantar   lingga    Wonogiri   Demak     Kendal    Semarang    Bone     Enrekang   Toraja    Makasar
 Indicators
 Type of place                                    -0.086               -0.077    -0.068     -0.095    -0.230                                     0.112
 (1=Urban 0=Others)                               (0.023)              (0.025)   (0.025)    (0.020)   (0.017)                                   (0.031)
 Percapita Floor                                             0.004                           0.001               0.001      0.001     0.001      0.002     0.003
                                                            (0.001)                         (0.001)             (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)
 Type of Floor                        -0.100       0.113     0.149      0.118     0.133      0.111     0.096     0.169               -0.108                0.088
 (1=Not earth 0=Others)               (0.024)     (0.026)   (0.031)    (0.018)   (0.017)    (0.018)   (0.015)   (0.027)              (0.021)              (0.028)
 Type of Wall                          0.104                 0.053                0.055                0.033                0.119     0.059      0.114
 (1=Brick/Cement 0=Others)            (0.027)               (0.022)              (0.018)              (0.018)              (0.026)   (0.028)    (0.038)
 Toilet Facility                       0.056       0.094     0.184      0.127     0.066      0.094     0.123     0.073      0.103     0.033      0.087     0.140
 (1=Private 0=Others)                 (0.015)     (0.022)   (0.034)    (0.017)   (0.019)    (0.019)   (0.015)   (0.020)    (0.017)   (0.014)    (0.019)   (0.022)
 Drinking Water source                 0.035                 0.112      0.044                          0.064     0.100     -0.047     0.100      0.028     0.117
 (1=Clean 0=Other)                    (0.014)               (0.036)    (0.017)                        (0.014)   (0.019)    (0.018)   (0.013)    (0.016)   (0.020)
 Electricity (1=PLN 0=Others)                      0.113     0.294      0.112     0.177      0.125     0.286     0.286      0.190     0.093
                                                  (0.033)   (0.074)    (0.034)   (0.077)    (0.043)   (0.081)   (0.123)    (0.021)   (0.021)
 Type of Roof                          0.078       0.085     0.108               -0.208     -0.121    -0.037    -0.075      0.178     0.093      0.095     0.122
 (1=Concrete/Corrugated 0=Others)     (0.034)     (0.042)   (0.046)              (0.021)    (0.024)   (0.018)   (0.021)    (0.057)   (0.032)    (0.053)   (0.028)
 Fuel for Cooking                      0.178       0.155     0.274      0.188     0.172      0.155     0.168     0.152      0.229     0.145      0.074     0.188
 (1=Not Firewood 0=Other)             (0.033)     (0.021)   (0.019)    (0.027)   (0.038)    (0.023)   (0.018)   (0.018)    (0.030)   (0.021)    (0.036)   (0.018)
 Ownership of house                    0.060                            0.080     0.076                0.102     0.077                                     0.087
 (1=Private 0=Others)                 (0.021)                          (0.042)   (0.035)              (0.022)   (0.019)                                   (0.021)
 Having Micro Credit                               0.129                0.098     0.165      0.209     0.069    -0.106                0.045      0.227     0.304
                                                  (0.073)              (0.036)   (0.050)    (0.045)   (0.023)   (0.049)              (0.022)    (0.060)   (0.111)
 Household Size                       -0.287      -0.247    -0.261     -0.314    -0.330     -0.254    -0.277    -0.378     -0.249    -0.250     -0.209    -0.293
                                      (0.018)     (0.033)   (0.026)    (0.025)   (0.021)    (0.027)   (0.025)   (0.021)    (0.017)   (0.015)    (0.019)   (0.018)
 Household Size Squared                0.017       0.012     0.014      0.019     0.021      0.014     0.016     0.026      0.014     0.015      0.012     0.016
                                      (0.001)     (0.003)   (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.002)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.002)   (0.002)
 Age of the head of household          0.010       0.013     0.004      0.012                          0.012                0.009     0.007      0.004     0.007
                                      (0.004)     (0.005)   (0.001)    (0.004)                        (0.004)              (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.004)
 Age of the head of household
 Squared                               0.000       0.000                0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000                0.000
                                      (0.000)     (0.000)              (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)              (0.000)
 Head of household gender              0.153       0.193     0.109      0.092     0.098      0.171     0.153                0.070     0.145      0.101     0.135
 (1=Male 0=Female)                    (0.037)     (0.073)   (0.057)    (0.026)   (0.037)    (0.049)   (0.040)              (0.024)   (0.029)    (0.038)   (0.036)
 Head of household is Married          0.166                                     -0.066     -0.086                                                         0.119
                                      (0.083)                                    (0.034)    (0.050)                                                       (0.068)
 Head of household is Male*Married    -0.207      -0.141                                              -0.074                         -0.060     -0.075    -0.230
                                      (0.089)     (0.071)                                             (0.038)                        (0.026)    (0.035)   (0.076)
 Sector of HH Head is Agriculture                 -0.066                         -0.071                                    -0.080                         -0.138
                                                  (0.021)                        (0.022)                                   (0.021)                        (0.058)
 Sector of HH Head is Industry         0.240                -0.060      0.105                                   -0.121               -0.108     -0.101    -0.110
                                      (0.073)               (0.029)    (0.020)                                  (0.019)              (0.031)    (0.044)   (0.036)
 Sector of HH Head is Service          0.248                            0.145     0.098      0.107     0.053                          0.089               -0.065
                                      (0.028)                          (0.021)   (0.027)    (0.020)   (0.019)                        (0.026)              (0.027)
 Sector of HH Head is in Formal                              0.082                           0.036     0.076     0.058      0.056     0.083      0.089     0.040
 Sector                                                     (0.023)                         (0.019)   (0.018)   (0.018)    (0.031)   (0.031)    (0.031)   (0.020)
 Sector of HH Head is in Informal      0.045                 0.045                                                          0.077     0.051      0.140
 Sector                               (0.024)               (0.023)                                                        (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.020)
 Education Attaintment of HH Head      0.053       0.152                0.031     0.061      0.183     0.041     0.115      0.053                0.063
 is Elementary School                 (0.023)     (0.040)              (0.028)   (0.025)    (0.035)   (0.018)   (0.028)    (0.019)              (0.032)
 Education Attaintment of HH Head      0.072       0.164     0.198      0.166     0.153      0.164     0.128     0.204      0.099     0.081      0.080     0.156
 is Junior School                     (0.027)     (0.040)   (0.031)    (0.032)   (0.028)    (0.036)   (0.026)   (0.054)    (0.030)   (0.016)    (0.031)   (0.035)
 Education Attaintment of HH Head      0.096       0.194     0.143      0.140     0.113      0.088     0.198     0.317      0.099     0.129      0.170     0.196
                                                                                                                                                          50
  is Senior +                             (0.033)       (0.045)       (0.032)       (0.051)       (0.036)       (0.045)       (0.032)        (0.035)       (0.035)       (0.020)       (0.036)          (0.053)
  Number of children 0-4                  -0.043                                                                                             -0.078        -0.029        -0.044                         -0.028
                                          (0.011)                                                                                            (0.017)       (0.013)       (0.010)                        (0.016)
  Number of Children in Elementary
  School
  Number of Children in Junior                           0.056                       0.056         0.086         0.072         0.045          0.073
  H.School                                              (0.022)                     (0.018)       (0.020)       (0.019)       (0.017)        (0.020)
  Number of Children in Senior                           0.076         0.069         0.165         0.150         0.135         0.116          0.167                       0.029         0.049            0.109
  H.School                                              (0.023)       (0.017)       (0.024)       (0.024)       (0.024)       (0.022)        (0.015)                     (0.014)       (0.018)          (0.012)
  Highest Education Attaintment of         0.053         0.152                                     0.061        -0.045         0.105          0.133         0.064                       0.063            0.077
  HH Members is Elementary School         (0.023)       (0.040)                                   (0.025)       (0.019)       (0.028)        (0.054)       (0.026)                     (0.032)          (0.031)
  Highest Education Attaintment of         0.077         0.058         0.113         0.122         0.153         0.164         0.070          0.221         0.120         0.081         0.050            0.170
  HH Members is Junior School             (0.025)       (0.032)       (0.083)       (0.034)       (0.028)       (0.036)       (0.030)        (0.032)       (0.035)       (0.016)       (0.024)          (0.051)
  Highest Education Attaintment of         0.110         0.135         0.211         0.317         0.267         0.281         0.133          0.310         0.170         0.129         0.109            0.231
  HH Members is Senior +                  (0.033)       (0.044)       (0.082)       (0.044)       (0.042)       (0.043)       (0.035)        (0.054)       (0.041)       (0.020)       (0.032)          (0.039)
  Dependency Ratio                                      -0.039        -0.034        -0.027                      -0.075                                     -0.034        -0.022        -0.040           -0.074
                                                        (0.018)       (0.015)       (0.016)                     (0.017)                                    (0.014)       (0.009)       (0.011)          (0.018)
  Distance to District                                  -0.004        -0.025                      -0.003        -0.004        -0.007                                                   -0.004           -0.004
                                                        (0.001)       (0.010)                     (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)                                                  (0.000)          (0.002)
  Existence of SD                                       -0.224         0.183                                                                 -1.438                                     0.093
                                                        (0.040)       (0.102)                                                                (0.057)                                   (0.041)
  Existence of SLTP                       -0.150                      -0.051        -0.088         0.041                                                    0.053
                                          (0.019)                     (0.028)       (0.020)       (0.017)                                                  (0.016)
  Existence of Puskesmas/Pustu            -0.047        -0.116         0.100         0.032                                                                                              0.049            0.038
                                          (0.020)       (0.024)       (0.031)       (0.017)                                                                                            (0.020)          (0.019)
  Existence of Polindes                   -0.054        -0.114                                    -0.048                                                                  0.029
                                          (0.017)       (0.028)                                   (0.016)                                                                (0.015)
  Existence of Posyandu                   -0.062        -0.081                                    -0.184                                                    0.174                      -0.205
                                          (0.018)       (0.040)                                   (0.073)                                                  (0.038)                     (0.038)
  Availability of Doctor                                                                                        -0.050        -0.080          0.092                                                      0.085
                                                                                                                (0.021)       (0.018)        (0.023)                                                    (0.025)
  Availability of Bidan                    0.082         0.089        -0.144                      -0.065         0.072         0.093                                                   -0.068            0.084
                                          (0.025)       (0.035)       (0.068)                     (0.027)       (0.036)       (0.034)                                                  (0.021)          (0.025)
  Road type is Asphalt                     0.101         0.132        -0.280         0.137        -0.042         0.053                                    -0.114          0.057                         -0.247
                                          (0.015)       (0.023)       (0.057)       (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.017)                                   (0.018)        (0.015)                        (0.066)
  Existence of Semi permanent market                                   0.276         0.049                                     0.065                      -0.090                      -0.099             0.048
  place                                                               (0.098)       (0.021)                                   (0.018)                     (0.018)                     (0.034)           (0.021)
  Existence of Credit Facility                          0.055                                                                               -0.072        -0.040        -0.031        -0.185
                                                       (0.022)                                                                              (0.018)       (0.017)       (0.014)       (0.022)
  Constant                               12.839        12.884         12.131        12.119        13.287        12.756        12.344        14.008        12.577        12.852        13.082            13.098
                                         (0.106)       (0.150)        (0.218)       (0.123)       (0.127)       (0.076)       (0.131)       (0.149)       (0.109)       (0.082)       (0.087)           (0.118)
  Observations                            1920          2239           1824          2112          2208          2208          2208          2496          2016          1824          1920              2208
  R-squared                               0.606         0.284          0.486         0.457         0.436         0.363         0.471         0.516         0.474         0.556         0.478             0.583

Notes: Each column reports the result from a separate regression for that district. The dependent variable is log per capita consumption. Following standard BPS procedure, for each district, a
first regression was run with all variables listed. A second regression was then run retaining only those variables that were statistically significant at the 10% level in the first regression. The
results above present the results of this second regression, which were used for the PMT calculation. All variables above are statistically significant at least at the 10% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                    51
Appendix Table 2: Results of Different Targeting Methods on Mis-targeting Rate - Time elapsed between survey and targeting


                                      (1)                      (2)           (3)                           (4)                 (5)             (6)                     (7)                     (8)
                                                                  By Income Status                                             By Detailed Income Status                                        Per-capita
   Sample:                               Full                  Non-poor         Poor                          Rich              Middle         Near Poor               Very Poor             consumption of
                                      population                                                                                income                                                        beneficiaries
   Community treatment                  0.088                    0.098               0.042                   0.090               0.102           0.127                    -0.072                  68.008
                                       (0.072)                  (0.074)             (0.129)                 (0.086)             (0.111)         (0.170)                  (0.178)                 (78.501)
   Hybrid treatment                     0.018                    0.074              -0.226*                  0.023               0.117           -0.252                   -0.227                    5.139
                                       (0.072)                  (0.071)             (0.125)                 (0.081)             (0.108)         (0.166)                  (0.176)                 (90.750)
   Time elapsed                         0.000                    -0.000              0.001                   -0.001              -0.000          0.004                    -0.002                    0.759
                                       (0.001)                  (0.001)             (0.002)                 (0.002)             (0.002)         (0.003)                  (0.003)                  (1.552)
   Time elapsed x                       -0.001                   -0.001              -0.001                  -0.001              -0.001          -0.003                   0.002                    -1.358
   Community Treatment                 (0.002)                  (0.002)             (0.003)                 (0.002)             (0.003)         (0.004)                  (0.004)                  (1.852)
   Time elapsed x                       0.000                    -0.001              0.005                   0.000               -0.001          0.005                    0.005                    -0.322
   Hybrid Treatment                    (0.002)                  (0.002)             (0.003)                 (0.002)             (0.003)         (0.004)                  (0.004)                  (2.049)
   Observations                          5595                     3617                1978                    1791                1826            1052                     926                     1687
   Mean in PMT treatment                 0.30                      0.18                0.52                    0.13                0.23            0.55                     0.48                    366

Notes: All regressions include stratum fixed effects. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the village level. All coefficients are interpretable relative to the
PMT treatment, which is the omitted category. The mean of the dependent variable in the PMT treatment is shown in the bottom row. All specifications include stratum fixed effects. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     52
Appendix Table 3: Results of Different Targeting Methods on Mis-targeting Rate - Heterogeneity


                                      (1)                      (2)           (3)                           (4)                 (5)             (6)                     (7)                     (8)
                                                                  By Income Status                                             By Detailed Income Status                                        Per-capita
   Sample:                               Full                  Non-poor         Poor                          Rich               Middle        Near Poor               Very Poor             consumption of
                                      population                                                                                 income                                                       beneficiaries
   Community treatment                 0.069**                   0.005             0.145**                   -0.052               0.068        0.218***                   0.042                  -44.804
                                       (0.035)                  (0.039)             (0.058)                 (0.050)              (0.053)         (0.079)                 (0.083)                 (36.192)
   Hybrid treatment                    0.087**                   0.017             0.130**                   0.041                -0.009        0.200**                   0.092                  -22.408
                                       (0.037)                  (0.042)             (0.060)                 (0.054)              (0.054)         (0.078)                 (0.087)                 (40.155)
   Urban village                        -0.010                 -0.098***           0.128***                -0.088**             -0.113**       0.231***                   0.035                  -20.668
                                       (0.030)                  (0.035)             (0.046)                 (0.043)              (0.047)         (0.063)                 (0.062)                 (36.623)
   Inequality                           -0.004                   -0.026              0.057                   -0.029               -0.015          0.043                  0.091*                   -3.963
                                       (0.026)                  (0.027)             (0.040)                 (0.033)              (0.039)         (0.055)                 (0.053)                 (33.960)
   General                              0.043*                   -0.010              0.000                   0.009                -0.046          0.036                   -0.043                 -20.957
   Connectedness                       (0.026)                  (0.031)             (0.039)                 (0.039)              (0.039)         (0.053)                 (0.056)                 (29.451)
   Urban village x                      -0.049                   0.026              -0.110*                  0.056                -0.029        -0.184**                  -0.041                  25.062
   Community treatment                 (0.036)                  (0.039)             (0.060)                 (0.045)              (0.058)         (0.078)                 (0.083)                 (41.936)
   Urban village x                      -0.051                   0.014               -0.069                  -0.001               0.020          -0.149*                  -0.015                  11.794
   Hybrid treatment                    (0.036)                  (0.039)             (0.059)                 (0.045)              (0.055)         (0.079)                 (0.082)                 (47.509)
   Inequality x                         -0.016                   0.022             -0.134**                  0.027                0.052          -0.128*                  -0.117                  38.764
   Community treatment                 (0.035)                  (0.039)             (0.055)                 (0.047)              (0.057)         (0.075)                 (0.076)                 (39.728)
   Inequality x                         -0.021                   -0.002              -0.069                  -0.036               0.061           0.006                 -0.157**                  13.022
   Hybrid treatment                    (0.034)                  (0.037)             (0.054)                 (0.045)              (0.054)         (0.073)                 (0.077)                 (41.603)
   General Connectedness x              -0.018                   0.022               -0.007                  0.069                -0.025          -0.038                  0.040                   44.665
   Community treatment                 (0.035)                  (0.041)             (0.058)                 (0.050)              (0.056)         (0.078)                 (0.082)                 (39.438)
   General Connectedness x              -0.050                   0.018               -0.081                  -0.007               0.034         -0.166**                  -0.010                  17.931
   Hybrid treatment                    (0.035)                  (0.040)             (0.058)                 (0.050)              (0.052)         (0.080)                 (0.078)                 (40.290)
   Observations                          5753                     3725                2028                    1843                 1882            1074                    954                    1719
   Mean in PMT treatment                 0.30                      0.18                0.52                    0.13                 0.23            0.55                    0.48                   366

Notes: All regressions include stratum fixed effects. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the village level. All coefficients are interpretable relative to the
PMT treatment, which is the omitted category. The mean of the dependent variable in the PMT treatment is shown in the bottom row. All specifications include stratum fixed effects. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     53
Appendix Table 4: Are elite results driven by social connections?


                                                   (1)               (2)                        (3)                    (4)                   (5)                   (6)
                                                     Mis-target dummy                        On beneficiary list dummy                         Mis-target dummy
  Elite connectedness                            -0.034           -0.034                 -0.078***              -0.078***                0.083**             -0.074***
                                                (0.021)           (0.021)                  (0.023)                (0.023)                (0.040)               (0.023)
  Connectedness                                 0.041*            0.041*                  0.067***               0.067***                 -0.051              0.049**
                                                (0.023)           (0.023)                  (0.022)                (0.022)                (0.041)               (0.024)
  Elite connectedness                            -0.010            -0.002                  -0.064*               -0.075**                 0.068                -0.035
  × community treatment                         (0.035)           (0.039)                  (0.034)                (0.037)                (0.064)               (0.036)
  Elite connectedness                            0.003             -0.004                   -0.022                -0.010                  0.035                 0.018
  × hybrid treatment                            (0.034)           (0.036)                  (0.034)                (0.037)                (0.062)               (0.036)
  Elite connectedness                            -0.032           -0.050                    0.040                  0.062                  -0.067                0.018
  × elite treatment                             (0.031)           (0.047)                  (0.031)                (0.043)                (0.059)               (0.032)
  Elite connectedness                                              0.030                                           -0.050
  × elite treatment × hybrid                                      (0.064)                                         (0.061)
  Connectedness                                  -0.002           -0.026                    0.008                  0.019                  0.004               0.010
  × community treatment                         (0.038)           (0.043)                  (0.036)                (0.041)                (0.066)             (0.041)
  Connectedness ×                                0.041             0.064                     0.055                  0.042                -0.041               0.043
  hybrid treatment                              (0.037)           (0.041)                  (0.035)                (0.037)                (0.073)             (0.036)
  Connectedness ×                                -0.000            0.043                    -0.004                 -0.029                -0.044              -0.004
  elite treatment                               (0.035)           (0.051)                  (0.032)                (0.047)                (0.067)             (0.035)
  Connectedness × elite treatment ×                                -0.090                                          0.050
  hybrid treatment                                                (0.071)                                         (0.065)
  Observations                                    5753              5753                      5756                  5756                   2028                3725

Notes: All specifications include dummies for the community, hybrid, and elite treatment main effects, as well as stratum fixed effects;
columns (2) and (4) also include a dummy for elite × hybrid. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the village
level. Dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the mis-target dummy for the full sample, as in column (1) of Table 4. Dependent variable
in columns (3) and (4) is a dummy for being a beneficiary of the program. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                         54
