                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      WORKER REPLACEMENT

                                              Guido Menzio
                                              Espen R. Moen

                                          Working Paper 15983
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15983


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2010




We received comments from participants at the Society for Economic Dynamics Meeting in Vancouver
(July 2006), the NBER Summer Institute in Cambridge (July 2006), and at the macroeconomic seminars
at Stanford, Penn, LSE, UCLA and Saint Louis FED. Discussions with Ken Burdett, Dale Mortensen,
Guillaume Rocheteau and Randy Wright led to significant improvements in the paper. Menzio gratefully
acknowledges the financial support and the hospitality of the Hoover Institution. Moen gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Norwegian Research Council. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Guido Menzio and Espen R. Moen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Worker replacement
Guido Menzio and Espen R. Moen
NBER Working Paper No. 15983
May 2010
JEL No. E24,E32,J64

                                              ABSTRACT

Consider a labor market in which firms want to insure existing employees against income fluctuations
and, simultaneously, want to recruit new employees to fill vacant jobs. Firms can commit to a wage
policy, i.e. a policy that specifies the wage paid to their employees as a function of tenure, productivity
and other observables. However, firms cannot commit to employ workers. In this environment, the
optimal wage policy prescribes not only a rigid wage for senior workers, but also a downward rigid
wage for new hires. The downward rigidity in the hiring wage magnifies the response of unemployment
to negative shocks.


Guido Menzio
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
467 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gmenzio@econ.upenn.edu

Espen R. Moen
1RUZHJLDQ6FKRRORI0DQDJHPHQW
Nydalsveien 37
N-0442 Oslo
Norway
espen.r.moen@bi.no
1         Introduction
Shimer (2005) documents that, according to the standard search model of the labor market
(Pissarides, 1985), productivity shocks account for an implausibly small fraction of the em-
pirical volatility of unemployment and vacancies. This finding has generated a significant
research eﬀort devoted to reconciling the predictions of the model with the empirical behavior
of the labor market. Hall (2005) and Gertler and Trigari (2009) are among the most promi-
nent examples of this eﬀort. These papers show that, when wage rigidities are introduced
into the model, productivity shocks lead to much larger and more plausible fluctuations in
unemployment and vacancies. Interestingly, in these papers the source of amplification of
productivity shocks is not the rigidity of the wage of workers who are already employed, but
the rigidity of the wage of newly hired workers (more precisely, the rigidity of the present
value of wages of newly hired workers). Indeed, the fact that the wage oﬀered to a worker in
an ongoing employment relationship does not respond to changes in productivity only aﬀects
the distribution of rents between the worker and his employer. In contrast, the fact that
the wage oﬀered to new hires does not respond to changes in productivity aﬀects the firms’
incentives to create vacancies and, in turn, aﬀects unemployment. However, why should the
wage of new hires be rigid? This paper answers the question.
        We consider a directed search model of the labor market in the spirit of Moen (1997) and
Shimer (1996). Firms enter the market and announce their wage policy, i.e. a policy that
specifies the wage paid to a worker as a function of his tenure, the idiosyncratic productivity
of the firm, and the aggregate state of the economy. Unemployed workers observe the wage
policy of new and old firms and choose where to apply for jobs. The application process is
subject to matching frictions. Because workers cannot access the capital market, firms have
an incentive to insure their employees against income fluctuations. To accomplish this task
eﬃciently,1 firms would like to oﬀer to each of their workers a constant wage. Because of
search frictions and turnover, firms also have an incentive to attract new applicants to fill
vacant jobs. To accomplish this task eﬃciently, firms would like to oﬀer to new hires a wage
that varies in response to changes in aggregate productivity. Hence, in some states of the
world, firms would like to oﬀer a hiring wage lower than the wage paid to existing employees.
    1
        That is, to accomplish this task in a way that maximizes profits.



                                                         2
But what happens if, in one of these states, a firm finds an applicant that is qualified for
the job held by one the senior workers? If the firm cannot commit to the employment
relationship, it will simply replace the senior worker with the new applicant. This “worker
replacement” problem creates a tension between eﬃcient provision of insurance to senior
workers and eﬃcient recruitment of new hires.
   The first part of the paper characterizes the optimal wage policy of the firm in the
presence of the worker replacement problem. We find that, when the firm is hit by a positive
productivity shock, the optimal policy prescribes that senior workers should be paid the
same wage as in the past (the eﬃcient insurance wage), and that new hires should be paid
the wage that maximizes the value of the firm’s vacant jobs (the eﬃcient hiring wage). These
wages do not induce the firm to replace senior workers with new recruits, because the eﬃcient
hiring wage is greater than the eﬃcient insurance wage. When the firm is hit by a negative
productivity shock, the optimal policy prescribes that senior workers and new recruits should
be paid exactly the same wage. The common wage is smaller than the wage paid to senior
workers in the past, and greater than the wage that maximizes the value of the firm’s vacant
jobs. The common wage guarantees that the firm will not replace senior workers with new
recruits, but it distorts the eﬃcient hiring wage up and the eﬃcient insurance wage down.
Overall, the worker replacement problem induces a form of downward rigidity in the wage
oﬀered to new hires by old firms.
   The second part of the paper studies how the worker replacement problem aﬀects the
response of the labor market to productivity shocks. Here, the main finding is that the worker
replacement problem amplifies the decline in vacancies and the increase in unemployment
in response to a negative shock, but has no eﬀect on the response of the labor market to
a positive shock. When the economy is hit by a negative shock, the worker replacement
problem dampens the decline in the wage oﬀered by old firms to new hires. This downward
wage rigidity distorts the flow of applicants towards old firms, amplifies the decline in the
number of new firms that enter the labor market, amplifies the decline in vacancies and,
ultimately, amplifies the increase in unemployment. In contrast, when the economy is hit
by a positive shock, the worker replacement problem does not aﬀect the hiring wage of old
firms and, for this reason, it has no eﬀect on vacancies and unemployment. Even though our
model is too abstract to carry out a thorough quantitative analysis, a back-of-the-envelope

                                              3
calculation shows that the worker replacement problem can easily account for 20 percent of
the increase in unemployment that takes place during a typical recession.
       Our theory of downward rigidity in the hiring wage hinges on two elements. First, firms
want to oﬀer to each of their employees a constant wage to insure them against income
fluctuations. Second, firms do not want to hire new employees for less than the wage of
senior employees to avoid the replacement problem. The first element of our theory is the
cornerstone of the implicit contract literature (Azariadis, 1975) and is supported by vast
empirical evidence. For example, in a survey of US firms, Blinder and Choi (1990) find that
the majority of managers agree that wages contain a countercyclical insurance payment.
There is also empirical evidence supporting the second, novel element of our theory. For
example, in a recent survey of Swedish firms, Agell and Bennmarker (2007) find that 90
percent of managers are not willing to hire new workers for less than the wage of existing
workers. This finding is particularly striking considering that the survey was conducted in
the midst of a severe recession. Similarly, in a survey of US firms, Bewley (1999) finds that 79
percent of managers refuse to hire undercutters. Moreover, in both surveys, the majority of
managers argue (in accordance to our theory) that hiring undercutters would either violate
the personnel policy of the firm or some bargaining agreement with the unions.
       The theory advanced in this paper is an alternative to recent theories of wage rigidity
based on asymmetric information.2 In Menzio (2005), firms do not want to increase the
hiring wage in expansions because they do not want to reveal to existing workers that the
gains from trade have increased and, hence, their wages can be renegotiated. In Kennan
(2009), workers do not demand higher wages in expansions because they do not want to
be turned down by those firms whose productivity did not increase. In Moen and Rosen
(2008), firms are reluctant to cut pay in response to negative shocks because of eﬃciency
wage considerations.
   2
     Independently from us, Snell and Thomas (2008) develop a related theory of wage rigidity. They consider
a frictionless labor market populated by risk neutral firms and risk adverse workers who have no access to the
credit market. Under the assumption that a firm cannot pay a diﬀerent wage to workers with diﬀerent tenure,
they find that the wage policy of the firm prescribes a wage that responds less to aggregate productivity shocks
than a spot market wage. Moreover, under the assumption that new firms cannot enter the labor market,
they find that there is involuntary unemployment and that involuntary unemployment is countercyclical.
Our paper diﬀers from theirs for two main reasons. First, in our paper, the link between the wage of existing
workers and the wage of new hires emerges endogenously as part of the optimal solution to the replacement
problem. Second, in our paper, the rigidity in the wage of new hires amplifies the response of unemployment
because it aﬀects the search strategy of unemployed workers and it crowds out the entry of new firms.


                                                       4
2         Model
This section develops a model of directed search à la Moen (1997) and Shimer (1996). In the
model, firms have an incentive to insure their employees against income fluctuations because
workers are risk averse and cannot access the capital market. Firms also have a desire
to attract applicants to fill the jobs that become vacant because of turnover. However, the
goals of insuring workers and attracting applicants may be in conflict because the firm cannot
commit not to replace senior employees with cheaper new hires.

2.1        Preferences and technologies

There is a continuum of workers with measure one. A worker has preferences given by
 P
E ∞      t
    t=0 β υ(ct ), where β is the discount factor, and υ is a strictly increasing and strictly

concave utility function. A worker consumes his income each period, so consumption c
equals the wage w if the agent is working and b > 0 if the agent is unemployed.
   There is a continuum of entrepreneurs with positive measure. An entrepreneur has pref-
                    P
erences given by E ∞       t e          e
                      t=0 β ct , where c is the sum of profits from firms the entrepreneur

owns.3 An entrepreneur can start a firm at the cost k > 0. A firm operates a technology
that turns labor into output according to the production function min{n, n}y, where n is the
measure of jobs at the firm, n is the measure of workers employed by the firm, and y is the
firm’s productivity. The productivity of a firm in its first period of activity is y1 , where y1
is a discrete random variable drawn from the probability distribution π 1 (y1 |x). The produc-
tivity of a firm in its second period of activity is y2 , where y2 is a discrete random variable
drawn from the distribution π 2 (y2 |x). To simplify the analysis, we assume that firms exit the
market after two periods. The distribution of firm’s productivities depends on the aggregate
state of the economy x, which follows a Markov chain with transition probabilities π x (x0 |x).
        A period is divided into four stages: separation, entry, search and production. At the
separation stage, an employed worker becomes unemployed for exogenous reasons with prob-
    3
     As discussed in Rudanko (2009), the assumption that entrepreneurs and workers have a diﬀerent pref-
erence for risk can be motivated in a number of ways. First, if becoming an entrepreneur or a worker is a
choice, it is natural to expect less risk averse agents to become entrepreneurs and more risk averse agents to
become workers. Second, if entrepreneurs are wealthier than workers, they might behave as if they were less
risk averse. Finally, it might be the case that entrepreneurs have better access to asset markets and, hence,
can insure away risk.



                                                      5
ability δ. Moreover, at this stage, an employed worker has the option to leave his job and
become unemployed, and a firm has the option to dismiss any of its workers.
       At the entry stage, an entrepreneur chooses how many new firms to create. After realizing
the productivity y1 , a new firm announces the wage policy σ = (w1 , w2i ). The first element
of σ is the wage paid to a worker who is employed in the first period of the firm’s life. The
second element is a function w2i (x0 , y20 , μ02 ) which returns the wage paid to a worker who is
employed in the second period of the firm’s life, conditional on the worker’s tenure i, the
aggregate state of the economy x0 , the firm’s productivity y20 , and a sunspot μ02 . The sunspot
is a random variable drawn from the uniform distribution with unit support.4
       If a worker was unemployed at the beginning of the period, he has the opportunity to
apply for a job at the search stage. For simplicity, we assume that a worker cannot apply
for a job if he is employed or if he became unemployed during the separation stage. The
application process is directed, in the sense that a worker applies for a particular job at
a particular firm.5 If the worker applies for a job of type W , his application is successful
with probability p(θ(W )), where θ(W ) is the ratio of applicants to jobs of type W and p is
a strictly decreasing function such that p(0) = 1 and p(∞) = 0. Following Acemoglu and
Shimer (1999), we refer to θ(W ) as the queue length for the job. Symmetrically, the firm
finds a successful applicant for a job of type W with probability q(θ(W )), where q is a strictly
increasing function such that q(θ) = p(θ)θ, q(0) = 0, q(∞) = 1. Moreover, the elasticity of
q wrt θ,     q (θ),   is such that q(θ) q (θ)/[1 − q (θ)] is a decreasing function of θ.6 When a firm
finds a successful applicant for a job, it has the option to hire him and dismiss any other
worker who might have been holding the job. The type of a job is the value that it oﬀers to
a successful applicant.
       At the production stage, production and consumption take place. Then nature draws
the aggregate state of the economy x0 , the idiosyncratic productivity of the firm y20 , and the
   4
      Because of the sunspot, a change in the second period wages w2i (x0 , y20 , μ02 ) has a marginal eﬀect on the
lifetime utility W1 provided to a worker hired in the first period of the firm’s life. This property allows to
establish the necessary conditions (K) and (R), which are used to characterize the optimal wage policy. As
an alternative to the sunspot, one could assume that the productivity of the firm is a continuous random
variable.
    5
      The qualitative results of our paper are robust to an alternative specification of the search process in
which workers apply to firms rather than to specific jobs.
    6
      The assumptions on p(θ) and q(θ) are satisfied by many standard matching processes. For example,
they are satisfied by the urn-ball matching process, p(θ) = θ(1 − exp(−1/θ)) and q(θ) = 1 − exp(−1/θ), and
by the telephone-line matching process, p(θ) = θ/(1 + θ) and q(θ) = 1/(1 + θ).


                                                        6
sunspot μ02 for next period. The draws of the productivity and the sunspot are independent
across firms.
    The model incorporates some new elements in a model of directed search. First, the model
assumes that entrepreneurs are risk neutral and that workers are risk averse and cannot access
the capital market. The assumption is common in the literature on implicit contracts and
it implies that firms have an incentive to insure their workers against income fluctuations
(Azariadis, 1985). Second, the model assumes that firms have limited commitment, in the
sense that firms can commit to a wage policy but cannot commit to employ any of their
workers. The assumption is also present in some of the literature on implicit contracts (see
e.g. MacLeod and Malcomson 1989 or Thomas and Worrall 1988). It is usually motivated by
the fact that a third party (say a court of law or a labor union) can easily verify how much
a worker is paid, but not whether a worker who has left the firm has done so voluntarily,
because of poor performance, because his job ceased to exist, or, in our case, because the
firm replaced him with a new hire. Lack of verifiability also motivates the assumption that
the wage paid by the firm to a worker cannot depend on whether the firm has found a
replacement for him, or on whether the worker has been hired as a replacement of somebody
else.7
    Rudanko (2009) also introduces elements from the implicit contract literature in a model
of directed search. The main diﬀerence between her model and ours is the size of a firm.8
In her model, a firm has only one job. If the job is vacant, the only goal of the firm is to
recruit. If the job is filled, its only goal is to insure the worker. In our model, a firm has
many jobs. Therefore, the firm needs to insure existing workers and recruit new workers at
the same time. Because of limited commitment, there may be a tension between these two
goals. The resolution of this tension is the key to our theory of rigidity for the wage of new
hires.
    7
      Note that we do not allow for wage renegotiation when the firm finds a replacement for the worker. It
is easy to justify this modeling choice. Assume that the firm privately observes whether a replacement for
the worker is available. Under this assumption, the firm has the incentive to announce that it has found a
replacement whether this is actually true or not. Hence, the worker ignores the announcement of the firm
and renegotiation does not take place. An analogous argument is used in many models of search on the job
to justify the assumption that wage renegotiation does not take place when an employed worker finds an
alternative employer (see e.g. Burdett and Mortensen 1998).
    8
      Another diﬀerence between Rudanko’s model and our model is the life span of a firm. In her model, a
firm has a constant probability of exiting the labor market in each period. In our model a firm exits the
labor market deterministically after two periods.


                                                    7
2.2    Competitive search equilibrium

Let Z(x) be the lifetime utility of an unemployed worker at the search stage, given that the
worker has the opportunity to apply for a job and the state of the economy is x. We refer to
Z as the value of search. Let U(x) ≤ Z(x) be the lifetime utility of an unemployed worker
at the production stage, given that the state of the economy is x. We refer to U as the value
of unemployment. Given U and Z, the queue length for a job of type W is
                      ½
                        θ : p(θ)W + (1 − p(θ))U(x) = Z(x), if W > Z(x),
            θ(W, x) =                                                                       (1)
                        0, if W ≤ Z(x).

If the value of the job to a successful applicant, W , is greater than the value of search, Z,
the queue length is driven up to the point where workers are indiﬀerent between applying
for the job and searching somewhere else. If W is smaller than Z, the queue length is zero.
Notice that, if a worker applies for a filled job at a firm with a wage policy that specifies
w21 ≥ w22 , the worker will not be hired even if his application is successful. Hence, the value
of this job to a successful applicant is equal to the value of unemployment U, and the queue
length is zero. In contrast, if a worker applies for a filled job at a firm with a wage policy
that specifies w21 < w22 , the worker will be hired if his application is successful. Hence, the
queue length of this job may be positive.
   Given the value of search, Z, and the queue length for diﬀerent types of jobs, θ, one can
compute the value of unemployment and employment to the worker, as well as the value of
a firm to the entrepreneur. The value of unemployment to the worker is

                                   U(x) = υ(b) + βEZ(x0 ).                                  (2)

In the current period, the worker consumes b units of output. At the search stage of next
period, the worker has the option of sending an application and his continuation utility is Z.
   The value to the worker from being employed by an old firm at the wage w is

                                 W2 (w, x) = υ(w) + βEZ(x0 ).                               (3)

In the current period, the worker consumes w units of output. At the end of the current
period, the firm exits the labor market and the worker moves into unemployment. At the
search stage of next period, the worker has the option of sending a job application and his


                                               8
continuation utility is Z.
   The value to the worker from being employed by a new firm with wage policy σ is

        W1 (σ, x) = υ(w1 ) + βE {U(x0 ) + (1 − d)(1 − ρq̃(w21 , x0 )) [W2 (w22 , x0 ) − U(x0 )]}   (4)

where
                   d = {δ if w22 ∈ [b, y20 ], 1 else}, ρ = {0 if w22 ≤ w21 , 1 else},
                                 q̃(w21 , x0 ) = q(θ(W2 (w21 , x0 )), x0 ),
and the dependence of w21 , w22 , d and ρ on (x0 , y20 , μ02 ) is omitted for brevity. In the current
period, the worker consumes w1 units of output. At the separation stage of next period,
the worker moves into unemployment and gets the continuation utility U with probability
d, where d equals δ if b ≤ w22 ≤ y20 and d equals 1 otherwise. Intuitively, the worker
moves into unemployment for exogenous reasons with probability δ, he voluntarily moves
into unemployment if w22 < b, and the firm dismisses him if w22 > y2 . At the search stage,
the worker is replaced by a new hire and gets the continuation utility U with probability
(1 − d)ρq̃(w21 , x0 ), where ρ equals 1 if w22 > w21 and 0 otherwise. Intuitively, if w22 >
w21 , the firm has an incentive to replace the worker and will succeed in doing so with
probability q̃(w21 , x0 ). At the production stage of next period, the worker is still employed
with probability (1 − d)(1 − ρq̃(w21 , x0 )). In this case, the worker’s continuation utility is
W2 (w22 ).
   The value to the entrepreneur of a new firm with wage policy σ is

             F (σ, x, y1 ) = n1 (y1 − w1 ) + βE {n1 (1 − d)(1 − ρq̃(w21 , x0 ))(y20 − w22 )}
                                                                                                   (5)
                           +βE {[n − n1 (1 − d)(1 − ρ)] q̃(w21 , x0 )(y20 − w21 )}

where
                                       n1 = nq(θ(W1 (σ, x), x)).

At the search stage, the firm attracts θ(W1 (σ)) applicants for each one of its n vacant jobs.
Hence, at the production stage, the firm employs n1 = nq(θ(W1 (σ))) workers. At the search
stage of next period, the firm has n −n1 (1 −d) vacant jobs and n1 (1− d) filled jobs. The firm
receives θ(W2 (w21 )) applications for each of its vacant jobs. In addition, the firm receives
θ(W2 (w21 )) applications for each of its filled jobs if w21 < w22 . Hence, at the production
stage, the firm employs n1 (1 − d) senior workers and (n − n1 (1 − d))q̃(w21 ) new hires if
w21 ≥ w22 , and n1 (1 − d)(1 − q̃(w21 )) senior workers and nq̃(w21 ) new hires if w21 < w22 .

                                                   9
    We define an equilibrium along the lines of Moen (1997), Acemoglu and Shimer (1999),
and Rudanko (2009).

Definition 1 A competitive search equilibrium consists of a search value Z(x), a queue
length θ(W, x) and a wage policy σ(x, y1 ) with the following properties:
(i) Optimal application: For all (W, x), θ(W, x) satisfies (1).
(ii) Profit maximization: For all (x, y1 , σ̃), F (σ(x, y1 ), x, y1 ) ≥ F (σ̃, x, y1 ).
(iii) Zero profit: For all x, Ey1 [F (σ(x, y1 ), x, y1 )] − k = 0.

    Condition (i) ensures that the queue length is consistent with the optimal application
strategy of the workers. Condition (ii) ensures that a new firm chooses its wage policy to
maximize profits. Condition (iii) ensures that free entry drives the maximized profits of a
new firm down to zero. Formally, condition (i) pins down the queue length as a function of
Z, condition (ii) pins down the wage policy as a function of Z, and condition (iii) pins down
the equilibrium value of Z.
    Note that the competitive search equilibrium is block recursive. That is, the system of
equations that pins down the equilibrium value of search, the queue length, and the wage
policy of new firms is independent of the distribution of workers across diﬀerent employment
states and the distribution of old firms across diﬀerent wage policies. As explained in Menzio
and Shi (2009a, b), the block recursive nature of the equilibrium is a property common to
many models of directed search.


3     Microeconomics of worker replacement
This section characterizes the wage policy of the firm in the presence of the worker replace-
ment problem. From a technical point of view, this task is not trivial because the objective
function of the firm (5) is discontinuous with respect to the wage oﬀered to new hires in the
second period. In fact, if the hiring wage is greater than the wage of senior workers, the
firm does not attract any applications for its filled jobs. However, if the hiring wage is even
a penny less than the wage of senior workers, the firm attracts a non-negligible number of
applications to each of its filled jobs. Because of this discontinuity, one cannot use standard
optimality conditions to characterize the optimal wage policy.


                                                    10
3.1       Necessary condition for optimality

Let σ = (w1 , w2i ) be the optimal wage policy of the firm, and let n1 be the number of
workers employed by the firm in its first period of activity. Then, (w21 , w22 ) must maximize
the weighted sum of the firm’s profits and the n1 senior workers’ utility in the firm’s second
period of activity, where the weight on the firm’s profits is 1 and the weight on the senior
workers’ utility is 1/υ 0 (w1 ). The intuition behind this necessary condition for optimality is
simple and can be given here. A formal derivation of this condition is given in the proof of
lemma 2 in the appendix. Intuitively, the choice of (w21 , w22 ) has not only a direct eﬀect on
the profits of the firm in the second period, but also an indirect eﬀect on the profits of the
firm in the first period, and the magnitude of this indirect eﬀect is precisely the utility of
senior workers weighted by 1/υ 0 (w1 ). In fact, a choice of (w21 , w22 ) that increases the utility
of senior workers in the second period by one unit allows the firm to lower the wage w1 by
1/υ 0 (w1 ) dollars without aﬀecting the lifetime utility W1 delivered to workers hired in the
first period and, hence, without aﬀecting the number of workers n1 employed by the firm in
the first period. For this reason, the optimal wage policy maximizes the weighted sum of
the firm’s profits and the senior workers’ utility in the second period.
      Now, restrict attention to the set of wages that do not induce the firm to replace senior
workers with new hires, i.e. w22 ≤ w21 , and do not induce the firm and the senior workers
to voluntarily break up at the separation stage, i.e. b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 . Over this set of wages,
the maximized sum of the firm’s profits and the senior workers’ utility is9

              Vk = max            n1 [δυ(b) + (1 − δ)υ(w22 )] /υ 0 (w1 )
                    (w21 ,w22 )
                               +n1 (1 − δ)(y2 − w22 ) + [n − n1 (1 − δ)] q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 ),   (K)
                          s.t. b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 , w22 ≤ w21 .

The first term on the rhs of (K) is the utility of senior workers weighted by 1/υ 0 (w1 ). The
utility of each of the n1 senior workers is υ(b) with probability δ and υ(w22 ) with probability
1 − δ. The second term and third terms on the rhs of (K) are the profits of the firm. The
firm employs n1 (1 − δ) senior workers and earns a profit of y2 − w22 on each of them. Also,
the firm employs [n − n1 (1 − δ)] q̃(w21 ) new hires and earns a profit of y2 − w21 on each of
                  k     k
them. Denote as (w21 , w22 ) the solution to (K).
  9
      For the sake of brevity, the dependence of Vk , Vr and V̂ on w1 , n1 and x is omitted.


                                                        11
   Next, restrict attention to the set of wages that induce the firm to replace senior workers
with new hires, i.e. w22 > w21 , but do not induce the firm and the senior workers to
voluntarily break up at the separation stage, i.e. b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 . Over this set of wages, the
maximized sum of the firm’s profits and the senior workers’ utility is

            Vr = max            n1 {υ(b) + (1 − δ)(1 − q̃(w21 )) [υ(w22 ) − υ(b)]} /υ 0 (w1 )
                  (w21 ,w22 )
                             +n1 (1 − δ)(1 − q̃(w21 ))(y2 − w22 ) + nq̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 ),       (R)
                        s.t. b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 , w22 > w21 .

The first term on the rhs of (R) is the utility of senior workers weighted by 1/υ 0 (w1 ). The
utility of each of the n1 senior workers is υ(b) with probability δ + (1 − δ)q̃(w21 ), and υ(w22 )
with complementary probability. The second and third terms on the rhs of (R) are the
profits of the firm. The firm employs n1 (1 − δ)(1 − q̃(w21 )) senior workers and earns a profit
of y2 − w22 on each of them. Also, the firm employs nq̃(w21 ) new hires and earns a profit of
                                      r     r
y2 − w21 on each of them. Denote as (w21 , w22 ) the solution to (R).
   Since the optimal wage schedule maximizes the sum of the profits of the firm and the
utility of the senior workers over all (w21 , w22 ), the following result obtains.

Lemma 2 Let σ ∗ = (w1∗ , w2i
                          ∗
                             ) be the optimal wage policy for a new firm. Then, σ ∗ satisfies
                                                               ∗            ∗     ∗
the following necessary conditions for optimality: (i) If b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 and w22 ≤ w21 ,
       ∗     ∗        k     k                               ∗            ∗     ∗
then (w21 , w22 ) = (w21 , w22 ) and Vk ≥ Vr ; (ii) If b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 and w22 > w21 , then
  ∗     ∗        r     r                                                    ∗
(w21 , w22 ) = (w21 , w22 ) and Vr ≥ Vk ; (iii) If and only if y2 ≥ b, b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 .

   The proof of this and other lemmas can be found in the appendix.

3.2    Wage policy with and without replacement

Lemma 2 suggests a simple procedure for characterizing the optimal wage policy of the
firm. First, characterize the solution to (K). That is, characterize the wages that maximize
the sum of the firm’s profits and the senior workers’ utility subject to the no-replacement
constraint, w22 ≤ w21 , and the individual rationality constraint, b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 . Second,
characterize the solution to (R). That is, characterize the wages that maximize the sum
of the firm’s profits and the senior workers’ utility subject to the replacement constraint,
w22 > w21 , and the individual rationality constraint. Finally, compare the two maximized
sums to identify the prescriptions of the optimal wage policy. The following pages carry out

                                                     12
this procedure under the maintained assumption that w1 and y2 are greater than z, where z
is the consumption equivalent of the flow value of search, i.e. υ(z) = Z(x) − βEZ(x0 ).

3.2.1   Wage policy under commitment

As a preliminary step, it is useful to characterize the prescriptions of the optimal wage policy
if the firm could commit not to replace senior workers with new hires. In this case, one can
show that the optimal wage policy solves the problem

           V̂ = max           n1 [δυ(b) + (1 − δ)υ(w22 )] /υ 0 (w1 )
                (w21 ,w22 )
                           +n1 (1 − δ)(y2 − w22 ) + [n − n1 (1 − δ)] q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 ),      (C)
                      s.t. b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 ,

where the objective function is the weighted sum of the firm’s profits and the senior workers’
utility in the second period given that senior workers are never replaced by new hires.
   The optimal hiring wage ŵ21 satisfies the first order condition

                                      q̃ 0 (ŵ21 )(y2 − ŵ21 ) = q̃(ŵ21 ).                    (6)

Since the firm can commit not to replace senior workers, the hiring wage ŵ21 aﬀects the
profits of the firm, but does not aﬀect the utility of senior workers. In particular, an increase
in ŵ21 has a positive eﬀect on the profits of the firm because each vacant job is filled with
higher probability. This eﬀect is measured by the lhs of (6). On the other hand, an increase
in ŵ21 has a negative eﬀect on the profits of the firm because it reduces the profit margin on
each new hire. This eﬀect is measured by the rhs of (6). The optimal hiring wage equates
these two eﬀects. The lhs of (6) is positive for ŵ21 < y2 and negative otherwise. The rhs of (6)
is zero for ŵ21 ≤ z and positive otherwise. Hence, the optimal hiring wage lies between the
flow value of search z and the productivity of the firm y2 . Moreover, q̃ 0 (ŵ21 ) is a decreasing
function of ŵ21 . Hence, the optimal hiring wage is increasing in y2 .
   The optimal wage for senior workers ŵ22 satisfies the first order condition

                                           υ 0 (ŵ22 )/υ 0 (w1 ) ≥ 1,                          (7)

and ŵ22 ≤ y2 with complementary slackness. On the one hand, an increase in ŵ22 raises the
weighted utility of each senior worker by υ 0 (ŵ22 )/υ 0 (w1 ). On the other hand, an increase in


                                                      13
ŵ22 reduces the profit that the firm earns on each senior worker by 1 dollar. The optimal
wage for senior workers equates these two eﬀects as long as it satisfies the constraint ŵ22 ≤ y2 .
Hence, ŵ22 is equal to the past wage of senior workers if the firm’s productivity is greater
than w1 , and is equal to y2 otherwise. From the properties of ŵ21 and ŵ22 , it follows that
there exists a ŷ such that the optimal wage for new hires, ŵ21 , is greater than the optimal
wage for senior workers, ŵ22 , if the firm’s productivity is greater than ŷ, and such that ŵ21
is smaller than ŵ22 if the firm’s productivity is less than ŷ. The properties of ŵ21 and ŵ22
are summarized in the following proposition and illustrated in figure 1.

Proposition 3 Let (ŵ21 , ŵ22 ) denote the solution to (C). (i) For y2 > z, the wage for new
hires ŵ21 lies in the interval (z, y2 ), and the wage for senior workers ŵ22 equals min{w1 , y2 }.
(ii) There exists a ŷ such that ŵ21 < (>)ŵ22 if y2 < (>)ŷ.

3.2.2   Wage policy without replacement

Now, we return to the case in which the firm cannot commit not to replace senior workers
with new hires. The following proposition characterizes the solution to (K), i.e. the second
period wages that maximize the weighted sum of the firm’s profits and the senior workers’
utility subject to the no replacement constraint, w22 ≤ w21 , and the individual rationality
constraint, b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 .

                    k     k
Proposition 4 Let (w21 , w22 ) denote the solution to (K). (i) For y2 > ŷ, the wage for new
       k                                                 k
hires w21 equals ŵ21 , and the wage for senior workers w22 equals ŵ22 . (ii) There exists a
                                           k       k
yk ∈ (z, ŷ) such that, for yk < y2 < ŷ, w21 and w22 are both equal to w2k ∈ (ŵ21 , ŵ22 ). (iii)
                   k       k
For z ≤ y2 ≤ yk , w21 and w22 are both equal to w2k = y2 .

   The results in proposition 4 are intuitive. When the productivity of the firm is greater
than ŷ, the no-replacement constraint does not bind at (ŵ21 , ŵ22 ). In this case, the optimal
             k
hiring wage w21 equals ŵ21 , the wage that the firm would choose if it could commit not to
                                                                 k
replace workers. Similarly, the optimal wage for senior workers w22 equals ŵ22 , the wage that
the firm would choose under commitment. When the productivity of the firm is between yk
and ŷ, the no-replacement constraint is violated at (ŵ21 , ŵ22 ). In this case, the wage for new
hires and the wage for senior workers are both set equal to w2k . This firm-wide wage satisfies


                                                14
the first order condition
                  £                        ¤                  £                                ¤
        n1 (1 − δ) υ 0 (w2k )/υ 0 (w1 ) − 1 + [n − n1 (1 − δ)] q̃ 0 (w2k )(y2 − w2k ) − q̃(w2 ) = 0.    (8)

The first term on the rhs of (8) is the eﬀect of an increase in w2k on the utility of senior
workers and on the profits that the firm earns on them. The second term is the eﬀect of
an increase in w2k on the profits that the firm earns on new recruits. The optimal firm-wide
wage equates the sum of these two eﬀects to zero. The first term on the rhs of (8) is positive
for w2k < w1 , and negative otherwise. The second term is negative for w2k > ŵ21 . Since the
constraint w2k ≤ y2 does not bind for y2 ∈ [yk , ŷ], it follows that w2k is greater than ŵ21 and
smaller than ŵ22 = min{w1 , y2 }. That is, the optimal firm-wide wage is greater than the
wage for new hires and smaller than the wage for senior workers that the firm would choose
under commitment. Finally, when the productivity of the firm falls below yk , the constraint
w2 ≤ y2 begins to bind. In this case, the optimal firm-wide wage equals the productivity of
                              k     k
the firm. The properties of (w21 , w22 ) are illustrated in figure 2.

3.2.3    Wage policy with replacement

The following proposition characterizes the solution to (R), i.e. the second period wages
that maximize the weighted sum of the firm’s profits and the senior workers’ utility subject
to the replacement constraint, w21 < w22 , and the individual rationality constraint.

                    r     r
Proposition 5 Let (w21 , w22 ) denote the solution to (R). For z ≤ y2 ≤ ŷ, the wage for new
       r                                                                    r
hires w21 lies in the interval [z, ŵ21 ), and the wage for senior workers w22 equals ŵ22 .

                            r
   The optimal hiring wage w21 satisfies the first order condition

            r
  n [q̃ 0 (w21         r
               )(y2 − w21         r
                          ) − q̃(w21                     r
                                     )] = n(1 − δ)q̃ 0 (w21          r
                                                            ) {y2 − w22       r
                                                                        + [υ(w22 ) − υ(b)] /υ 0 (w1 )} . (9)

                                 r
On the one hand, an increase in w21 aﬀects the profits that the firm earns on new recruits.
                                                                             r
This eﬀect is measured by the lhs of (9). On the other hand, an increase in w21 increases
the probability of replacement for senior workers and, hence, it reduces their utility as well
as the profits that the firm earns from them. This eﬀect is measured by the rhs of (9). The
                                                                                   r
optimal hiring wage equates these two eﬀects. The term on the lhs is positive for w21 < ŵ21
                                                                 r
and negative otherwise. The term on the rhs is positive. Hence, w21 is less than ŵ21 . That is,

                                                    15
the optimal hiring wage is lower than the wage that the firm would oﬀer under commitment.
                                                  r
In contrast, the optimal wage for senior workers w22 equals ŵ22 , the wage that the firm would
choose under commitment. Intuitively, even though the possibility of replacement aﬀects the
utility of senior workers and the profits that the firm makes oﬀ of them, it does not aﬀect
                                                            r     r
the optimal resolution of the trade-oﬀ. The properties of (w21 , w22 ) are illustrated in figure
3.

3.3      The optimal wage policy

Theorem 6 Let σ ∗ = (w1∗ , w2i
                            ∗
                               ) be the optimal wage policy. (i) For y2 ≥ ŷ, the wage for new
       ∗          k                                   ∗          k           k
hires w21 equals w21 and the wage for senior workers w22 equals w22 , where w2i = ŵ2i . (ii)
                                                        ∗       ∗
There exists a y ∈ [z, ŷ) such that, for y ≤ y2 < ŷ, w21 and w22 are both equal w2k , where
w2k ∈ (ŵ21 , ŵ22 ).

     The theorem characterizes the properties of the optimal wage policy of the firm in the
presence of the replacement problem. First, consider the case in which the productivity of
the firm is greater than ŷ. In this case, the wage policy without replacement prescribes
            k     k            k     k
the wages (w21 , w22 ) where (w21 , w22 ) = (ŵ21 , ŵ22 ). Under this policy, senior workers have
the same probability of employment and the same wage as under commitment. Moreover,
under this policy, the firm recruits the same number of new hires for its vacant jobs and pays
them the same wage as under commitment. Since this policy distorts neither the provision
of insurance to senior workers nor the recruitment of new hires, Vk = V̂ . In turn, since Vk ,
Vr ≤ V̂ , this implies that the policy without replacement is optimal.
     Next consider the case in which the productivity of the firm is less than ŷ. In this
case, the policy without replacement prescribes the wage w2k for both new hires and senior
workers, where ŵ21 < w2k < ŵ22 . Under this policy, senior workers have the same probability
of employment but a lower wage than they would under commitment. Moreover, under
this policy, the firm hires more workers for its vacant jobs and pays them more than in
the commitment case. In contrast, the wage policy with replacement prescribes the wage
 r                     r                             r              r
w21 for new hires and w22 for senior workers, where w21 < ŵ21 and w22 = ŵ22 . Under this
policy, senior workers have the same wage as under commitment, but a lower probability of
employment. Moreover, the firm hires fewer workers for its vacant jobs and pays them less


                                               16
than it would under commitment. Overall, when the productivity of the firm is less than ŷ,
both policies introduce some distortions in the provision of insurance to senior workers and
in the recruitment of new hires, i.e. Vk , Vr < V̂ In principle, either one of these two policies
may be optimal.
   However, if the productivity of the firm is not too far below ŷ, the optimal wage policy
is always the one without replacement. The intuition for this result is straightforward. For
y2 → ŷ − , the distortions introduced by the policy without replacement disappear because
w2k → ŵ21 , ŵ22 . In contrast, for y2 → ŷ − , the distortions introduced by the policy with
                               r
replacement do not vanish. If w21 converges to a value greater than z, the firm attracts
some applicants to its filled jobs and the probability of employment for senior workers is too
         r
low. If w21 converges to z, the firm does not attract any applicants and the number of filled
vacancies is too low. Therefore, there exists an interval [y, ŷ] for y2 where the wage policy
without replacement is the optimal one. Whether y is equal to z (and the optimal policy is
always the one without replacement) or it is greater than z (and the optimal policy is the
one with replacement for suﬃciently low y2 ) depends on the fundamentals of the model. For
the parameter values presented at the end of the next section, we find that y = z. Figure 4
illustrates an optimal wage policy in which y > z.
   The key implication of theorem 6 is that the contractual solution to the worker replace-
ment problem induces a form of downward rigidity in the wage of new hires. The firm would
like to oﬀer to its senior workers a wage that remains constant over time, and to its new
hires a wage that varies in response to changes in productivity. When the productivity of
the firm falls below a critical threshold, the wage that the firm would like to oﬀer to its
new hires is less than the wage oﬀered to senior workers in the past. Since at these wages
the firm would have an incentive to replace senior workers with new hires, the firm chooses
instead to oﬀer the same wage to everybody (as long as y2 is not too low). This firm-wide
wage successfully prevents replacement, but it distorts the wage of senior workers down and
the wage of new hires up. Hence, the optimal solution to the worker replacement problem
dampens the response to negative productivity shocks of the wage oﬀered by old firms to
new hires.




                                               17
4     Macroeconomics of worker replacement
This section studies how the worker replacement problem aﬀects the response of unemploy-
ment and vacancies to aggregate productivity shocks. To this aim, the section compares the
predictions of our model with those of a model in which the replacement problem does not
arise because firms can commit not to substitute senior workers with new recruits.

4.1     Environment

For this section, we restrict attention to a particular stochastic process for the aggregate state
of the economy x and for the idiosyncratic productivity of the firm y. The aggregate state
of the economy can take one of two values x ∈ {x , xh }, where x is a state in which firms
have low productivity (a recession), and xh is a state in which firms have high productivity
(an expansion). In particular, when x = xj , j = , h, a new firm has productivity y1j and an
old firm has productivity y2j , where b < y1 < y1h and b < y2 < y2h . The aggregate state of the
economy is very persistent, in the sense that πx (xj |xj ) → 1 for j = , h. This specification
of the stochastic process for x and y aﬀords a clear-cut comparison between the predictions
of our model and those of a model in which firms can commit not to replace workers.
    We also restrict attention to particular parameter values. Let (Ẑ, θ̂, σ̂) be the equilibrium
of a version of the model in which firms can commit not to replace workers. We choose the
productivity of the firm in the first and second period of activity so that the wage policy
σ̂(xj ) = (ŵ1j , ŵ2i
                    j
                       (x0 )) prescribes a hiring wage that remains constant throughout the life of
the firm (conditional on a given state of the economy). That is, we choose (y1j , y2j ) so that
ŵ1j = ŵ21
         j
            (xj ) for j = , h. Moreover, we choose the cost of entry k so that number of
applicants attracted by a vacant job remains constant during the life of the firm. That is,
we choose k so that θ̂(W1 (σ̂(x ), x )) = θ̂(W2 (ŵ21 (x ), x )).
    The parametric restrictions above can be interpreted as normalizations. If a firm had
an infinite horizon and a constant productivity, the optimal wage policy under commitment
would prescribe a constant hiring wage and would attract a constant number of applicants
to each vacancy. However, for the sake of tractability, our model assumes that firms have a
finite horizon. Hence, if a firm in our model had a constant productivity, the optimal wage
policy under commitment would prescribe a time-varying hiring wage and would attract a


                                                 18
time-varying number of applicants. The parametric restrictions above make sure that the
behavior of a firm in our model reproduces the behavior of a firm with an infinite horizon.

4.2        Competitive search equilibrium

Lemma 7 Let (Ẑ, θ̂, σ̂) be the competitive search equilibrium of the model in which firms
can commit not to replace workers. Then (Z, θ, σ) is a competitive search equilibrium of
our model, where: (i) Z = Ẑ and Z(x ) < Z(xh ); (ii) θ = θ̂ and θ(W, x ) > θ(W, xh );
(iii) σ(x ) = σ̂(x ) and σ(xh ) = (w1h , w2i
                                          h
                                             (x0 )), where w1h = ŵ1h and w2i
                                                                           h            h
                                                                              (xh ) = ŵ2i (xh ) for
i = 1, 2. Moreover, as long as |y1h − y1 | is not too large, w2i
                                                              h
                                                                 (x ) = w2 for i = 1, 2, where
  h                h
ŵ21 (x ) < w2 < ŵ22 (x ).

       Lemma 7 characterizes the properties of the equilibrium of our model.10 The wage policy
of a firm that enters the labor market during a recession is the same that the firm would
choose if it could commit not to replace workers. This result is intuitive. The wage policy
under commitment prescribes the wage ŵ1 in the first period. In the second period, the
policy prescribes that senior workers should be paid the same wage as in the first period,
and that new hires should be paid the wage ŵ21 (x0 ) that maximizes the value of the firm’s
vacant jobs. Since ŵ1 = ŵ21 (x ) and ŵ21 (x ) < ŵ21 (xh ), the optimal wage policy under
commitment never tempts the firm to replace senior workers with new hires. Hence, it is
also the optimal policy under limited commitment.
       The wage policy of a firm that enters the labor market during an expansion is σ(xh ). In
the first period, the policy prescribes the wage ŵ1h . If in the second period the economy is
                                                         h              h
still in an expansion, the policy prescribes the wages ŵ21 (xh ) and ŵ22 (xh ), the same wages
that the firm would choose under commitment. These wages are optimal because they do
not induce the firm to replace senior workers with new hires. If the economy turns into a
                       h             h
recession, the wages ŵ21 (x ) and ŵ22 (x ) would induce the firm to replace workers because
  h           h
ŵ21 (x ) < ŵ22 (x ). For this reason, the wage policy prescribes the wage w2 for both new
                                  h                h
hires and senior workers, where ŵ21 (x ) < w2 < ŵ22 (x ).
       Notice that, when a firm enters the labor market, its expected profits are the same as
under commitment. Intuitively, if the firm enters the labor market during a recession, its
  10
       The proof of Lemma 7 is avaliable upon request.



                                                     19
expected profits are the same as under commitment because the wage policy is the same. If
the firm enters the labor market during an expansion, the wage policy is the same as under
commitment as long as the economy remains in an expansion. Since the probability of this
event is 1, the profits of the firm are the same as under commitment. In turn, from the
free-entry condition, it follows that, if the expected profits of a new firm are the same as
under commitment, so are the worker’s value of search Z and the expected queue length θ.
       Overall, the only diﬀerence between the equilibrium of our model and the equilibrium
of the model with commitment are the wages that old firms pay to new hires and senior
workers when the economy moves from an expansion to a recession.11 Then, it is clear that
the worker replacement problem will not aﬀect the response of the labor market to a positive
shock to aggregate productivity, but it will have an eﬀect on the response of unemployment,
vacancies and other labor market variables to a negative shock. In the following pages we
shall characterize these eﬀects.

4.3       Unemployment and vacancies

Suppose that the economy moves from an expansion to a recession. In the economy there
are f2 old firms, where f2 is determined by the history of realizations of the aggregate
productivity shock. Every old firm has the wage policy σ(xh ) which prescribes that both
new hires and senior workers should be paid the wage w2 in the current period. Every old
firm has n1 (1 − δ) filled jobs and n − n1 (1 − δ) vacant jobs. At the search stage, each
one of these vacant jobs attracts θ2 applicants and is filled with probability q(θ2 ), where
θ2 = θ̃(w2 , x ). Hence, at the production stage, every old firm employs n1 (1 − δ) senior
workers and [n − n1 (1 − δ)]q(θ2 ) new hires.
       Entrepreneurs create f1 new firms, where f1 is determined endogenously. Every new
firm chooses the wage policy σ(x ) which prescribes that workers should be paid the wage
ŵ1 in the current period. Every new firm has n vacant jobs. At the search stage, each
one of these vacant jobs attracts θ1 applicants and is filled with probability q(θ1 ), where
θ1 = θ̃(ŵ21 (x ), x ) because of our normalizations. Hence, at the production stage, every
  11
    If the transition probability of x from one state to the other were greater than zero, the worker replace-
ment problem would also have an indirect eﬀect on the value of search Z and on the queue length θ. This
paper does not explore how these indirect eﬀects impact the response of unemployment and vacancies to
productivity shocks.


                                                     20
new firm employs nq(θ1 ) workers.
   The number of new firms clears the market for applicants. That is, the number of new
firms is such that the number of job applications received by new and old firms is equal to
the number of workers who apply for a job, a. Since every new firm receives nθ1 applications
and every old firm receives [n − n1 (1 − δ)]θ2 applications, the number of new firms is

                             f1 = {a − f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)]θ2 }/ nθ1 .                      (10)

   The vacancy rate, the job-finding rate and the unemployment rate are

                  v = f1 n + f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)],
                      ¡       ¢         ¡            ¢
                  h = f1 nθ
                          a
                            1
                                p(θ1 ) + 1 − f1 nθ
                                                a
                                                   1
                                                       p(θ2 ),                             (11)
                  u = 1 − f1 nq(θ1 ) − f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)]q(θ2 ) − f2 n1 (1 − δ).

The vacancy rate v is the sum of vacant jobs at new and old firms. The job-finding rate h
is the weighted average of the job-finding rate for workers who apply for jobs at new and
old firms. The unemployment rate u is the diﬀerence between the number of workers in the
economy and the number of workers employed at new and old firms.

4.4    Worker replacement as an amplification mechanism

To understand how the worker replacement problem aﬀects the response of the labor market
to a negative productivity shock, we compare the predictions of our model with those of a
model in which firms can commit not to replace workers. As shown in lemma 7, when the
economy is hit by a negative productivity shock, the wage oﬀered by old firms to new hires
falls less in our model than it would in a model with commitment. Specifically, this wage
falls to w2 rather than to ŵ21 (x ), where w2 > ŵ21 (x ). Because of this downward wage
rigidity, the number of workers who apply for a vacant job at an old firm increases more in
our model than it would in a model with commitment. Specifically, this number increases
to θ2 rather than θ̃(ŵ21 (x ), x ), which is equal to θ1 because of our normalizations.
   From the above observations and equations (10) and (11), it follows that, when the
economy is hit by a negative productivity shock, the vacancy rate in our model falls more than
it would in a model with commitment. Specifically, the vacancy rate falls by an additional

                         ∆v = f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)] · [(θ2 − θ1 ) /θ1 ] > 0.                 (12)

                                                21
The first term on the rhs of (12) is the number of vacant jobs at old firms. The second
term is the relative diﬀerence between the number of applicants attracted by each of these
jobs in our model and in a model with commitment. This expression is intuitive. For every
additional worker who applies to old firms, there are 1/nθ1 fewer firms that find it profitable
to enter the labor market and, hence, there are 1/θ1 fewer vacancies.
   From equations (10) and (11), it also follows that, in response to a negative productivity
shock, the job-finding rate in our model falls more than it would in a model with commitment.
Specifically, the job-finding rate falls by an additional

                     ∆h      =f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)] [q(θ1 )θ2 /θ1 − q(θ2 )]/ a
                                                                                          (13)
                             ={f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)]θ2 /a} · [p(θ1 ) − p(θ2 )] > 0,

where the second line makes use of q(θ) = p(θ)θ. This expression is intuitive. The first term
on the rhs of (13) is the fraction of applicants who look for vacant jobs at old firms. The
second term is the diﬀerence between the probability that an applicant finds one of these
jobs in our model and in a model with commitment. Finally, equations (10) and (11) imply
that unemployment in our model increases more than it would under commitment, where
the additional increase is

                          ∆u = f2 θ2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)] [p(θ1 ) − p(θ2 )] > 0.              (14)

   Overall, the worker replacement problem amplifies the response of the vacancy, job-
finding and unemployment rates to a negative shock to aggregate productivity. In contrast,
it is straightforward to see that the replacement problem has no eﬀect on how the labor
market responds to a positive shock. Intuitively, the worker replacement problem leads to
a form of downward rigidity in the wage of new hires at old firms. When the economy is
hit by a negative productivity shock, this downward wage rigidity amplifies the increase in
the number of applicants attracted by old firms, it amplifies the decline in the number of
firms that enter the market and, ultimately, the decline in vacancies and the increase in
unemployment. When the economy is hit by a positive productivity shock, the wage of
new hires at old firms is unaﬀected and so are labor market outcomes. These findings are
summarized in the following theorem.

Theorem 8 The worker replacement problem amplifies the response of v, h and u to a

                                                  22
negative shock to the aggregate productivity x. However, the worker replacement problem
does not aﬀect the response of v, h or u to a positive shock to aggregate productivity.

       The model cannot be used for a thorough quantitative analysis of business cycles because
of the assumption that firms operate for two periods only. Nevertheless, the model can still be
used to get a sense of the importance of the worker replacement problem as an amplification
mechanism. To this aim, note that the expected utility of a worker who applies for a job at
an old firm is the same in our model and in a model with commitment, i.e.

                            p(θ2 ) [υ(w2 ) − υ(b)] + U (x ) = Z(x )
                                               £                 ¤
                            = Ẑ(x ) = p(θ1 ) υ(ŵ21 (x )) − υ(b) + U(x ).
                                                                         £                   ¤
The above equation implies that p(θ2 ) [υ(w2 ) − υ(b)] is equal to p(θ1 ) υ(ŵ21 (x )) − υ(b) .
Using this fact, we can rewrite ∆u as

                                                                υ(w2 ) − υ(ŵ21 (x ))
                      ∆u    = f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)] θ2 · p(θ1 ) ·
                                                                   υ(w2 ) − υ(b)
                                                                                                          (15)
                                                                w2 − ŵ21 (x )
                            ≈ f2 [n − n1 (1 − δ)] θ2 · p(θ1 ) ·                .
                                                                   w2 − b
The first term on the rhs of (15) is the measure of workers who apply to old firms. The
second term is the job-finding probability for a worker who applies to a new firm. The third
term measures the extent of the wage rigidity caused by the replacement problem as the
ratio between w2 − ŵ21 (x ) and w2 − b. Now, suppose that the measure of workers who apply
to old firms is 30% per period, that the job-finding probability is 90%, that w2 − ŵ21 (x ) is
0.5% of w2 and w2 −b is 30% of w2 .12 . Given these numbers, the worker replacement problem
amplifies the response of unemployment to a negative productivity shock by approximately
1/2 of a percentage point.13 Considering that in a typical recession the unemployment rate
increases by 3 percentage points and that presumably only a fraction of this increase is
attributable to the decline in labor productivity, the worker replacement problem appears
to be a quantitatively important mechanism through which negative productivity shocks are
  12
      It is easy to construct examples that deliver similar numbers. For instance, suppose that the preferences
of the worker are given by β = .95, b = .46, and υ(c) = c1−γ /(1−γ) with γ = 2. Suppose that the technology
of the firm is given by δ = .1, y2 = 1 and y2h = 1.05. Suppose that the matching technology is given by
p(θ) = M θη−1 , q(θ) = M θη , where M = 1/10 and η = 1/2. Then, given our normalizations for y1 , y1h and
k, the measure of workers applying to old firms is 39%, the job-finding probability at new firms is 90%, the
diﬀerence w2 − ŵ21 (x ) is .5% of w2 , and the diﬀerence w2 − b is 28% of w2 .
   13
      By comparison, in the standard search model of Pissarides (1985), a 5 percent decline in productivity
increases unemployment by 0.1 percentage points.

                                                      23
transmitted into the labor market.


5     Conclusions
The paper advances a theory of downward rigidity for the wage on new hires in the context
of a labor market with search frictions. Firms want to insure existing workers against income
fluctuations, because workers are risk averse and have no access to the capital market. To
perform this task eﬃciently, firms would like to keep the wage of each worker constant over
time. Firms also want to attract applicants to fill the jobs that become vacant because
of turnover. To perform this task eﬃciently, firms would like to oﬀer a hiring wage that
varies over time with the state of the economy. Generally, firms cannot perform both tasks
eﬃciently because they cannot commit not to replace senior workers with new hires.
    The first part of the paper studied the eﬀect of the worker replacement problem on
the optimal design of the wage policy of the firm. We found that, because of the worker
replacement problem, the wage policy prescribes a hiring wage that does not vary as much as
the eﬃcient hiring wage in response to negative productivity shocks. The downward rigidity
in the hiring wage allows the firm to keep the wage profile of existing workers smooth without
having the temptation to replace them with new recruits. This finding may help explain why,
in the real world, managers are reluctant to hire new workers for less than the wage of existing
workers even during recessions.
    The second part of the paper studies how the worker replacement problem aﬀects the
response of unemployment and vacancies to aggregate productivity shocks. We found that
the worker replacement dampens the decline in the wage of new hires at old firms in response
to a negative shock. In turn, this wage rigidity amplifies the increase in the number of
unemployed workers who look for jobs at old firms, it amplifies the decline in the entry of
new firms in the labor market and, ultimately, it amplifies the increase in the unemployment
rate in response to a negative shock. In contrast, the worker replacement problem does not
aﬀect the response of the labor market to positive aggregate productivity shocks. A back-of-
the-envelope calculation suggests that the worker replacement problem may help explain why
small aggregate productivity shocks are associated with large unemployment fluctuations.




                                              24
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., Shimer, R., 1999. Eﬃcient unemployment insurance. Journal of Political
    Economy 107, 893—928.

 [2] Agell, J., Bennmarker, H., 2007. Wage incentives and wage rigidity: A representative
    view from within. Labour Economics 14, 347—69.

 [3] Azariadis, C., 1975. Implicit contracts and underemployment equilibria. Journal of Po-
    litical Economy 83, 1183—202.

 [4] Bewley, T., 1999. Why wages don’t fall during a recession?. Harvard University Press,
    Cambridge, MA.

 [5] Blinder, A., Choi, D. 1990. A shred of evidence on theories of wage stickiness. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 105, 1003—15.

 [6] Burdett, K., Mortensen, D., 1998. Wage diﬀerentials, employer size, and unemployment.
    International Economic Review 39, 257—73.

 [7] Gertler, M., Trigari, A., 2009. Unemployment fluctuations with staggered nash bargain-
    ing. Journal of Political Economy 117, 38—86.

 [8] Hall, R., 2005. Employment fluctuations with equilibrium wage stickiness. American
    Economic Review 95, 50—65.

 [9] Kennan, J., 2009. Private information, wage bargaining and employment fluctuations.
    Review of Economic Studies (forthcoming).

[10] MacLeod, B., Malcomson, J., 1989. Implicit contracts, incentive compatibility, and
    involuntary unemployment. Econometrica 57, 447—80.

[11] Menzio, G., 2005. High-frequency wage rigidity. Unpublished Manuscript, University of
    Pennsylvania.

[12] Menzio, G., Shi, S., 2009a. Eﬃcient search on the job and the business cycle. NBER
    Working Paper.


                                             25
[13] Menzio, G., Shi, S., 2009b. Block recursive equilibria for stochastic models of search on
    the job. Journal of Economic Theory (forthcoming).

[14] Moen, E., 1997. Competitive search equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy 105,
    694—723.

[15] Moen, E., Rosen, Å., 2008. Incentives in competitive search equilibrium. Unpublished
    Manuscript, Norwegian School of Management.

[16] Pissarides, C. 1985. Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment, vacancies, and
    real wages. American Economic Review 75, 676—690.

[17] Rudanko, L., 2009. Labor market dynamics under long-term wage contracting. Journal
    of Monetary Economics 56, 170—83.

[18] Shimer, R., 1996. Contracts in a frictional labor market. Unpublished Manuscript,
    M.I.T.

[19] Shimer, R., 2005. The cyclical behavior of unemployment and vacancies. American
    Economic Review 95, 25—49.

[20] Snell, A., Thomas, J., 2008. Labor contracts, equal treatment, and wage-unemployment
    dynamics. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Edinburgh.

[21] Thomas, J., Worrall, T., 1988. Self-enforcing wage contracts. Review of Economic Stud-
    ies 55, 541—53.




                                             26
27
                                             Appendix
A       Proof of Lemma 2
(i) Let σ ∗ = (w1∗ , w2i
                      ∗
                         ) be the optimal wage policy for a new firm, given that the aggregate
state of the economy is x, and the productivity of the firm is y1 . Let w∗21 denote w21
                                                                                     ∗
                                                                                        (s) for
s ∈ S ∗ , where S ∗ is the set {(x0 , y20 , μ02 ) : x0 = x, y20 = y 2 , μ02 ∈ [μ2 , μ2 ]}. Similarly, let w∗22
        ∗
denote w22 (s) for s ∈ S ∗ . Suppose that w∗22 ≤ w∗21 and w∗22 ∈ [b, y2 ].
                                                                                     / S ∗ , w2i (s)
Next, let σ = (w1 , w2i ) denote an alternative wage policy such that: (i) for all s ∈
             ∗
is equal to w2i (s); (ii) for all s ∈ S ∗ , w2i (s) is equal to w2i ; (iii) W1 (σ, x) = W1 (σ ∗ , x). In
                                                                       / S ∗ , the wages for new
words, the alternative wage policy σ is such that: (i) in all states s ∈
hires and senior workers are the same as under the policy σ ∗ ; (ii) in all states s ∈ S ∗ , the
wages for new hires and senior workers may be diﬀerent than under the policy σ ∗ ; (iii) in its
first period of activity, the firm oﬀers the same lifetime utility as under the policy σ ∗ . The
last property implies that, in its first period of activity, the firm employs the same number
of workers as under the policy σ∗ .
First, consider the case in which w22 ≤ w21 and w22 ∈ [b, y2 ]. In this case, the diﬀerence
between the profits of the firm under the wage policy σ ∗ and the alternative policy σ

               F (σ ∗ , x, y1 ) − F (σ, x, y1 )
             = n1 (w1 − w1∗ ) + β Pr(S ∗ )n1 (1 − δ)(w22 − w∗22 )                                        (16)
             + β Pr(S ∗ )[n − n1 (1 − δ)][q̃(w∗21 )(y2 − w∗21 ) − q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )] ≥ 0,

where
                       w1 = υ −1 {υ(w1∗ ) + β Pr(S ∗ )(1 − δ) [υ(w∗22 ) − υ(w22 )]} .                    (17)

After substituting (17) into (16), we obtain
                              ∙                                  ¸
                                F (σ ∗ , x, y1 ) − F (σ, x, y1 )
                    limμ2 →μ2
                                           β Pr(S ∗ )
                                                                                                         (18)
                = n1 (1 − δ) {[υ(w∗22 ) − υ(w22 )] /υ 0 (w1∗ ) + w22 − w∗22 }
                + [n − n1 (1 − δ)][q̃(w∗21 )(y2 − w∗21 ) − q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )] ≥ 0.

Denote as vk (w21 , w22 ) the objective function in the maximization problem (K). Then, it is
straightforward to verify that the above limit is equal to the diﬀerence between vk (w∗21 , w∗22 )
and vk (w21 , w22 ).


                                                     28
Next, consider the case in which w21 < w22 and w22 ∈ [b, y2 ]. In this case, the diﬀerence
between the profits of the firm under the policy σ ∗ and the alternative policy σ is

              F (σ ∗ , x, y1 ) − F (σ, x, y1 )
            = n1 (w1 − w1∗ ) + β Pr(S ∗ )n1 (1 − δ)[q̃(w21 )w21 + (1 − q̃(w21 ))w22 − w∗22 ]      (19)
            + β Pr(S ∗ )[n − n1 (1 − δ)][q̃(w∗21 )(y2 − w∗21 ) − q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )] ≥ 0,

where

    w1 = υ −1 {υ(w1∗ ) + β Pr(S ∗ )(1 − δ) [υ(w∗22 ) − q̃(w21 )υ(b) − (1 − q̃(w21 ))υ(w22 )]} .   (20)

After substituting (20) into (19), we obtain
                            ∙                                  ¸
                              F (σ ∗ , x, y1 ) − F (σ, x, y1 )
                  limμ2 →μ2
                                         β Pr(S ∗ )
              = n1 (1 − δ) [υ(w∗22 ) − q̃(w21 )υ(b) − (1 − q̃(w21 ))υ(w22 )] /υ 0 (w1∗ )          (21)
              + n1 (1 − δ) [q̃(w21 )w21 + (1 − q̃(w21 ))w22 − w∗22 ]
              + [n − n1 (1 − δ)][q̃(w∗21 )(y2 − w∗21 ) − q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )] ≥ 0.

Denote as vr (w21 , w22 ) the objective function in the maximization problem (R). Then, it is
straightforward to verify that the above limit is equal to the diﬀerence between vk (w∗21 , w∗22 )
and vr (w21 , w22 )..
Finally, note that inequality (18) holds for all wages (w21 , w22 ) such that w22 ≤ w21 and
b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 . Moreover, note that inequality (21) holds for all wages (w21 , w22 ) such that
w21 < w22 and b ≤ w22 ≤ y2 . Hence, (18) and (21) imply that vk (w∗21 , w∗22 ) = Vk ≥ Vr and
(w∗21 , w∗22 ) = (w21
                   k     k
                      , w22 ).
(ii) We omit the proof of part (ii) because it is similar to the proof of part (i). We omit the
proof of part (iii) because it is straightforward. All details are available upon request.


B       Proof of Proposition 3
The maximization problem (C) can be written as

                    V̂ = [n − n1 (1 − δ)] max {q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )} + n1 υ(b)/υ 0 (w1 )
                                             w21
                                                                                                  (22)
                    +n1 (1 − δ) max {[υ(w22 ) − υ(b)] /υ 0 (w1 ) + y2 − w22 } .
                                 b≤w22 ≤y2


(i) Consider the first maximization problem in (22). The objective function of this problem
is continuous in w21 . It is equal to zero for w21 = z, strictly positive for w21 ∈ (z, y2 ), and


                                                    29
negative for w21 ≥ y2 . Hence, the solution to this problem, ŵ21 , exists and belongs to the
interval (z, y2 ). Now, consider the second maximization problem in (22). It is straightforward
to verify that the solution of this problem, w22 , is equal to min{w1 , y2 }.
(ii) Return to the first maximization problem in (22). For all w21 ∈ (z, y2 ), the derivative of
the objective function with respect to w21 is

              d[q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )]
                        dw21
                0
            = q̃ (w21 )(y2 − w21 ) − q̃(w21 )                                                    (23)
            = q 0 (θ(W2 (w21 )))θ0 (W2 (w21 ))υ 0 (w21 )(y2 − w21 ) − q(θ(W2 (w21 ))),
                                                     0
            = q(θ(W2 (w21 ))) 1−q (θ(W 2 (w21 )))    υ (w21 )
                                  q (θ(W2 (w21 ))) υ(w21 )−υ(b)
                                                                (y2 − w21 ) − q(θ(W2 (w21 ))),

where the third line makes use of the definitions of q̃(w) and W2 (w), and the fourth line
makes use of the equilibrium condition for θ(W ). The first term on the rhs of (23) is strictly
decreasing in w21 , because q(θ) q (θ)/(1 −       q (θ))   is a strictly decreasing function of θ and
θ(W2 (w21 )) is strictly increasing in w21 . The second term is also strictly decreasing in w21 ,
because q(θ) is a strictly increasing function of θ. Hence, the objective function is strictly
concave in w21 . This implies that ŵ21 is the unique solution to

                         q (θ(W2 (w21 )))     υ 0 (w21 )
                                                          (y2 − w21 ) − 1 = 0.                   (24)
                      1 − q (θ(W2 (w21 ))) υ(w21 ) − υ(b)

The lhs of (24) is strictly increasing in y2 and strictly decreasing in w21 . Hence, ŵ21 is
strictly increasing in y2 . For any given w21 , the lhs of (24) is strictly positive when y2 is
suﬃciently large. Hence, limy2 →∞ ŵ21 = ∞. From these properties of ŵ21 and from the fact
that ŵ21 ∈ (z, y2 ) and ŵ22 = min{w1 , y2 }, it follows that there exists a unique ŷ such that
ŵ21 > (<)ŵ22 if y2 > (<)ŷ.


C      Proof of Proposition 4
The maximization problem (K) can be written as

                Vk = max         [n − n1 (1 − δ)] q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 ) + n1 υ(b)/υ 0 (w1 )
                      w21 ,w22
                               n1 (1 − δ) {[υ(w22 ) − υ(b)] /u0 (w1 ) + y2 − w22 } ,             (25)
                          s.t. b ≤ w22 ≤ w22 ≤ y2 .

First, notice that the objective function in (25) is continuous in (w21 , w22 ) and the the feasible


                                                   30
set is non-empty and compact. Hence, a solution to the maximization problem (25) exists.
Second, notice that the objective function is strictly concave in (w21 , w22 ) and the feasible
set is convex. Hence, the solution to the maximization problem (25) is unique. Moreover,
               k
the solution (w21    k
                  , w22 ) and the multiplier λk satisfy the following necessary and suﬃcient
conditions for optimality with respect to (w21 , w22 , λ):
(i) the wage w21 is such that

                      [n − n1 (1 − δ)] [q̃0 (w21 )(y2 − w21 ) − q̃(w21 )] + λ ≥ 0

and w21 ≤ y2 , with complementary slackness;
(ii) the wage w22 is such that

                                     n1 (1 − δ) [υ 0 (w22 )/υ 0 (w1 ) − 1] − λ ≤ 0

and b ≤ w22 , with complementary slackness;
(iii) the multiplier λ is such that λ ≥ 0 and w21 − w22 ≥ 0, with complementary slackness.
For all y2 ≥ ŷ, it is immediate to verify that the triple (ŵ21 , ŵ22 , 0) satisfies the necessary
and suﬃcient conditions for optimality (i)—(iii). For all y2 < ŷ, it is immediate to verify that
the optimality conditions (i)—(iii) are satisfied by the triple (w2k , w2k , λk ), where λk is equal
to n1 (1 − δ)[υ 0 (v2 )/υ 0 (w1 ) − 1] and w2k is the solution for w2 to the following inequalities
                          h                 i
                              υ0 (w2 )
             n1 (1 − δ)       υ0 (w1 )
                                         − 1 + [n − n1 (1 − δ)] [q̃ 0 (w2 )(y2 − w2 ) − q̃(w2 )] ≥ 0   (26)

and w2 ≤ y2 , with complementary slackness.
To characterize the properties of w2k , it is useful to denote as yk the solution for y2 to the
following equation
                                            h                 i
                                                u0 (y2 )
                          n1 (1 − δ)            u0 (w1 )
                                                           − 1 − [n − n1 (1 − δ)] q̃(y2 ) = 0.

Clearly, yk is strictly greater than z and strictly smaller than ŷ. First, consider the case
where y2 ≤ yk . In this case, the lhs of (26) is strictly decreasing in w2 , and it is positive
at w2 = y2 . Hence, w2k equals y2 . Second, consider the case where y2 ∈ (yk , ŷ). In this
case, the first term on the lhs of (26) is strictly decreasing in w2 , and it is equal to zero at
w2 = w1 . The second term is strictly decreasing in w2 , and it is equal to zero at w2 = ŵ21 ,


                                                                  31
where ŵ21 < w1 . Moreover, the sum of the first and the second terms is strictly negative at
w2 = y2 . Hence, w2k is strictly greater than ŵ21 and strictly smaller than ŵ22 = min{w1 , y2 }.


D      Proof of Proposition 5
Without the replacement constraint w12 < w22 , the maximization problem (R) can be written
as
               ⎧                                                                                 ⎫
               ⎨ nq̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 ) + n1 υ(b)/υ 0 (w1 )+                                       ⎬
 V r = max                                                                                           (27)
         w21   ⎩ +n1 (1 − δ)(1 − q̃(w21 )) max {[υ(w22 ) − υ(b)] /υ 0 (w1 ) + y2 − w22 } ⎭
                                              b≤w22 ≤y2


Consider the inner maximization problem in (27). As established in Proposition 3, the
solution to this problem, wr22 , is equal to min{w1 , y2 }. Next consider the outer maximization
problem in (27). The objective function is continuous and diﬀerentiable in w21 . Also, the
derivative of the objective function with respect to w21 is equal to zero for all w21 ≤ z and
is strictly negative for all w21 ≥ ŵ21 . Hence, the solution to this problem, wr21 , exists and
belongs to the interval [z, ŵ21 ). Finally, note that wr21 < wr22 because ŵ21 < min{w1 , y2 } for
all y2 < ŷ. Hence, the solution to the maximization problem (27) is also the solution to (R).


E     Proof of Theorem 6
The maximization problem (C) can be written as

               V̂ (y2 ) = max       [n − n1 (1 − δ)] [q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )] + n1 υ(b)/υ 0 (w1 )
                         w21 ,w22
                                 +n1 (1 − δ) {[υ(w22 ) − υ(b)] /υ 0 (w1 ) + y2 − w22 }               (28)
                            s.t. b ≤ w21 , w22 ≤ y2 ,

where we made the dependence of V̂ on y2 explicit. The objective function in (28) is contin-
uous in w21 , w22 and y2 . The feasible set in (28) is non-empty, bounded and continuous in
y2 . Hence, by the Theorem of the Maximum, the value function V̂ (y2 ) is continuous in y2 .
The maximization problem (K) can be written as

               Vk (y2 ) = max       [n − n1 (1 − δ)] [q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )] + n1 υ(b)/υ 0 (w1 )
                         w21 ,w22
                                  +n1 (1 − δ) {[υ(w22 ) − υ(b)] /υ 0 (w1 ) + y2 − w22 }              (29)
                             s.t. b ≤ w21 , w22 ≤ y2 ,

The objective function in (29) is continuous in w21 , w22 and y2 . The feasible set in (29) is

                                                     32
non-empty, bounded and continuous in y2 . Hence, by the Theorem of the Maximum, the
value function Vk (y2 ) is continuous in y2 . Now, notice that the objective function in (29) is
the same as in (28) and the feasible set in (29) is a subset of the feasible set in (28). Hence,
                                           k     k
Vk (y2 ) ≤ V̂ (y2 ). Moreover, note that (w21 , w22 ) equals (ŵ21 , ŵ22 ) for all y2 ≥ ŷ. Hence,
Vk (y2 ) = V̂ (y2 ) for all y2 ≥ ŷ.
The value function Vr (y2 ) is smaller than V r (y2 ), where

     V r (y2 ) = maxw21     nq̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 ) + n1 υ(b)/υ 0 (w1 )+
                            +n1 (1 − δ)(1 − q̃(w21 )) {[υ(ŵ22 ) − υ(b)] /υ 0 (w1 ) + y2 − ŵ22 }      (30)
     s.t.                   z ≤ w21 ≤ y2 .

The objective function in (30) is continuous in w21 and y2 . The feasible set in (30) is non-
empty, bounded and continuous in y2 . Hence, by the Theorem of the Maximum, the value
function V r (y2 ) is continuous in y2 .
The diﬀerence between V̂ (y2 ) and V r (y2 ) is

                  V̂ (y2 ) − V r (y2 )
                =    min n1 (1 − δ)q̃(w21 ) {[υ(ŵ22 ) − υ(b)] /υ 0 (w1 ) + w21 − ŵ22 }               (31)
                     z≤w21 ≤y2
                     +[n − n1 (1 − δ)][q̃(ŵ21 )(y2 − ŵ21 ) − q̃(w21 )(y2 − w21 )].

From the concavity of υ, it follows that υ(ŵ22 )−υ(b) is strictly greater than υ 0 (ŵ22 ) (ŵ22 −b).
From the inequalities ŵ22 ≤ w1 and b ≤ z ≤ w21 , it follows that υ 0 (ŵ22 ) (ŵ22 − b) is strictly
greater than υ 0 (w1 )(ŵ22 − w21 ). Hence, the first term on the rhs of (31) is strictly positive
for all w21 > z, and it is equal to zero for w21 = z. Moreover, the second term on the rhs of
(31) is strictly positive for all w21 6= ŵ21 , and it equals zero for w21 = ŵ21 . Since ŵ21 > z, it
follows that the rhs of (31) is strictly positive. Hence, V̂ (y2 ) > V r (y2 ).
In the above paragraphs, we have established that Vk (y2 ) = V̂ (y2 ) and V r (y2 ) < V̂ (y2 ) for all
y2 ≥ ŷ. Since the value functions Vk (y2 ), V̂ (y2 ) and V r (y2 ) are continuous with respect to y2 ,
there exists an y ∈ [z, ŷ) such that Vk (y2 ) > V r (y2 ) for all y2 ∈ (y, ŷ). Since V r (y2 ) ≥ Vr (y2 ),
                                                                                    k     k
the previous observations imply that the optimal wage policy prescribes the wages (w21 , w22 )
for all y2 > y.




                                                     33
