                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CREDIT DEFAULT SWAPS AND THE EMPTY CREDITOR PROBLEM

                                           Patrick Bolton
                                           Martin Oehmke

                                        Working Paper 15999
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15999


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




For helpful comments we thank Bernard Black, Charles Calomiris, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Florian
Ederer, Mark Garmaise, Charles Jones, Edward Morrison, and seminar participants at Columbia University,
Ohio State University, UCLA Anderson, MIT Sloan, Columbia Law School, and the NBER Corporate
Finance meetings. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Patrick Bolton and Martin Oehmke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Credit Default Swaps and the Empty Creditor Problem
Patrick Bolton and Martin Oehmke
NBER Working Paper No. 15999
May 2010
JEL No. G3,G33

                                            ABSTRACT

Commentators have raised concerns about the empty creditor problem that arises when a debtholder
has obtained insurance against default but otherwise retains control rights in and outside bankruptcy.
We analyze this problem from an ex-ante and ex-post perspective in a formal model of debt with limited
commitment, by comparing contracting outcomes with and without credit default swaps (CDS). We
show that CDS, and the empty creditors they give rise to, have important ex-ante commitment benefits:
By strengthening creditors' bargaining power they raise the debtor's pledgeable income and help reduce
the incidence of strategic default. However, we also show that lenders will over-insure in equilibrium,
giving rise to an inefficiently high incidence of costly bankruptcy. We discuss a number of remedies
that have been proposed to overcome the inefficiency resulting from excess insurance.


Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

Martin Oehmke
Finance and Economics Division
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 420
New York, NY 10027
moehmke@columbia.edu
   One of the most signi…cant changes in the debtor-creditor relationship in the past few years

has been the creation and subsequent exponential growth of the market for credit insurance, in

particular credit default swaps (CDS). An important aspect of this development is that credit

insurance with CDS does not just involve a risk transfer to the insurance seller. It also signi…cantly

alters the debtor-creditor relation in the event of …nancial distress, as it partially or fully separates

the creditor’s control rights from his cash-‡ow rights. Legal scholars (Hu and Black (2008a,b)) and

…nancial analysts (e.g. Yavorsky (2009)) have raised concerns about the possible consequences of

such a separation, arguing that CDS may create empty creditors— holders of debt and CDS— who

no longer have an interest in the e¢ cient continuation of the debtor, and who may push the debtor

into ine¢ cient bankruptcy or liquidation:


         “Even a creditor with zero, rather than negative, economic ownership may want to

      push a company into bankruptcy, because the bankruptcy …ling will trigger a contractual

      payo¤ on its credit default swap position.”, Hu and Black (2008a), pp.19.


   We argue in this paper that while a creditor with a CDS contract may indeed be more reluctant

to restructure debt of a distressed debtor, it does not necessarily follow that the presence of CDS

will inevitably lead to an ine¢ cient outcome. In a situation where the debtor has limited ability to

commit to repay his debt, a CDS strengthens the creditor’s hand in ex-post debt renegotiation and

thus may actually help increase the borrower’s debt capacity. The relevant question is thus whether

the presence of CDS leads to debt market outcomes in which creditors are excessively tough even

after factoring in these ex-ante commitment bene…ts of CDS.

   In a CDS, the protection seller agrees to make a payment to the protection buyer in the event

of a credit event on a prespeci…ed reference asset. In exchange for this promised payment, the

protection seller receives a periodic premium payment from the buyer. The credit event may be

the bankruptcy …ling of the debtor, non-payment of the debt, and in some CDS contracts, debt

restructuring or a credit-rating downgrade. In most cases the default payment is given by the

di¤erence between the face value of the debt due and the recovery value, which is estimated based

on market prices over a prespeci…ed period after default has occurred (typically 30 days), or is

based on a CDS settlement auction. Settlement of the contract can be a simple cash payment or it

may involve the exchange of the defaulted bond for cash.

                                                   1
      We formally analyze the e¤ects of CDS in a limited-commitment model of credit to determine

both the ex-ante and ex-post consequences of default insurance on debt outcomes. In our model,

a …rm has a positive net present value investment project, which it seeks to …nance by issuing

debt. However, similar to Hart and Moore (1994, 1998) and Bolton and Scharfstein (1990, 1996),

we assume that the …rm faces a limited commitment problem when writing …nancial contracts:

it cannot credibly commit to pay out cash ‡ows in the future, since realized cash ‡ows are not

veri…able and thus not enforceable in court. As is standard in these models, non-payment can

occur for two reasons: First, when interim cash ‡ows are insu¢ cient to cover contractual payments

a lender may be unable to pay for liquidity reasons. Second, when cash ‡ows are su¢ cient to

cover contractual payments but the borrower refuses to pay in full to divert cash ‡ows to himself,

non-payment occurs for strategic reasons.

      The central insight of our model is that by raising the creditor’s bargaining power, CDS act as a

commitment device for borrowers to pay out cash ‡ows. That is, when creditors are insured through

CDS they stand to lose less in default and therefore are less forgiving in debt renegotiations. As

a result, creditors are generally able to extract more in debt renegotiations, and borrowers have

less of an incentive to strategically renegotiate down their debt repayments to their own advantage.

However, instances may also arise in which protected creditors are unwilling to renegotiate with

the debtor, even though renegotiation would be e¢ cient. This leads to incidence of Chapter 11

even though a debt exchange or workout would be preferable.

      There is growing anecdotal evidence for this CDS-induced shift in bargaining power from debtors

to creditors.1 In 2001-02, not long after the creation of CDS markets, Marconi, the British telecoms

manufacturer, was unable to renegotiate with a syndicate of banks, some of which had purchased

CDS protection. Marconi was eventually forced into a debt-for-equity swap that essentially wiped

out equity holders.2 In 2003, Mirant Corporation, an energy company based in Atlanta, sought

Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection when it was unable to work out a deal with its creditors, many

of which had bought credit protection. Remarkably, the bankruptcy judge in this case took the

unusual step of appointing a committee to represent the interests of equity holders in Chapter 11

(typically, once a company enters Chapter 11 equity holders lose all claims on the …rm). In the
  1
      Table 1 provides a selective summary of instances in which empty creditors may have played a role in restructuring.
  2
      See, for example, "Liar’s Poker," The Economist, May 15th 2003.



                                                            2
judge’s opinion there was a reasonable chance that the reorganization value would be high enough

to allow equity holders to obtain a positive claim after making all creditors whole, suggesting that

the reason for the …ling was an empty creditor problem, and not an economic insolvency.3

      More recently, the issue of empty creditors resurfaced in the 2009 bankruptcy negotiations of

the US auto companies General Motors and Chrysler, the amusement park operator Six Flags, the

Dutch petrochemicals producer Lyondell Basell, the property investor General Growth Properties,

and the Canadian paper manufacturer Abitibi Bowater, all of which …led for Chapter 11 protection

when they were unable to work out deals with their creditors.4 Harrah’s Entertainment, the casino

operator, only barely managed to restructure its debt, and, after two failed exchange o¤ers, the IT

provider Unisys had to give its creditors a particularly sweet deal (bonds worth more than par) to

reschedule debt coming due in 2010.5 Most recently, the trucking company YRC only managed to

restructure its debt at the last minute, when the Teamsters union threatened to protest in front of

the o¢ ces of hold-out hedge funds, which were allegedly blocking YRC’s debt-for-equity exchange

o¤er so as to trigger a default and cash in on more lucrative CDS payments.6

      We …rst highlight the potential ex-ante bene…ts of CDS protection as a commitment device in

renegotiations: A key consequence of the stronger bargaining power of creditors with CDS is that

…rms can increase their debt capacity. This means that in the presence of CDS more positive net

present value projects can receive …nancing ex ante. Also, projects that can be …nanced also in

the absence of CDS may get more e¢ cient …nancing, as the presence of CDS lowers the borrower’s

incentive to ine¢ ciently renegotiate down payments for strategic reasons. Taken together, this

implies that under limited commitment CDS can have signi…cant ex-ante bene…ts.

      This insight leads to a more general point about the economic role of CDS markets. In the

absence of any contractual incompleteness, introducing a CDS market would not lead to gains

from trade in our model, given that both parties involved are risk-neutral. More generally, in

any complete market CDS contracts are redundant securities. This raises the question why CDS

markets exist in the …rst place. Our model highlights that, besides reducing the transaction costs of

insurance or risk transfer, CDS introduce gains from contracting by allowing the lender to commit
  3
    See "Shareholders in Mirant Gain Voice in Reorganization," New York Times, September 20, 2003.
  4
    See, for example, "Credit Insurance Hampers GM Restructuring," Financial Times, May 11, 2009; "Burning
Down the House," Economist, May 5 2009; "No Empty Threat," Economist, June 18, 2009.
  5
    On Harrah’s and Unysis see "CDS Investors Hold the Cards," Financial Times, July 22, 2009.
  6
    "YRC and the Street’s Appetite for Destruction," Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2010.


                                                    3
not to renegotiate debt unless the renegotiation terms are attractive enough for creditors.

   However, despite this bene…cial role as a commitment device CDS can lead to ine¢ ciencies. The

reason is that when lenders freely choose their level of credit protection, they will generally over-

insure: While the socially optimal choice of credit protection trades o¤ the ex-ante commitment

bene…ts that arise from creditors’increased bargaining power against the ex-post costs of ine¢ cient

renegotiation, creditors do not fully internalize the cost of foregone renegotiation surplus that

arises in the presence of credit insurance. Even when insurance is fairly priced and correctly

anticipates the creditors’ potential value-destroying behavior after a non-payment for liquidity

reasons, creditors have an incentive to over-insure. This gives rise to ine¢ cient empty creditors

who refuse to renegotiate with lenders in order to collect payment on their CDS positions, even

when renegotiation via an out-of-court restructuring would be the socially e¢ cient alternative.

This over-insurance is ine¢ cient ex post but also— and more importantly— ex ante. In equilibrium,

the presence of a CDS market will thus produce excessively tough creditors and an incidence of

bankruptcy that is ine¢ ciently high compared to the social optimum.

   The legal scholarship (Hu and Black (2008a,b), Lubben (2007)) has mostly focused on the detri-

mental ex-post consequences of empty creditors for e¢ cient debt restructuring. Hence, the resulting

policy proposals regarding the treatment of CDS in and out of bankruptcy risk underestimating

some of the potential ex-ante bene…ts of CDS markets. In particular, a rule that has the e¤ect

of eliminating the empty creditor problem altogether, for example by stripping protected creditors

of their voting rights or by requiring the inclusion of restructuring as a credit event in all CDS

contracts, would not be e¢ cient according to our analysis. While such a rule would prevent CDS

protection from inhibiting e¢ ciency-enhancing debt restructuring, it would also eliminate any posi-

tive commitment e¤ects of CDS for borrowers. A similar e¤ect would obtain if CDS were structured

like put options, whereby the protection buyer can sell the bond at any time to the protection seller

for a prespeci…ed price. However, our analysis does suggest that disclosure of CDS positions may

mitigate the ex-ante ine¢ ciencies resulting from the empty creditor problem, without undermining

the ex-ante commitment e¤ect of CDS. In particular, if public disclosure allows borrowers and

lenders to contract on CDS positions, they may allow the lender to commit not to over-insure once

he has acquired the bond. More generally, public disclosure of positions may also be bene…cial by

giving investors a more complete picture of creditors’incentives in restructuring.

                                                 4
   Our paper is part of a growing theoretical literature on CDS and their e¤ect on the debtor-

creditor relationship. We add to the existing literature by emphasizing the e¤ects of CDS on

renegotiation between debtors and creditors, and the associated costs and bene…ts. Much of the

existing literature has focused either on the impact of CDS on banks’incentives to monitor, or on the

ability of CDS to improve risk sharing. In Du¤ee and Zhou (2001) CDS allow for the decomposition

of credit risk into components that are more or less information sensitive, thus potentially helping

banks overcome a lemon’s problem when hedging credit risk. Thompson (2007) and Parlour and

Winton (2008) analyze banks’ decision to lay o¤ credit risk via loan sales or by purchasing CDS

protection and characterize the e¢ ciency of the resulting equilibria. Arping (2004) argues that

CDS can help overcome a moral hazard problem between banks and borrowers, provided that CDS

contracts expire before maturity. Parlour and Plantin (2008) analyze under which conditions liquid

markets for credit risk transfer can emerge when there is asymmetric information about credit

quality. Morrison (2005) argues that since CDS can undermine bank monitoring, borrowers may

ine¢ ciently switch to bond …nance, thus reducing welfare. Allen and Carletti (2006) show that

credit risk transfer can lead to contagion and cause …nancial crises. Stulz (2009) discusses the role

of CDS during the credit crisis of 2007-2009.

   Another related literature deals with the decoupling of voting and cash-‡ow rights in common

equity through the judicious use of derivatives to hedge cash-‡ow risk. Hu and Black (2006,

2007) and Kahan and Rock (2007) argue that such decoupling can give rise to the opposite voting

preferences from those of unhedged common equity holders and thus to ine¢ cient outcomes, such as

voting for a merger which results in a decline in stock price of the acquirer and pro…ts those who have

built up short positions on the …rm’s stock. More recently Brav and Mathews (2009) have proposed

a theory of decoupling in which the hedging of cash-‡ow risk can facilitate trading and voting by

an informed trader, but where it can also give rise to ine¢ cient voting when hedging is cheap.

In a related study, Kalay and Pant (2008) show that rather than leading to ine¢ cient acquisition

decisions, decoupling allows shareholders to extract more surplus during takeover contests, while

still selling the …rm to the most e¢ cient bidder. Zachariadis and Olaru (2010) propose a model in

which a debtholder can trade in a …rm’s equity after a restructuring proposal has been made, but

before the vote on the proposal takes place. They show that this ability to trade generally raises

the creditor’s payo¤, but can lead to ine¢ cient liquidation when debt and equity markets di¤er in

                                                  5
their assessment of the …rm’s survival probability.

    The emerging empirical literature on the e¤ects of CDS on credit market outcomes supports

our main …ndings. For example, Hirtle (2008) shows that greater use of CDS leads to an increase in

bank credit supply and an improvement in credit terms, such as maturity and required spreads, for

large loans that are likely to be issued by companies that are ‘named credits’in the CDS market.

Ashcraft and Santos (2007) show that the introduction of CDS has lead to an improvement in

borrowing terms for safe and transparent …rms, where banks’monitoring incentives are not likely

to play a major role.

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We outline our limited commitment model of

CDS in Section 1. We then …rst analyze the model without CDS (Section 2) and then with CDS

(Section 3). Section 4 extends the model to analyze the e¤ect of multiple creditors. In Section

5 we discuss the model’s implications for policy and optimal legal treatment of CDS. Section 6

concludes.



1    The Model

We consider a …rm that can undertake a two-period investment project which requires an initial

investment F at date 0. The project generates cash ‡ows at dates 1 and 2. At each of those

dates cash ‡ows can be either high or low. At date 1 the project generates high cash ‡ow C1H

with probability , and low cash ‡ow C1L < C1H with probability 1          . Similarly, at date 2 the

project generates C2H with probability , and C2L < C2H with probability 1         . The realization

of C2 is revealed to the …rm at time 1. The project can be liquidated after the realization of the

…rst-period cash ‡ow for a liquidation value of L < C2L , implying that early liquidation of the

project is ine¢ cient. The liquidation value at date 2 is normalized to zero.

    The …rm has no initial wealth and …nances the project by issuing debt. The debt contract

speci…es a contractual repayment R at date 1. If the …rm makes this contractual payment, it has

the right to continue the project and collect the date 2 cash ‡ows. If the …rm fails to make the

contractual date 1 payment, the creditor has the right to discontinue the project and liquidate

the …rm. Liquidation can be interpreted as outright liquidation, as in a Chapter 7 cash auction,

or, more generally, as forcing the …rm into Chapter 11 reorganization; for example by …ling an


                                                 6
involuntary bankruptcy petition. In the latter interpretation L denotes the expected payment the

creditor receives in Chapter 11. Both the …rm and the creditor are risk neutral, and the riskless

interest rate is zero.

       The main assumption of our model is that the …rm faces a limited commitment problem when

raising …nancing for the project, similar to Hart and Moore (1994, 1998) and Bolton and Scharfstein

(1990, 1996). More speci…cally, we assume that only the minimum date 1 cash ‡ow C1L is veri…able,

and that all other cash ‡ows can be diverted by the borrower. In particular, the borrower can

divert the amount C1H         C1L at date 1 if the project yields the high return C1H . This means that

after the date 1 cash ‡ow is realized the …rm can always claim to have received a low cash ‡ow,

default and pay out C1L instead of R. We assume that C1L < F , such that the project cannot be

…nanced with risk-free debt that is repaid at date 1. In fact, it turns out that there is no loss from

normalizing C1L to zero, such that for the remainder of the paper we take C1L = 0.

       We also assume that at date 0 none of the date 2 cash ‡ows can be contracted upon. One

interpretation of this assumption is that, seen from date 0; the timing of date 2 cash ‡ows is too

uncertain and too complicated to describe to be able to contract on when exactly payment is due.

At date 1, however, the …rm and its initial creditors can make the date 2 cash ‡ow veri…able by

paying a proportional veri…cation cost (1             ) C2 , where    2 (0; 1).7 The ability to verify the date

2 cash ‡ow at date 1 opens the way for potential renegotiation between the …rm and its creditor

following non-payment of the date 1 claim R. This has the consequence that the …rm may want to

strategically renegotiate down its repayment at date 1.

       The main focus of our analysis is the e¤ect of introducing a market for credit insurance in which

lenders can purchase credit default swaps (CDS) to insure against non-payment of the contractual

date 1 repayment R. We model the CDS market as a competitive insurance market involving risk-

neutral buyers and sellers, in which CDS contracts are priced fairly. Note that in the absence of

any contractual incompleteness there would be no gains from trade in this market given that both

parties are risk-neutral. More generally, in any complete market, CDS contracts are redundant
   7
     For simplicity, we assume that the date 2 cash ‡ow cannot be made veri…able to a new creditor. In other words,
existing creditors have an "informational monopoly," as is assumed, for example, in Rajan (1992). The main role of
this assumption is to simplify the way we model to the distribution of the renegotiation surplus between debtor and
creditors. The analysis can be extended to the situation where we drop this assumption. The main change would
involve the debtor sometimes rolling over its debts with the initial creditors by borrowing from new creditors at date
1. In this case initial creditors only obtain R when they could have obtained a higher renegotiation surplus in the
event of a liquidity default.


                                                          7
securities. Indeed, in practice an implicit assumption in the pricing of these securities is that they

can be costlessly replicated. This, naturally, raises the question why this market exists in the

…rst place. One explanation is that the CDS allows the parties to save on transaction costs. But

another explanation is the one we propose in this paper, which is that CDS play another role besides

insurance or risk transfer. They introduce gains from contracting arising from the commitment the

lender gains not to renegotiate debt unless the renegotiation terms are attractive enough.

      Formally, the CDS is a promise of a payment          by the protection seller to the lender if a ‘credit

event’occurs at date 1, against a fair premium f that is paid by the protection buyer to the seller.

We assume that a credit event occurs when the …rm fails to repay R and if upon non-payment

the …rm and the creditor fail to renegotiate the debt contract to mutually acceptable terms. With

this type of renegotiation we have in mind an out-of-court restructuring, for example through a

debt exchange or a debt-for-equity swap. The assumption that CDS contracts do not pay out after

successful renegotiation re‡ects what is standard practice in the CDS market. Since the spring of

2009, the default CDS contract as de…ned by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association

(ISDA) does not recognize restructuring as a credit event. Moreover, even for CDS contracts

that recognize restructuring as a credit event, in practice there is often signi…cant uncertainty for

creditors whether a particular restructuring quali…es.8 We discuss the di¤erent ISDA restructuring

clauses and the implications of making restructuring a credit event that triggers the CDS in section

5.3.

      If the …rm misses its contractual date 1 payment R; two outcomes are possible: either the

lender liquidates the project, forces the …rm into bankruptcy, and collects the liquidation value L,

or the lender chooses to renegotiate the debt contract in an out-of-court restructuring. Bankruptcy

is a credit event and triggers the payment          by the protection seller under the CDS contract, so

that the insured lender receives a total payo¤ of L +            under this outcome. Alternatively, if the

…rm and lender renegotiate the initial contract in an out-of-court restructuring, they avert costly

bankruptcy (as L < C2L ), but the lender does not receive the CDS payment                   , since an out-of-

court restructuring does not constitute a credit event. A workout also involves costs, as the lender

must verify date 2 cash ‡ows and pay the veri…cation cost (1               ) C2 , such that the surplus from
  8
    For example, on October 5, 2009, ISDA ruled that an ‘Alternative Dispute Resolution’ (ADR) that led to
changes in maturity and principal of Aiful Corporation’s debt does not qualify as a bankruptcy event. The ruling
was subsequently overturned. See www.isda.org for more information.


                                                       8
renegotiation is given by        C2 < C2 . However, workouts are less costly than bankruptcy, as we

assume that C2 > L. Since for most of our analysis there is not much loss in setting L = 0; we

will make this assumption for the remainder of the paper unless we explicitly state otherwise.

    Finally, when renegotiation occurs, the renegotiation surplus is split between the …rm and the

lender according to their relative bargaining strengths. We assume that absent CDS, the relative

bargaining strengths in renegotiation are exogenously given by q (for the lender) and 1                         q (for

the …rm). In the presence of CDS, however, the relative bargaining positions can change, since

CDS protection increases the lender’s outside option. In particular, if the amount the creditor

receives by abandoning negotiation and triggering the CDS exceeds what he would receive as part

of the bargaining game absent CDS, the …rm must compensate the creditor up to his level of credit

protection     in order to be able to renegotiate. In the presence of credit protection, the creditor thus

receives the maximum of what he would receive absent CDS and his outside option                            generated

by the CDS: max [q C2 ; ]. Moreover, when                  exceeds the available renegotiation surplus             C2 ;

the CDS payment in the event of bankruptcy exceeds what the …rm can o¤er to the creditor in

renegotiation, such that renegotiation becomes impossible. Overall CDS protection thus makes

creditors tougher negotiators in out-of-court restructurings, and in the extreme case may prevent

renegotiation altogether.9

    Our model of debt restructuring, while highly stylized captures the broad elements of debt

restructuring in practice. Absent tax and accounting considerations, out-of-court restructuring is

generally seen to be cheaper than a formal bankruptcy procedure.10 Also, the higher the potential

gains from continuation the larger are the due diligence costs incurred in restructuring negotiations,

which is re‡ected in our assumption of proportional veri…cation costs.11 As for the e¤ects of

CDS protection on out-of-court restructurings, our model captures in a simple way the empty
   9
     Formally our bargaining protocol is equivalent to a Nash bargaining outcome in which CDS protection raises
the creditor’s outside option, as outlined in Sutton (1986) (page 714). For the relationship between Nash bargaining
and Rubinstein bargaining see also Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986). Note that we could also assume that
instead of receiving max [q C2 ; ] the protected creditor receives his outside option plus a share q of the remaining
bargaining surplus. Qualitatively, none of our results would change.
  10
     For example, Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006) …nd that bankruptcy costs are very heterogeneous and can reach up
to 20% of assets. Their paper also provides a useful summary of older studies of bankruptcy costs, many of which
…nd signi…cant costs of bankruptcy.
  11
     None of the implications of the model depend on proportional veri…cation costs. Strategic default is costly as
long as veri…cation costs are positive, whether they are proportional or …xed. Moreover, even when there are no
veri…cation costs, CDS will play a role by strengthening the creditor’s role in renegotiation. The di¤erence is that in
this latter case strategic default is not costly from a welfare perspective.



                                                          9
creditor e¤ects that analysts are concerned about. As Yavorsky (2009) argues: “While individual

circumstances may vary, we believe that bondholders that own CDS protection are more likely to

take a ‘hard-line’in negotiations with issuers.”



2         Optimal Debt Contracts without CDS

We begin by analyzing the model in the absence of a market for credit insurance. The optimal

debt contract for this case will later serve as a benchmark to analyze the e¤ects of introducing a

CDS market.

         Two types of non-payment of debt can occur in our model. If the low cash ‡ow realizes at date

1, the …rm cannot repay R as it does not have su¢ cient earnings to do so (since F > C1L ). We refer

to this outcome as a liquidity default. If the high cash ‡ow realizes at date 1, the …rm is able to

service its debt obligations but may choose not to do so. That is, given our incomplete contracting

assumption, the …rm may default strategically and renegotiate with the creditor. In particular,

in the high cash ‡ow state the …rm will make the contractual repayment R only if the following

incentive constraint is satis…ed:


                                          C1H     R + C2      C1H + (1         q) C2 :                                     (1)


         This constraint says that, when deciding whether to repay R, the …rm compares the payo¤ from

making the contractual payment and collecting the entire date 2 cash ‡ow to defaulting strategically

and giving a fraction q of the renegotiation surplus to the creditor. The …rm has an incentive to

make the contractual payment whenever the date 2 cash ‡ow is su¢ ciently large, while for small

expected future cash ‡ows the …rm defaults strategically.

         We …rst establish under which conditions the project can be …nanced without strategic default

occurring in equilibrium. Since strategic default is costly (                      < 1), this is the optimal form of

…nancing whenever it is feasible. From equation (1) we see that the maximum face value that

will just satisfy the incentive constraint for both realizations of the date 2 cash ‡ow must satisfy

R = C2L [1            (1   q)]. We shall assume that C1H              C2H [1      (1     q)] so that the …rm can always

pay the incentive compatible repayment R in the high date 1 cash ‡ow state C1H .12 This maximum
    12
         For Proposition 1 it would be su¢ cient to assume that C1H     C2L [1    (1     q)]. However, we will use the slightly


                                                             10
value for R in turn implies a maximum ex-ante setup cost consistent with the no strategic default

assumption. We summarize this in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 Suppose that there is no strategic default. The maximum face value R compatible

with this assumption just satis…es the incentive constraint


                                   C1H + C2L      R       C1H + C2L (1     q)                    (2)


yielding a maximum face value consistent with no strategic default of


                                          R = C2L [1         (1    q)] :                         (3)


The maximum ex-ante setup cost consistent with no strategic default is given by


                      Fb = C2L [1        (1    q)] + (1      ) q     C2H + (1   ) C2L :          (4)


   Proposition 1 states that when the ex-ante setup cost of the project is not too high, the project

can be …nanced through a debt contract such that no strategic default will not occur in equilibrium,

even in the absence of CDS contracts. The resulting outcome is e¢ cient: When the …rm has

su¢ cient resources at date 1 it chooses to repay, such that the …rm only enters costly renegotiation

in the liquidity default state, where it is unavoidable. Moreover, in the liquidity default state

renegotiation, while costly, is e¢ cient and always occurs.

   However, ine¢ ciencies arise when the ex-ante setup cost exceeds Fb. As we show below, in this

case the project either cannot be …nanced at all, or it can only be …nanced with strategic default

occurring in equilibrium. The former is ine¢ cient because it implies underinvestment. The latter

is ine¢ cient because renegotiation has a cost, and from an e¢ ciency perspective should only occur

when absolutely necessary, i.e. in the liquidity default state. However, when the ex-ante setup

costs exceeds Fb; the face value required for the project to attract funding makes it optimal for the

…rm to default strategically when the …rst-period cash ‡ow is high and the second-period cash ‡ow

low. Renegotiation thus occurs even in cases when it is not strictly necessary. This costly strategic

renegotiation leads to a deadweight loss. We summarize this in Proposition 2.
stronger assumption C1H   C2H [1    (1   q)] in Proposition 2.


                                                       11
                                               (1 )C2L
Proposition 2 When                   (1     )C2H + q (C2H C2L )
                                                                  the project cannot be …nanced when the setup

cost exceeds Fb: When       >                         b 0 ] for which the project can be …nanced with
                                there is an interval (F;F

strategic default arising at date 1 when C2 = C2L : This results in an expected ine¢ ciency from

strategic default of

                                                (1       ) (1      ) C2L .                                  (5)

The maximum face value of debt R consistent with strategic default only in the low cash ‡ow state

C2 = C2L is given by

                                             R = C2H [1           (1     q)] ;                              (6)

and the maximum ex-ante setup cost for which the project can be …nanced with strategic default

only in the low cash ‡ow state is given by


           F0 =        C2H [1   (1        q)] + (1      ) qC2L + (1              ) q   C2H + (1   ) C2L :   (7)

                              h      i
                                b F 0 , the project cannot be …nanced at all. This is because in
   Finally, when F exceeds max F;

this case there would be systematic strategic default at date 1. That is, the debt obligation R is

so high that in the high date 1 cash ‡ow state the …rm defaults even when the date 2 cash ‡ow is

C2H . This, however, implies that the pledgeable income is insu¢ cient to …nance the project. We

thus obtain:
                          h      i
                            b F 0 the project cannot be …nanced. In this case, strategic
Proposition 3 When F > max F;

default would always arise when C1 = C1H . This implies a maximum pledgeable cash ‡ow of


                                     F = q           C2H + (1          ) C2L < F 0 ;                        (8)


which is insu¢ cient to …nance the project.



   Propositions 1, 2 and 3 are summarized in Figure 1. Jointly they imply that limited commitment

causes two types of ine¢ ciencies. First, it leads to underinvestment relative to the …rst best. While

it would be e¢ cient to fund any project for which the expected cash ‡ows exceed the setup cost,




                                                          12
Figure 1: The …gure illustrates the two possible outcomes absent a CDS market. Either all projects
up to F^ receive …nancing without strategic default and no projects beyond F^ are …nanced (top), or,
when is su¢ ciently high, there is an additional region (F^ ; F 0 ] where the project can be …nanced
with strategic default occuring in equilibrium.



limited commitment reduces the …rm’s borrowing capacity, such that only projects for which

                           h       i
                   F    max Fb; F 0 < C1H + (1         ) C1L + C2H + (1      ) C2L                (9)
                                     |                       {z                  }
                                                      expected cash ‡ows


can be …nanced. Hence limited commitment gives rise to underinvestment relative to the …rst-best.


Corollary 1 The equilibrium without a CDS market exhibits underinvestment relative to …rst-best.


   Second, when F 0 exceeds Fb, there is a range for setup costs for which the project can be …nanced,

but only ine¢ ciently. This is because in this range strategic default occurs in equilibrium, leading

to a deadweight cost since renegotiation takes place even when not strictly necessary.


Corollary 2 When                                                    b 0 ] for which the project can
                       > ; there is a range of ex-ante setup costs (F;F

only be …nanced ine¢ ciently.


   These ine¢ ciencies relative to …rst best are a direct consequence of limited commitment. This

highlights the potential bene…cial e¤ect of commitment devices. In particular, a direct implication

of Corollaries 1 and 2 is that any mechanism that can serve as a commitment device for the …rm

to pledge cash ‡ows to the creditor can be value-enhancing. In Section 3 we show that CDS can

serve as exactly such a commitment device.



                                                 13
3    Debt, CDS, and the Empty Creditor

We now analyze the e¤ect of allowing the lender to purchase credit insurance in a fairly priced CDS

market. As we will see, the main e¤ect of CDS protection is to increase the lender’s bargaining

position in renegotiation: In order to induce the lender to accept a renegotiation o¤er, the …rm

must now compensate the lender for the CDS premium he could collect by forcing the …rm into

bankruptcy.

    The increase in the lender’s bargaining power has two e¤ects. First, when creditors are protected

through CDS, they are generally able to extract more surplus during renegotiation following either

a liquidity default or a strategic default, thus increasing the …rm’s pledgeable income at date 0.

This is welfare-enhancing since it allows more investment to be undertaken at time 0.

    Second, when the …rm anticipates lenders to be tougher in renegotiation, this reduces the …rm’s

incentive to strategically renegotiate down its repayment at date 1. In particular, if the borrower

has a CDS position of size     , any out-of-court renegotiation o¤er must compensate the lender

for the outside option of forcing the …rm into bankruptcy and collecting the insurance payment.

This means that when the amount of credit insurance       exceeds q C2 ; the incentive constraint (1)

becomes

                              C1H   R + C2     C1H + max [ C2      ; 0] :                       (10)

It is easy to see that by reducing the right hand side of this inequality, credit protection lowers

the …rm’s incentive to default strategically. This second e¤ect is welfare-enhancing since strategic

renegotiation is costly and should be avoided when possible.

    However, when the lender acquires a CDS position this can also lead to situations in which the

creditor is unwilling to renegotiate with the …rm even after a liquidity default, when renegotiation

would be e¢ cient given the positive renegotiation surplus of     C2 . This happens because credit

insurance can turn the lender into an ine¢ cient ‘empty creditor:’ While still owning control rights,

the creditor with CDS protection is insulated from the potential value destruction that results

from bankruptcy. Renegotiation breaks down when the insurance payout the lender can collect in

bankruptcy is larger than the potential surplus from renegotiating with the …rm. This results in

unrealized renegotiation gains and is clearly ex-post ine¢ cient. Moreover, when credit insurance

leads to foregone renegotiation surplus for projects that could have been …nanced without sacri…cing

                                                 14
renegotiation surplus, it also leads to an ine¢ ciency in an ex-ante sense.

   We will analyze the CDS market in two steps. As a benchmark we …rst characterize the socially

optimal level of credit insurance. This is the level of credit protection a social planner would set

to maximize overall surplus. In our setting it also coincides with the level of CDS protection the

borrower would choose if he could determine a certain level of credit protection for his lenders.

After establishing this benchmark, we then analyze the lender’s choice of credit protection. We

will show that when the lender to freely chooses his CDS position, he generally has an incentive

to over-insure in the CDS market, leading to socially excessive incidence of bankruptcy and lost

renegotiation surplus. This means that our model predicts that a laissez-faire equilibrium in the

CDS market leads to ine¢ ciently empty creditors, even when CDS prices perfectly anticipate the

creditor’s ine¢ cient behavior in renegotiation.


3.1   E¢ cient Credit Insurance

What level of credit insurance maximizes surplus? First, it is easy to see that the borrower would

choose a level of credit protection of at least C2L . Setting   = C2L increases the lender’s bargaining

position in renegotiation, while still allowing renegotiation to take place after a liquidity default

when the date 2 cash ‡ow is low (a fortiori this implies that renegotiation will also occur after a

liquidity default when the date 2 cash ‡ow is high).

   Setting    = C2L thus increases the pledgeable cash ‡ow without sacri…cing any renegotiation

surplus. The only e¤ect of CDS protection is to allow creditors to extract more in renegotiation

and to provide a commitment device for the …rm not to default strategically. The reduced incentive

to default strategically when the lender has credit protection      = C2L means that the highest face

value consistent with no strategic default is now given by R = C2L . This follows directly from the

incentive constraint (10). This increase in the maximum value of R consistent with no strategic

default and the creditor’s increased bargaining power following a liquidity default translate into a

higher maximum ex-ante setup cost that is consistent with …nancing the project without strategic

default.


Proposition 4 It is e¢ cient to choose a level of credit protection of at least      = C2L : Then the

highest face value consistent with no strategic default is given by R = C2L :This translates into a


                                                   15
maximum ex-ante setup cost consistent with no strategic default of


                    Fe = C2L + (1          )     max C2L ; qC2H + (1        ) C2L > Fb:                   (11)


                               (1 )C2L
In addition, when    >e        C2H C2L
                                       ,   there is an interval (Fe; Fe0 ] on which the project can be …nanced

with strategic default in equilibrium. In this case R = C2H ; and the project can be …nanced up to a

maximum ex-ante setup cost of


         Fe0 =      C2H + (1      ) C2L + (1         )        max C2L ; qC2H + (1      ) C2L > F 0 :      (12)


   Proposition 4 illustrates two bene…ts of CDS markets, which we illustrate in Figure 2. First,

some positive NPV projects that could not attract …nancing in the absence of CDS can be …nanced
                                                   h     i         h     i
when a CDS market becomes available, since max Fe; Fe0 > max Fb; F 0 . This means that the

introduction of CDS extends the set of projects that can attract …nancing, thus alleviating the

underinvestment ine¢ ciency. Second, when Fb < F 0 the presence of CDS protection can reduce

the incidence of strategic default. Projects for which F 2 (Fb < F 0 ] can attract …nancing even

in the absence of CDS, but only with strategic default in equilibrium. The introduction of CDS

eliminates strategic default and the associated deadweight loss of (1               ) (1   q) C2L . Introducing

a CDS market can thus make existing projects more e¢ cient and allow for …nancing of additional

projects, thus alleviating both ine¢ ciencies outlined in Corollaries 1 and 2. As shown in Proposition
                                                              h      i
4, if the ex-ante setup cost lies below the threshold max Fe; Fe0 both these e¢ ciency gains are

possible without sacri…cing any renegotiation surplus.

Corollary 3 CDS have two distinct bene…ts:

  1. CDS increase the set of projects that can receive …nancing in the …rst place.

  2. The presence of CDS eliminates strategic defaults for some projects that can be …nanced even

     in the absence of CDS.

   Could it be e¢ cient to raise the level of CDS protection above C2L ? In this case an additional

e¤ect emerges: the presence of CDS protection may prevent socially desirable renegotiation follow-

ing a liquidity default. More precisely, when the …rm renegotiates its debt for liquidity reasons and

                                                         16
Figure 2: The …gure illustrates the two bene…ts from CDS. If absent CDS the project can be …nanced
without strategic default for setup costs up to F^ and cannot be …nanced beyond F^ ; setting = C2L
allows …nancing without strategic default up to F~ (top). When absent CDS there is a region (F^ ; F 0 ]
in which …nancing absent CDS involves strategic default, = C2L may allow …nancing without
strategic default up to F~ (middle), or it may eliminate strategic default on (F^ ; F~ ]; and allow the
…nancing of new projects (with strategic default) on (F 0 ; F~ 0 ] (bottom).



the expected date 2 cash ‡ow turns out to be C2L , renegotiation will not occur even though it would

be e¢ cient. The reason is that the maximum the …rm can o¤er to the lender in renegotiation is

 C2L , such that the lender prefers to collect his insurance payment of             > C2L . Hence       > C2L

leads to ine¢ cient renegotiation after liquidity defaults.

       However, even despite this loss of renegotiation surplus it may still be e¢ cient to set the level

of CDS protection to C2H .13 This is the case when this higher level of credit protection allows a

project to be …nanced that could otherwise not be …nanced, or if the loss of renegotiation surplus

generated by the high level of credit protection is more than o¤set by a reduction in the social cost

of strategic default. We will consider these two cases in turn.

       First consider the case when Fe     Fe0 : The last project that can be …nanced with the low level

of credit protection      = C2L is …nanced e¢ ciently, i.e. without strategic default. Raising the level

of credit insurance to C2H can then only be e¢ cient if the project’s setup cost exceeds the critical

value Fe, such that the project could not be …nanced at all when              = C2L . If a setting      = C2H
  13
    When the level of credit protection exceeds C2L ; it is always optimal to raise it up to C2H to maximize the
e¤ect of increased bargaining power. Any level beyond C2H will eliminate renegotiation altogether and is strictly
dominated.


                                                       17
makes su¢ cient cash ‡ow pledgeable so that a project with a setup cost higher than Fe can be

…nanced, it is ex-ante e¢ cient to do so, even though renegotiation will be impossible in some state

of the world.


Proposition 5 Suppose that Fe           Fe0 : When the ex-ante setup cost exceeds Fe it is e¢ cient to set

the level of credit protection to   = C2H if this allows the project to be …nanced. Raising pledgeable

income beyond Fe by increasing the level of credit insurance to                    = C2H is possible when
                                        8
                                        >
                                        <     1
                                             (1 q)     C2L        when qC2H > C2L
                               C2H >                                                     :                          (13)
                                        >
                                        :    1
                                                 C2L              otherwise


While this results in expected lost renegotiation surplus of (1                   ) (1       ) C2L it is ex-ante e¢ cient

when F > Fe since otherwise the project could not be …nanced. The maximum ex-ante setup cost

that can be …nanced in this case is given by


                               F # = max C2L ; C2H + (1                       )    C2H :                            (14)


   Now consider what happens when Fe0 > Fe: In this case the marginal project that can be …nanced

with     = C2L involves strategic default. Again it is clearly always e¢ cient to set                      = C2H when

this allows a project with a setup cost higher than Fe0 to be …nanced. However, if the cost of

foregone renegotiation surplus is smaller than the cost of strategic default, then it is also optimal

to set    = C2H when F 2 (Fe; Fe0 ]. As it turns out, the cost of strategic default exceeds the cost of

foregone renegotiation whenever         > :


Proposition 6 Suppose that Fe0 > Fe: When the ex-ante setup cost exceeds Fe0 it is e¢ cient to

set the level of credit protection to       = C2H if this allows the project to be …nanced. This allows

…nancing up to a maximum ex-ante setup cost of


                                F # = max C2L ; C2H + (1                      )     C2H


In addition, if    >    it is also e¢ cient to set the level of credit protection to                     =   C2H on the

interval (Fe; Fe0 ], if this allows …nancing the project without strategic default.


                                                             18
Figure 3: The …gure illustrates when it may be optimal to raise the level of credit protection to
   = C2H : Either it must allow a project to attract …nancing that could not be …nanced with
  = C2L (top), or, if strategic default is su¢ ciently costly it may also be optimal to set = C2H
in the region where …nancing with = C2L would involve strategic default (bottom).



   Propositions 5 and 6 show that it can be e¢ cient to raise the level of credit protection to C2H

even though this implies that renegotiation will not take place after a liquidity default when the

expected date 2 cash ‡ow is low. However, it is only e¢ cient to do so when certain conditions are

met. Either it must be the case that the project cannot be …nanced when       = C2L and that raising

the level of credit protection beyond C2L allows the project to attract …nancing. This is possible

when C2H is su¢ ciently large, as stated in condition (13). Or it must be the case that the costs of

foregone renegotiation are smaller than the costs of strategic default, in which case it is optimal

to choose    = C2H also in the region in which …nancing with          = C2L would involve strategic

default. These cases are illustrated in Figure 3.

   To summarize, from an e¢ ciency standpoint it thus is optimal to choose a level of credit

protection of at least C2L . This increases the investment opportunity set by increasing pledgeable

income, and it reduces the incidence of strategic defaults for projects that can be …nanced in absence

of CDS. Moreover, for projects that cannot be …nanced when          = C2L , or when strategic default

is particularly costly, it can be optimal to raise the level of protection to C2H .


3.2   The Lender’s Choice of Credit Insurance

We now turn to the lender’s choice of credit protection. We will show that lenders will generally

choose to over-insure relative to the e¢ cient benchmark of Section 3.1, thus becoming to empty


                                                    19
creditors that are excessively tough from a social perspective.

       Consistent with current market practice, we assume that the lender cannot commit ex ante to

a speci…c level of credit protection. This is reasonable, because credit derivative positions do not

have to be disclosed, such that commitment to a certain level of credit protection is impossible. In

choosing credit protection, the lender will thus take the face value R as given and will then choose

a level of credit protection     that maximizes his individual payo¤. The fair insurance premium f in

turn correctly anticipates the lender’s incentives regarding renegotiation given a level of protection

 : Note that this also implies that the value of CDS to the lender comes entirely from strengthening

his bargaining power in situations that ultimately do not trigger payment of the CDS. States in

which the CDS pays out are priced into the insurance premium f , which means that in expected

terms the creditor pays one for one for potential payouts from his CDS protection.14

       By the same argument as in Section 3.1, we know that the lender will choose a level of credit

protection of at least C2L . By doing so, the lender improves his position in renegotiation without

sacri…cing any renegotiation surplus. However, the lender may have an incentive to raise his level

of credit protection beyond C2L to           = C2H . In fact, the lender will always do so if the increased

level of credit protection raises his expected payo¤ from owning the debt contract, notwithstanding

any lost renegotiation surplus an increase in credit protection may cause. This means, for example,

that in contrast to the e¢ cient benchmark the lender may have the incentive to raise the level of

credit protection to C2H even in cases where the project could be …nanced e¢ ciently with                 = C2L .

This is outlined in Proposition 7.


Proposition 7 Suppose that F             Fe; such that the project can be …nanced without strategic default

by setting      = C2L . The lender nevertheless chooses              = C2H when this increases his expected

payo¤ . This occurs when C2H is greater than C 2 , where
                                         8
                                         >
                                         <    1
                                             (1 q)     C2L    when qC2H > C2L
                                  C2 =                                          :                             (15)
                                         >
                                         :   1
                                                 C2L          otherwise


This is ine¢ cient because it results in an expected loss of renegotiation surplus of (1           ) (1     ) C2L .
  14
    We use this property to simplify our calculations. In particular, when calculating the creditor’s payo¤ we only
need to consider states in which default does not occurs, because in expected terms the CDS payment and the
insurance premium f will exactly o¤set.


                                                             20
   If in addition there is an interval (Fe; Fe0 ] where …nancing with             =     C2L involves strategic

default, the creditor ine¢ ciently chooses    = C2H when C2H > C 2 and in addition              > :


   Proposition 7 shows that, in comparison to the e¢ cient benchmark, the lender has an incentive

to over-insure. This is because the lender can increase his payo¤ by raising the level of credit

protection to C2H whenever C2H > C 2 . However, we know from Proposition 5 that it is only e¢ cient

to raise the level of credit protection to C2H if the project could not be …nanced otherwise, or if the

cost of foregone renegotiation surplus is more than compensated by a gain from eliminating strategic

default. The creditor, however, does not fully internalize the loss in renegotiation surplus that

results from choosing    = C2H and over-insures in equilibrium. Our model thus predicts ine¢ cient

empty creditors as an equilibrium outcome of the lender’s optimal choice credit protection choice,

even when the CDS market correctly anticipates the creditor’s ine¢ cient behavior in renegotiation.


Corollary 4 Assume that the project can be …nanced without strategic default by setting               = C2L :

The lender will always over-insure (irrespective of the particular values of C2H and C2L ) when


  1. the probability of the high second period cash ‡ow           tends to one;

  2. qC2H > C2L and q        :

      On the other hand, there is no overinsurance problem when either                = 0 or q = 0:


   The …rst part of Corollary 4 shows that ine¢ cient over-insurance by creditors is more likely

when there is a high probability that in the event of a liquidity default there is ample renegotiation

surplus. In this case, the incentive to appropriate as much as possible when the renegotiation

surplus turns out to be high gives creditors an incentive purchase credit insurance up to an amount

that ine¢ ciently precludes renegotiation when C2 = C2L : The second part of Corollary 4 shows that

when C2H is large relative to C2L , it su¢ ces that        exceeds q for the creditor to always over-insure.

This illustrates that ine¢ cient over-insurance by creditors is more likely the higher the ‘upside

potential’ in renegotiation surplus. Finally, (15) shows that there is no over-insurance problem

when the creditor receives the entire surplus in renegotiation (q = 1), or when the probability of

the high date 2 cash ‡ow is zero ( = 0).




                                                      21
4     Multiple Creditors

In this section we explore an individual creditor’s incentive to obtain default insurance in situations

where the …rm raises debt from multiple creditors. Most of our results can be stated in the simplest

possible setting with only two creditors. They generalize straightforwardly to situations with an

arbitrary number of n          2 creditors.

    The …rm may raise funds from multiple creditors either through a single debt issue to multiple

creditors, or through multiple issues sold to a single creditor each. In the latter situation the

…rm e¤ectively renegotiates its debts separately with each creditor, and can treat creditors with

di¤erent levels of credit protection di¤erently. In the former situation, the …rm will renegotiate

with all holders of a particular issue at once, treating all creditors equally, even if they may not all

be equally insured.


4.1   Two separate debt issues

Suppose for simplicity that the two debt issues are of equal size and seniority, and that each creditor

has purchased      i   = C2L =2 in credit protection, such that the aggregate amount of credit protection,

 1+   2   = C2L ; is at the maximum level that allows e¢ cient renegotiation after a liquidity default.

Suppose also that the project can attract …nancing when           1   +   2   = C2L ; such that an increase in

credit protection from this level would be ine¢ cient. We will now show that in this situation an

individual creditor is more likely to deviate, by obtaining an ine¢ ciently higher level of insurance,

than the lone creditor in the single creditor case analyzed in the previous section. The basic reason

is that in a setting with multiple creditors, an individual creditor is seeking to strengthen his

bargaining position in renegotiation not just vis-a-vis the debtor, but also with respect to the other

creditors.

    In Proposition 7 we established that when a lone creditor chooses his level of credit protection

he will over-insure whenever C2H exceeds the threshold C 2 de…ned in Proposition . We will now

show that the threshold for C2H at which a single creditor deviates in our symmetric two-creditor

situation is strictly lower. That is, when comparing a single creditor’s expected payo¤ from choosing

protection    i   = C2L =2 to the payo¤ from choosing a strictly higher level of protection, we show

that the latter is strictly higher for a cuto¤ of C2H strictly lower than C 2 .


                                                      22
   To see this, note that with protection        i   = C2L =2 the creditor’s expected payo¤ is given by

                        1
                            R + (1     )    max           C2L ; q C2H + (1             ) C2L   :                  (16)
                        2

The most pro…table deviation for an individual creditor is to increase protection to                        C2H      j

(where   j   = C2L =2 is the other creditor’s level of protection). In this case the deviating creditor

can extract all the bargaining surplus when C2 = C2H and force both the …rm and the other creditor

down to their outside options. Increasing protection beyond this level would lead to a breakdown

of renegotiation even when C2 = C2H and would thus not be pro…table. Choosing a lower level

credit protection would leave money on the table for the …rm or the other creditor. The deviation

payo¤ from unilaterally increasing credit protection to C2H                        C2L =2 is given by:

                                     1                                        C2L
                                       R + (1         )        C2H                :                               (17)
                                     2                                         2

                                                                                                                   C2L
   An individual creditor thus prefers to increase his level of credit protection to                      C2H       2

whenever (17) exceeds (16). Proposition (8) shows that the resulting cuto¤ value for C2H is lower

than the one in the single creditor case. Multiple creditors in separate debt issues thus have a

tendency to worsen the over-insurance problem.


Proposition 8 Suppose that the project can be …nanced without strategic default with two debt

issues of equal size and seniority and CDS insurance:                 1   =    2   = 2 C2L . Then an individual lender

i gains by deviating to CDS insurance       i   = C2H             L
                                                               2 C2       when C2H is greater than C2 :

                                       8
                                       >
                                       <     1    L
                                           (2 q) C2         when qC2H > C2L
                                C2 =                                                   :                          (18)
                                       >
                                       :   1+ 1 L
                                            2  C2           otherwise


The cuto¤ C2 is strictly smaller than the cuto¤ for C2H at which a sole creditor switches to the

higher level of insurance     = C2H . Therefore, there is a greater likelihood of over-insurance with

multiple creditors in separate issues than with a single creditor.


   The intuition for the worsening of the over-insurance problem when there are multiple creditors

in separate issues can be seen by considering the costs and bene…ts of a unilateral increase in credit


                                                          23
protection. The individual creditor who unilaterally raises his level of credit protection extracts all

the surplus from the deviation when C2 = C2H . The cost of the deviation, on the other hand, is

shared by the two creditors: when C2 = C2L renegotiation fails, and both creditors lose C2L =2 of

potential renegotiation surplus.

   To further compare the multiple creditor case to the single creditor case, it is instructive to

consider the case when q = 1: In this case creditors receive the entire surplus in renegotiation, even

in the absence of CDS. From (15) we know that in this case a lone creditor would have no incentive

to over-insure. In the two-creditor case, on the other hand, over-insurance still emerges even when

q = 1; as shown by condition (18). The reason is that even though creditors jointly receive the

entire renegotiation surplus even absent CDS, one creditor can pro…t at the expense of the other

creditor by increasing his CDS position.


4.2   One bond issue with multiple creditors

Consider now the situation where the …rm has issued a single bond that is held in equal amounts

by two creditors. Unlike in the previous case, the …rm is now required to treat the two creditors

equally when it attempts to restructure this bond: It has to o¤er a debt exchange on the same terms,

irrespective of whether the two creditors have independently purchased the same level of default

protection or not. As a result of this constraint on ex post restructuring o¤ers, the incentive for

each individual creditor to seek default protection is less clear. For example, if creditor i purchases

protection   i,   which is anticipated to result in an exchange o¤er to forestall default of   i   for each

creditor, then it is redundant for creditor j to also get default protection. Another complication

in this situation is that the two creditors may bene…t by trading their claims with each other in

anticipation of a debt restructuring. All in all, it is thus not obvious a priori whether the presence

of multiple holders of the same bond issue results in a greater or smaller level of equilibrium default

protection than with a single creditor. We consider in turn the situations where no trade between

the two creditors is allowed, and when both bond and CDS trades are possible in a secondary

market.




                                                    24
4.2.1      No trade among creditors during renegotiation

A …rst observation is that in equilibrium one of the two creditors purchases credit protection of

at least     i   = C2L =2. To see this, suppose that the two creditors each purchase less than C2L =2

in protection. In that case, it would always be individually pro…table for one of the creditors to

increase his level of credit protection to          i   = C2L =2. This increase in credit protection raises the

payo¤s of both creditors (since they are treated equally in renegotiation) without sacri…cing any

renegotiation surplus. Accordingly, when credit protection is fairly priced, a pair (          1;   2)   such that

max [   1;   2]   = C2L =2 could be a candidate equilibrium outcome. In what follows, we will focus in

the symmetric candidate equilibrium in which both creditors purchase C2L =2 of credit protection.

     Consider when it is privately optimal for one of the two creditors to increase his level of credit

protection beyond         C2L =2. The most pro…table deviation for an individual creditor is to raise

his level of credit protection up to C2H =2. This is the maximum level of protection that allows

renegotiation when the renegotiation surplus is high, given that both creditors have to be treated

equally in renegotiation. Then, assuming that there is no strategic default in equilibrium, the

expected payo¤ from deviating to            i   = C2H =2 is given by

                                                  R                  C2H
                                                    + (1         )       .                                    (19)
                                                  2                  2

Equation (19) re‡ects that under equal treatment a restructuring is possible only if the …rm o¤ers

 C2H =2 to each creditor, which after creditor i’s deviation is only possible when the renegotiation

surplus is high, i.e. with probability . When the surplus is low, renegotiation fails and the creditor

receives the CDS payment C2H =2. However, in expected terms this payment is o¤set by the cost

of purchasing CDS protection, which under fair pricing is given by (1                 ) (1   ) C2H =2.

     The deviation is pro…table if (19) exceeds the creditor’s payo¤ when protection is given by

 i   = C2L =2. This payo¤ is given by

                             R              1
                               + (1     )          max      C2L ; q C2H + (1    ) C2L :                       (20)
                             2              2




                                                            25
Comparing (19) to (20) shows that the deviation is pro…table whenever
                                          8
                                          >
                                          <    1
                                              (1 q)     C2L        when qC2H > C2L
                                C2H   >                                              :                       (21)
                                          >
                                          :   1
                                                  C2L              otherwise


     This condition is equivalent to the condition that must be satis…ed for a single creditor to bene…t

by increasing his level of credit protection beyond                  = C2L . This means that under a single bond

issue, that is held in equal amounts by two creditors, the incentives to over-insure are equivalent to

those of a single creditor, when creditors cannot trade amongst themselves in a secondary market.

It follows that there is likely to be less ine¢ cient overinsurance under this …nancial structure than

when the …rm negotiates two separate debt contracts.


4.2.2    Creditors can trade their CDS and bond positions during renegotiation

Consider now the situation where the two creditors can trade their bond and CDS positions before

the …rm undertakes debt renegotiations. As we will show, secondary market trade between the

two creditors induces the deviating creditor to be more aggressive in seeking high levels of default

protection.

     We start again from the candidate symmetric equilibrium in which both creditors have purchased

 1   =   2   =   C2L =2 in credit protection, and ask what an individual creditor’s incentives are to

deviate by seeking more credit protection. The most pro…table deviation for creditor i is to raise

his level of credit protection to     C2H          C2L =2. Note that absent trade among the creditors, at

this level of protection renegotiation would fail even if the renegotiation surplus is high: under

equal treatment of both creditors the …rm would have to o¤er 2                   C2H     C2L =2 to guarantee that

renegotiation succeeds, but this would exceed the available renegotiation surplus of C2H .

     However, when trade is allowed between the two creditors, the deviating creditor can purchase

the other creditor’s bond and CDS position to ensure that renegotiation will be successful when the

renegotiation surplus is high. To be able to purchase the other creditor’s bond and CDS positions,

the deviating creditor would have to pay the other creditor at least what he would receive if

renegotiation were to fail, i.e. his CDS default payment of                    C2L =2. After purchasing the other

creditor’s bond and CDS positions, the deviating creditor negotiates as a single creditor with the



                                                              26
…rm and is therefore willing to accept a restructuring o¤er for the whole bond issue of C2H . That

is, if the …rm makes an o¤er of C2H =2 for each half of the bond issue, the deviating creditor who

now owns the entire issue will vote to accept this o¤er on all the bonds he owns. The deviating

creditor can thus generate a payo¤ of

                                        R                                  C2L
                                          + (1         )        C2H            :                      (22)
                                        2                                  2

    Comparing this payo¤ to

                          R                 1
                            + (1        )        max       C2L ; q C2H + (1        ) C2L ;            (23)
                          2                 2

we …nd that a single creditor is better o¤ deviating to               i   = C2H     C2L =2 whenever
                                        8
                                        >
                                        <         1    L
                                                (2 q) C2        when qC2H > C2L
                                C2H >                                              .                  (24)
                                        >
                                        :       1+ 1 L
                                                 2  C2          otherwise


This is the same condition as the one we derived for the case which two creditors with two separate

bond issues. We thus conclude that the incentives to seek excessive default protection when the …rm

has issued a single bond held by multiple creditors lie between the incentives for over-insurance

under …nancing with a single creditor, and the incentives for over-insurance when the …rm has

written multiple debt contracts with multiple creditors. Given that trading among creditors has

become relatively commonplace, even during times of distress, this second case may be the one that

is empirically more relevant.



5    Discussion and Policy Implications

Our analysis highlights both the positive role of CDS as a commitment device for borrowers, and

the negative, socially ine¢ cient rent extraction they allow lenders to undertake. Both the costs

and bene…ts of CDS arise from the same economic force: empty creditors’strengthened bargaining

power in renegotiation.

    In this section we discuss the implications of our analysis for policy and the optimal legal treat-

ment of CDS. The existing law literature on CDS and the empty creditor problem (e.g. Hu and

                                                           27
Black (2008a,b), Lubben (2007)) has mostly been concerned with the potential negative ex-post

consequences of empty creditors. The premise of this literature is that the bundling of economic

ownership and control rights is e¢ cient, and hence that the introduction of CDS results in dis-

tortions, giving rise to ine¢ ciencies. Accordingly, these studies argue that it would generally be

e¢ ciency-enhancing to mitigate or undo the separation of cash ‡ow and control rights e¤ected

through CDS, thereby eliminating the empty creditor problem. Usually, the focus in on interven-

tions in the bankruptcy process, i.e. once a …rm is in Chapter 11. It is argued, in particular, that

it would be e¢ cient for bankruptcy courts to require disclosure of CDS positions to be able to

uncover potential con‡icts of interest between those creditors in a given class that are protected by

a CDS and those who are not:


           “This disclosure would ensure that the court, other creditors, and shareholders know

      where a creditor’s economic interest lies. Even if an apparent creditor with negative net

      economic interest in a class of debt retained voting rights, its views would be discounted.

      Moreover, courts would likely be readier to override a creditor vote which was tainted by

      some creditors voting with little, no, or negative economic ownership.”, Hu and Black

      (2008a), pp.21


    Thus, according to Hu and Black (2008a), one e¤ect of disclosure of CDS positions would be

the ability to reduce or remove the empty creditor’s control rights and to leave the restructuring

decisions in the hands of the unprotected creditors:


           “Voting rights may need to be limited to creditors with positive economic interest in

      the debtor as a whole or in a particular debt class. The degree of voting rights may need

      to be based on net economic ownership instead of gross ownership of a debt class.”, Hu

      and Black (2008a), pp.2115


    However, given the form of most CDS contracts, it is not obvious that a con‡ict between

protected and unprotected creditors always remains in bankruptcy, as the CDS payment is a bygone
  15
     They suggest further that “it might be feasible to adopt crude rules that block voting with negative overall
economic interest –either in the debtor or in a particular class. At least in the U.S., bankruptcy courts may have the
power under current law to disregard or limit votes by empty creditors, if disclosure rules made it possible for them
to identify these creditors.” That is, “courts can disallow votes that are "not in good faith." (U.S. Bankruptcy Code
§ 1126)”.


                                                         28
once the …rm is in Chapter 11 and CDS contracts have been settled.16 Thus, the focus on disclosure

and on denying voting rights to protected creditors in bankruptcy may be misplaced. Our analysis

suggests that the critical legal intervention is likely to be prior to the bankruptcy …ling, with a focus

on eliminating ine¢ cient obstacles to debt restructuring outside of Chapter 11, while preserving

the commitment bene…ts of CDS.

       We divide our policy discussion into six main subsections. The …rst two cover in turn situations

where from an e¢ ciency standpoint CDS are likely to be harmless and mostly harmful. The last

four subsections cover the issues of: i) whether it would be e¢ cient to make debt restructuring a

credit event; ii) whether it would be e¢ cient for the protection seller to become the debt claimholder

before or after a default; iii) the possibility of ex-post intervention by the protection seller should

renegotiation fail; and (iv) the bene…ts of mandating disclosure of CDS positions.


5.1      When are CDS likely to be harmless?

Given that in our analysis CDS lead to ex-ante commitment bene…ts by strengthening creditors’

ex-post bargaining power, it would be ine¢ cient to remove the creditor’s voting rights unless CDS

give rise to signi…cant ex-post debt restructuring ine¢ ciencies. Thus, as a general principle it

would be e¢ cient for courts to uphold a creditor’s voting rights in a debt restructuring proposal

or exchange o¤er, unless it can be shown that the CDS protection is likely to lead to a breakdown

in a value-enhancing debt restructuring deal. It would be ine¢ cient if the mere presence of CDS

protection led to an automatic denial of voting rights. In particular, if the e¤ect of CDS protection

is only to change the terms of the restructuring deal in favor of the creditor, then there is no reason

to intervene either in the debt contract or the CDS, since in this case, the denial of voting rights

to hedged creditors would erode the ex-ante bene…ts of CDS that we highlight in this article.

       When would we expect the commitment bene…ts of CDS to be largest? Since the bene…ts of

CDS stem from an increase in the creditor’s bargaining power, they are particularly large when

absent CDS creditors have limited bargaining power, i.e. when q is low. This is likely to be the case
  16
     Clearly, once all CDS are settled, they should not matter in Chapter 11. It is possible, however, that important
decisions— in particular whether to grant DIP-…nancing— have to be made before all CDS contracts are settled. To
the extent that the default payment by the protection seller is una¤ected, these decisions should not depend on the
presence of unsettled CDS. If, however, the default payment is inversely related to the recovery (or continuation)
value of the …rm in Chapter 11, protected creditors may have a lower incentive to maximize continuation value. From
this perspective it is desirable to settle CDS positions as quickly as possible after a Chapter 11 …ling.



                                                         29
when creditors are unsecured, and when the debtor’s assets are mostly intangible. On the other

hand, when the creditors’bargaining power is strong even absent CDS, the commitment bene…ts

are likely to be smaller. This is more likely when creditors are secured and when the …rm’s assets

are mostly tangible.

   It is also important to note that from an e¢ ciency perspective our model provides no grounds

for limiting speculative ’naked’positions in CDS markets. Since in our model the harmful e¤ects

of CDS on renegotiation can only arise through investors who hold both the bond and the CDS,

speculation in CDS markets does not cause any ine¢ ciency (at least in terms of a potential ine¢ cient

empty creditor problem) as long as the speculators active in these markets do not at the same time

own the CDS and the underlying bond. It is not necessary to sacri…ce the role of CDS markets in

aggregating market participants’information on credit default probabilities in order to deal with

ine¢ cient empty creditors. In our model there are thus no e¢ ciency gains from limiting ’naked’

CDS positions, although in practice there may be other reasons, outside our model, for considering

such a policy.

   On the other hand, our analysis indicates that regulators may want to keep an eye on trading

strategies that involve joint positions in bonds and CDS, for example so-called negative basis trades

that aim to take advantage of relative price di¤erences between a cash bond and a synthetic bond,

comprised of a risk-free bond and a CDS. In fact, Yavorsky (2009) predict that the increasing popu-

larity of negative basis arbitrage trades, which involve positions in a CDS and the underlying bond,

may lead to increased and accelerated bankruptcies or restructurings (in cases when restructuring

counts a credit event) over the coming years.


5.2   When are CDS mostly harmful?

When a …rm’s debt capacity is large enough that it could secure a loan from an unprotected creditor,

or from a creditor protected by a CDS with a low default payment, but instead the creditor takes

out a CDS insurance with a default payment so high that the CDS gives rise to an ine¢ cient

breakdown in debt restructuring, then clearly the CDS is harmful. As stated in Proposition 7,

the CDS then gives rise to socially ine¢ cient rent extraction by the creditor at the expense of the

overall value of the …rm.

   More generally, our analysis suggests that when a CDS speci…es a default payment that is

                                                 30
disproportionately large relative to the creditor’s loss in default, for a …rm that was perceived to be

su¢ ciently pro…table to be able to obtain more loans ex ante, then prima facie the main purpose

of such a CDS is ine¢ cient rent extraction. Intervention to limit such CDS is desirable from an

e¢ ciency perspective, but it is not entirely clear what form this intervention should take.

       Should it take the form of disenfranchising holders of CDS contracts of their voting rights in a

debt restructuring, as Hu and Black (2008a) suggest? Or should it take the form of limiting the

enforcement of excessively large default payments? Clearly, when there is only one creditor involved,

it does not make sense to disenfranchise the creditor. In such situations, intervention must take the

form of directly limiting the enforcement of CDS contracts. For example, a limit on a maximum

allowable default payment may be welfare improving. In the case of multiple creditors, on the other

hand, reducing voting rights of creditors with a disproportionate amount of protection may lower

the incentive to overinsure. Another avenue of intervention could be to require that enforcement

could be made conditional on the borrower and lender both agreeing to the CDS contract. This

would limit unilateral, rent-seeking default protection purchased by the creditor at the expense of

the …rm. However, this intervention would require detailed disclosure of CDS positions, which we

discuss further below.


5.3      The consequences of making debt restructuring a credit event

We have so far assumed that out-of-court debt restructuring does not constitute a credit event for

the CDS contract. This corresponds broadly to current market practice, as the standard North

American CDS as de…ned by ISDA does not count restructuring as a credit event (JPMorgan

(2009)). However, there are also CDS contracts that include restructuring as a credit event.17

       While it is well-known that the di¤erent treatment of restructuring events a¤ects the pricing of

CDS contracts (Packer and Zhu (2005), Berndt, Jarrow, and Kang (2006)), our model implies that

in addition this contractual di¤erence also has important repercussions on creditor behavior and
  17
    In fact, restructuring was originally included as a credit event in the 1999 ISDA credit derivatives de…nitions.
However problems with restructuring clauses emerged when Conseco Finance restructured debt to terms that were
advantageous to creditors, yet still this restructuring counted as a credit event. As a consequence, contracts that did
not include restructuring as a credit event gained in popularity. Moreover, for investors that wanted restructuring
included in their CDS contracts, ISDA introduced modi…ed versions of the restructuring clause. The modi…ed
restructuring clause of 2001 (Mod-R) and the modi…ed-modi…ed restructuring clause introduced in 2003 (Mod-Mod-
R) limit the set of securities a lender can deliver in the case of a restructuring credit event. For more details on the
di¤erent contractual clauses see JPMorgan (2006).



                                                          31
credit market outcomes. In particular, making restructuring a credit event constitutes one simple

way of eliminating the empty creditor problem altogether, since the default payment            would be

made whether or not debt restructuring is successful. Hence, when restructuring constitutes a

credit event the CDS has no e¤ect on the creditor’s incentives in debt restructuring and this would

therefore eliminate the empty creditor problem.

   However, recall that in our model the economic value added by CDS stems from their role as a

commitment device. In particular, a creditor with CDS protection becomes a tougher counterparty

in renegotiations when the CDS contract does not trigger a default payment upon an out-of-court

restructuring agreement, and only triggers a payment when the debtor formally defaults on his debt

obligations by, say, …ling for Chapter 11 protection. It follows that if restructuring is included as a

credit event, the CDS loses its economic role in our model. Hence, while classifying restructuring

as a credit event eliminates restructuring ine¢ ciencies resulting from the empty creditor problem,

it also eliminates any economic gains from CDS as a commitment device.

   A related way around the empty creditor problem would be to structure CDS like a put option.

Rather than requiring a contractually speci…ed default event, one could imagine a contract according

to which the protection buyer can sell (put) the bond to the protection seller for a prespeci…ed price

at any time. In this case again, the presence of CDS would have no e¤ect on debt restructuring.

However, as with debt restructuring as a credit event, the put option CDS would also eliminate the

bene…cial commitment role of CDS.


5.4   Who is best placed to renegotiate debt?

Should the CDS involve a simple default payment , as we have assumed, or should it also involve

a transfer of the debt claim to the protection seller? In our baseline model we have normalized the

reorganization value in Chapter 11 to L = 0 and assumed that, according to the absolute priority

rule, all the reorganization surplus goes to the lender. In this baseline case it is therefore irrelevant

whether the protection seller becomes the owner of the debt in the event of default or not. But,

suppose more generally that L > 0 and that the lender is only able to appropriate a share q of this

reorganization surplus. Then the debt claim should be transferred to the party that is best placed

to negotiate with the debtor in Chapter 11. If the protection seller’s bargaining power q I is higher

than the creditor’s bargaining power q; then there are obviously gains from trade in transferring

                                                   32
the debt claim to the protection seller, who can extract a bigger share of the reorganization surplus

L. If this transfer is anticipated at date 0, it is welfare-enhancing since it raises the …rm’s debt

capacity and thus facilitates investment. In the terminology of derivatives markets, in cases where

the insurance company that issues CDS has su¢ cient specialization in Chapter 11 negotiations,

‘physical settlement,’in which the bond is transferred to the protection seller when default occurs,

may thus be more e¢ cient than ‘cash settlement,’ under which the protection buyer retains the

bond in default.

    Is there also an e¢ ciency gain from transferring ownership of the debt to the insurance company

before default occurs? In contrast to a transfer of the bond once in Chapter 11, by selling the bond

to the protection seller before a default, the initial lender would undermine the commitment value

of the CDS. Indeed, the debtor then renegotiates the debt directly with the insurance company,

which does not have the outside option from CDS protection in renegotiation. Thus it is only if

the di¤erence in bargaining strengths between the original debtholders and the insurance company

is large enough to more than compensate for the lost outside option , that it is unambiguously

attractive for the initial lender to sell his debt claim before default. However, transfer of ownership

before may be e¢ cient when the original lender and the debtor fail to renegotiate. We discuss this

possibility in the next section.


5.5    Ex-post interventions by the protection seller

Up to now we have assumed that the protection seller remains passive when the debtor and creditor

renegotiate, e¤ectively ruling out Coasian dynamics that may alleviate the ine¢ ciencies caused by

empty creditors. In this subsection we discuss how active involvement by the protection seller may

reduce the ine¢ ciencies created by CDS.

    One avenue for the protection seller to avoid default, and the CDS payment of           = C2H to

the creditor, is to directly help the debtor repay the debt obligation R at date 1. If the protection

seller fears an ine¢ cient breakdown in renegotiation, all he needs to do is cover the di¤erence

R     C1L of the debt obligation. Hence, as long as R    C1L     C2H this is an attractive alternative

for the protection seller. In fact, the Texan brokerage …rm Amherst Holdings pursued exactly this

strategy to avoid default payments on CDS contracts it had sold to investment banks such as J.P.



                                                  33
Morgan Chase, Royal Bank of Scotland and Bank of America.18 Our analysis suggests that such

interventions are e¢ ciency-improving ex post.

       An alternative way for the protection seller to avoid the ine¢ ciency that arises from the failure

to renegotiate is to purchase the debt claim from the protection buyer in cases where renegotiation

between the debtor and creditor breaks down. In order to examine this in the context of our

model, recall that debt renegotiation breaks down when the CDS speci…es a high default payment,

  = C2H ; and when C2 = C2L ; such that the available renegotiation surplus is given by C2L . If

the protection seller purchases the debt claim from the initial lender there will be e¢ cient debt

renegotiation and therefore no default by the …rm. This means that the initial lender would be

denied the default payment          =   C2H under the CDS. Thus, to purchase the debt claim, the

protection seller must pay the initial lender at least this amount. Then, by renegotiating with the

…rm, the protection seller can receive q I C2L . The net payment the protection seller needs to make

if he purchases the debt claim is thus given by C2H           q I C2L . If the protection seller does not

purchase the debt claim, renegotiation will fail and the protection seller has to make a payment on

the outstanding CDS of        = C2H : This suggests a potential role for protection sellers to purchase

outstanding debt in cases when renegotiation between the debtor and the original creditor fails.

       However, while we have seen protection sellers making direct payments to avoid default on

issues, we are not aware of cases in which insurance companies have bought up the outstanding

debt of an issuer in order to avoid a breakdown of renegotiation. It is an open question whether

this is the case because protection sellers are not taking a su¢ ciently active role to avoid ine¢ cient

defaults due to empty creditors, or whether there are other di¢ culties, such as locating the holders

of the debt, that prevent this intervention in practice. Finally, a key issue with both types of

ex-post intervention described here is whether they do not undermine the CDS market altogether,

or lead to opportunistic behavior by the …rm or the initial creditor, thereby leading to an ex-ante

welfare loss.
  18
    See “A Daring Trade Has Wall Street Seething: Texas Brokerage Firm Outwits the Big Banks in a Mortgage-
Related Deal, and Now It’s War," Wall Street Journal, June 11, 2009.




                                                    34
5.6     Disclosure

According to current market practice, there are few disclosure requirements for bond positions and

almost no disclosure requirements for CDS positions. Prior to a Chapter 11 …ling neither bond nor

CDS positions have to be disclosed. Once in Chapter 11, rule 2019(a) requires ad-hoc committees

to disclose their security positions, but usually not their derivatives positions.

    However, the current debate about moving CDS to organized exchanges (see for example Du¢ e

and Zhu (2009) and Stulz (2009)) has gone hand in hand with a debate on transparency and poten-

tial disclosure requirements for CDS positions (although strictly speaking a central clearinghouse

is not necessary for disclosure, which could also be mandated in OTC markets). While much of the

debate on disclosure has focused on the ability to identify risk concentrations, our model highlights

another potential bene…t of CDS position disclosure: Requiring disclosure may allow market partic-

ipants to contract on CDS positions. Speci…cally, in our model this may allow the lender to commit

not to over-insure once he has acquired the bond, thus overcoming the empty creditor problem.

Moreover, even if such commitment to CDS positions is not possible, public disclosure of CDS po-

sitions would allow the public to gauge creditors’incentives when the …rm is in distress. Note that

in our analysis this type of disaggregated disclosure to facilitate contracting or gauge renegotiation

incentives would only need to apply to investors who simultaneously hold the underlying bond or

loan.



6       Conclusion

In this paper we propose a limited commitment model of credit default swaps. While many com-

mentators have raised concerns about the ex-post ine¢ ciency of the empty-creditor problem that

arises when a debt-holder has obtained insurance against default but otherwise retains control

rights, our analysis shows that credit default swaps add value by acting as a commitment device

for borrowers to pay out cash. Hence, CDS have important ex-ante commitment bene…ts. Specif-

ically, they increase investment and, by eliminating strategic default, can make existing projects

more e¢ cient. However, we also show that when creditors are free to choose their level of credit

protection, they will generally over-insure, resulting in an empty creditor problem that is ine¢ cient

ex-post and ex-ante. This over-insurance occurs even when CDS markets perfectly anticipate the


                                                  35
ine¢ cient behavior of empty creditors, and leads to excessive incidence of bankruptcy and too little

renegotiation with creditors relative to …rst best.

     Our analysis leads to a more nuanced view on policy than most of the existing law and eco-

nomics literature. In particular, any policy response to ine¢ ciencies arising from the empty creditor

problem should be mindful of the bene…cial commitment role of CDS. Eliminating empty credi-

tors altogether, for example by stripping protected creditors of their voting rights or by making

restructuring a credit event, would be ine¢ cient in our framework. An approach that may avoid

such ine¢ ciencies would be to cap enforceable CDS payments or to make CDS positions subject

to approval by both the debtor and the creditor. Moreover, disclosure of CDS positions may help

alleviate the problem by allowing debtors and creditors to contract on CDS positions taken by

creditors.



7     Appendix

Proof of Proposition 5: Suppose that Fe          Fe0 and consider a project whose setup cost exceeds Fe:

This project cannot be …nanced when setting         = C2L : Increasing the amount of credit protection

to    = C2H is e¢ cient if it allows the project to receive …nancing. This is the case if increasing

the amount of credit protection to C2H increases the amount the …rm can pledge to the creditor

relative to the case where   = C2L . When       = C2L the …rm can pledge


                          R + (1      )    max      C2L ; q C2H + (1     ) C2L                      (25)


to the creditor, where the face value of debt is set to the highest value compatible with no strategic

default in the high cash ‡ow state, R = C2L : By setting        = C2H ; the creditor expects to receive


                                           R + (1        )   C2H ;                                  (26)


where again R = C2L : (26) exceeds (25) when


                              C2H >       max    C2L ; q C2H + (1      ) C2L :                      (27)




                                                    36
                                                             (1 )
   When qC2H > C2L ; (27) simpli…es to C2H >                (1 q)     C2L : When qC2H         C2L ; (27) simpli…es to

C2H > 1 C2L :

   Proof of Proposition 6: Suppose that Fe0 > Fe: Clearly, when setting                              =    C2H allows

…nancing a project that could otherwise not be …nanced (F > Fe0 ), it is optimal to do so. This is

the case when the maximum pledgeable cash ‡ow with                     = C2H exceeds Fe0 ; i.e. when


        max      C2H ; C2L + (1     )      C2H     >        C2H + (1        ) C2L

                                                        + (1      )      max C2L ; qC2H + (1          ) C2L :     (28)


In addition, if the cost of foregone renegotiation surplus, (1                  ) (1      ) C2L ; is smaller than the

cost of strategic default, (1       ) (1         ) C2L ; it is optimal to set     = C2H and R = C2L also on the

interval (Fe; Fe0 ] to eliminate strategic default, as long as this allows …nancing. This is possible as

long as F < C2L + (1        )     C2H : Comparing the two expressions above, it is easy to see that the

cost of foregone renegotiation surplus is smaller then the cost of strategic default when                   > :

   Proof of Proposition 7: Suppose that F                      Fe such that e¢ cient …nancing is possible with

  = C2L . The creditor will nevertheless choose                = C2H when this increases his expected payo¤.

Following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 5, one …nds that this is the case when


                                  C2H >        max     C2L ; q C2H + (1         ) C2L ;                           (29)


which yields the same condition on C2H as in Proposition 5. The crucial di¤erence to Proposition

5 is that the creditor will choose to increase his level of credit protection to C2H if it increases his

expected payo¤, irrespective of whether the project can be …nanced when                       = C2L : Now consider

F 2 (Fe; Fe0 ]: When this interval is non-empty, the project can only be …nanced with strategic

default when      = C2L . If the project could be …nanced without strategic default when                    = C2H ;

it is e¢ cient to do so when the costs of strategic default outweigh the cost of lost renegotiation

surplus, which is the case when            >     : In that case the …rm can issue debt with face value of

R = C2L . Creditors will respond by setting               = C2H and willingly fund the project. However,

when     <      the …rm will issue debt with face value R = C2H : In this case it would be e¢ cient

for creditors to choose    = C2L on the interval F 2 (Fe; Fe0 ]: However, creditors will ine¢ ciently



                                                          37
choose     = C2H when this increases their payo¤, which following the same steps as above is the

case whenever (15) holds.

   Proof of Corollary 4: The …rst assertion is a direct consequence of taking the limit                    ! 1 in
                                                         1
equation (15). When qC2H > C2L the cuto¤                (1 q)   C2L converges to zero as   ! 1: When qC2H      C2L

the cuto¤ 1 C2L converges to one. In both cases this implies that the condition for over-insurance

is always satis…ed since C2H > C2L > 0: The second assertion of the corollary comes from the fact

that when qC2H > C2L over-insurance will always occur when the cuto¤ C2H needs to lie above for

over-insurance to occur is smaller than the lowest possible value C2H can take in this case ( 1q C2L ).
                           1             1 L
This is the case when     (1 q)   C2L    q C2 ,   which simpli…es to q < : The cases          = 0 and q = 1 follow

straightforwardly from (15).

   Proof of Proposition 8: (17) exceeds (16) when

  1                                C2L   1
    R + (1          )     C2H          >           R + (1          )   max     C2L ; q C2H + (1   ) C2L    :   (30)
  2                                 2    2

Simplifying this expression yields
                                           8
                                           >
                                           <        1    L
                                                  (2 q) C2        when qC2H > C2L
                                   C2H >                                            :                          (31)
                                           >
                                           :   1+ 1 L
                                                2  C2             otherwise


We can now compare this cuto¤ to the one computed in the single creditor case. When qC2H                       C2L

we have
                                                  1+ 1 L     1
                                                         C2 < C2L ;                                            (32)
                                                    2
                                                  | {z }
                                                   <1

such that over-insurance is more likely in the two-creditor case. When qC2H > C2L we know from
                                                                        1
(??) that a sole creditor would always over-insure when                (1 q)    1. The relevant case to compare is
               1                         1
thus when     (1 q)     > 1 ()      <   2 q.   For these parameter values a sole creditor would over-insure
            1
if C2H >   (1 q)    C2L . In the two-creditor case an individual creditor deviates from the low level of

insurance (    i   = C2L =2) when

                                                       1         1
                                   C2H > C2 =             CL <       C2L ,                                     (33)
                                                     (2 q) 2   (1 q)



                                                             38
                                1
where the last step uses   <   2 q:




References

Allen, F., and E. Carletti (2006): “Credit Risk Transfer and Contagion,”Journal of Monetary

  Economics, 53, 89–111.

Arping, S. (2004): “Credit Protection and Lending Relationships,”Working Paper, University of

  Amsterdam.

Ashcraft, A. B., and J. A. C. Santos (2007): “Has the CDS Market Lowered the Cost of

  Corporate Debt,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Berndt, A., R. A. Jarrow, and C. Kang (2006): “Restructuring Risk in Credit Default Swaps:

  An Empirical Analysis,” Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.

Binmore, K., A. Rubinstein, and A. Wolinsky (1986): “The Nash Bargaining Solution in

  Economic Modelling,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 17(2), 176–188.

Bolton, P., and D. S. Scharfstein (1990): “A Theory of Predation Based on Agency Problems

  in Financial Contracting,” American Economic Review, 80(1), 93–106.

         (1996): “Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors,” Journal of Political

  Economy, 104(1), 1–25.

Brav, A., and R. D. Mathews (2009): “Empty Voting and the E¢ ciency of Corporate Gover-

  nance,” Working Paper, Duke University.

Bris, A., I. Welch, and N. Zhu (2006): “The Costs of Bankruptcy: Chapter 7 Liquidation

  versus Chapter 11 Reorganization,” Journal of Finance, 61(3), 1253–1303.

Duffee, G. R., and C. Zhou (2001): “Credit derivatives in banking: Useful tools for managing

  risk?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(1), 25 –54.

Duffie, D., and H. Zhu (2009): “Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty

  Risk?,” Working Paper, Stanford University.


                                                39
Hart, O., and J. Moore (1994): “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human

  Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 841–879.

         (1998): “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt,” Quarterly Journal of

  Economics, 113(1), 1–41.

Hirtle, B. (2008): “Credit Derivatives and Bank Credit Supply,”Working Paper, Federal Reserve

  Bank of New York.

Hu, H. T. C., and B. Black (2006): “The New Vote Buying: Empty Voting and Hidden

  (Morphable) Ownership,” Southern California Law Review, 79, 811–908.

        (2007): “Hedge Funds, Insiders, and the Decoupling of Economic and Voting Ownership:

  Empty Voting and Hidden (Morphable) Ownership,”Journal of Corporate Finance, 13, 343–367.

        (2008a): “Debt, Equity, and Hybrid Decoupling: Governance and Systemic Risk Implica-

  tions,” European Financial Management, 14, 663–709.

        (2008b): “Equity and Debt Decoupling and Empty Voting II: Importance and Extensions,”

  University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 156(3), 625–739.

JPMorgan (2006): “Credit Derivatives Handbook,”JP Morgan Corporate Quantitative Research,

  December 2006.

         (2009): “Credit Market Outlook and Strategy,” North America Credit Research, 20

  February 2009.

Kahan, M., and E. B. Rock (2007): “Hedge Funds in Corporate Governance and Corporate

  Control,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 155(5), 1021–1093.

Kalay, A., and S. Pant (2008): “One Share-One Vote is Unenforceable and Sub-optimal,”

  Working Paper, University of Utah.

Lubben, S. J. (2007): “Credit Derivatives and the Future of Chapter 11,” Working Paper, Seton

  Hall University School of Law.

Morrison, A. C. (2005): “Credit Derivatives, Disintermediation, and Investment Decisions,”

  Journal of Business, 78(2), 621–647.

                                              40
Packer, F., and H. Zhu (2005): “Contractual Terms and CDS Pricing,” BIS Quarterly Review,

  pp. 89–100.

Parlour, C. A., and G. Plantin (2008): “Loan Sales and Relationship Banking,” Journal of

  Finance, 63(3), 1291–1314.

Parlour, C. A., and A. Winton (2008): “Laying o¤ Credit Risk: Loan Sales versus Credit

  Default Swaps,” Working Paper, UC Berkeley.

Rajan, R. G. (1992): “Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm’s-Length

  Debt,” Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1367–1400.

Stulz, R. (2009): “Credit Default Swaps and the Credit Crisis,” Working Paper, Ohio State

  University.

Sutton, J. (1986): “Non-Cooperative Bargaining Theory: An Introduction,”The Review of Eco-

  nomic Studies, 53(5), 709–724.

Thompson, J. R. (2007): “Credit Risk Transfer: To Sell or to Insure,”Working Paper, University

  of Waterloo.

Yavorsky, A. (2009): “Analyzing the Potential Impact of Credit Default Swaps in Workout

  Situations,” Special Comment, Moody’s Investor Services.

Zachariadis, K., and I. Olaru (2010): “Trading and Voting in Distressed Firms,” Working

  Paper, London School of Economics.




                                                 41
                                      Table 1: Summary of Potential Incidences of the Empty Creditor Problem

   Company            Year                                                          Summary                                                            Outcome
                             Marconi was initially unable to renegotiate with a consortium of banks, some of which had purchased credit
                             protection. As the Financial Times ("Restructuring at Risk from CDSs", October 18, 2004) points out "Banks
                             that bought CDS “insurance” to cover loans to Marconi held out against an early refinancing plan for the
    Marconi        2001‐2002                                                                                                                   Out‐of‐court restructuring
                             engineering group that would have involved them giving up the benefits of the insurance cover." Ultimately a
                             debt‐for‐equity swap was approved, essentially wiping out equity holders. See also "Liar's Poker," The
                             Economist, May 15, 2003.


                               Unable to work out a deal with its creditors, Mirant Corporation, an energy company based in Atlanta, was
                               forced to file for chapter 11. CFO Magazine ("Default Swap Faults," October 1, 2004) notes that "Citigroup
                               rejected troubled energy company Mirant Corp.'s efforts to reorganize without a Chapter 11 proceeding.
                               Citigroup insisted that it turned down Mirant's reorganization plan because the bank found the plan unlikely
                               to restore the company's solvency for long. But other creditors suspected that Citigroup had bought credit
     Mirant          2003                                                                                                                             Chapter 11
                               default swaps against Mirant, which might have given the bank a greater interest in seeing the company file
                               for bankruptcy than in helping finance a restructuring." Subsequently, the bankruptcy judge appointed a
                               committee representing interests of equity holders, indicating that there was a reasonable chance that the
                               reorganization value would be high enough to give equity holders a positive claim after paying off all
                               creditors. See "Shareholders in Mirant get Voice in Reorganization," New York Times, September 20, 2003.



                             A number of hedgeg funds refused to make concessions on exitingg loans to enable new loans that would have
                             improved Tower's cash position. Allegedly the hedge funds had shorted Tower's stock (rather than having
Tower Automotive   2004‐2005 entered into a CDS position, but to similar effect). See Partnoy and Skeel, "The Promise and Perils of Credit            Chapter 11
                             Derivatives," University of Cincinnati Law Review, 2005. See also "Hedge‐Fund Lending to Distressed Firms
                             Makes for Gray Rules and Rough Play," Wall Street Journal, July 18, 2005.


                               Six Flags filed for Chapter 11 after failing to reach a deal with its creditors. The Economist reports that a
                               Fidelity mutual fund turned down an offer that would have given unsecured creditors an 85% equity stake,
                               even though according to an analysis by Fitch Ratings, the same creditors would receive at most 10% of
    Six Flags        2009      equity after a bankruptcy filing (see "No Empty Threat," Economist, June 18, 2009). Mike Simonton, from                Chapter 11
                               Fitch, says that one possible scenario is that "the bondholder has a credit‐default swap ‐‐ essentially an
                               insurance policy ‐‐ that would pay it a higher sum than an out‐of‐court agreement." (quoted from "Plagued
                               by Debt, Six Flags Faces Its Own Wild Ride, Washington Post, April 13, 2009)




                                                                               42
                                           Table 1: Summary of Potential Incidences of the Empty Creditor Problem


                                   Filed for Chapter 11 after failing to reach a deal with its creditors. A research report by Deutsche Bank ("DB
                                   Current Issues, Decemer 21, 2009 on credit default swaps) notes that "traders speculated on the filing for
                                   bankruptcy of the European parent company after its US subsidiary Lyondell Chemical Co filed for Chapter 11
                                   bankruptcy protection in January 2009. The European parent decided not to do so, since the risk of
     Lyondell Basell        2009                                                                                                                                  Chapter 11
                                   liquidation following a bankruptcy filing under European law was deemed high. Many investors and CDS
                                   protection buyers (agreeing on cash settlement) reacted indignantly, and at least for some investors the
                                   reason might have been that a restructuring following Chapter 11 bankruptcy would have been a credit event
                                   triggering the CDS payments." See also "Burning down the House," The Economist, March 5, 2009.


                                   General Growth, the mall operator, filed for Chapter 11 after failing to reach a deal with its creditors.
                                   According to the Financial Times (see "CDS Derivatives are Blamed for Role in Bankruptcy Filings," April 17,
General Growth Properties   2009   2009) "Lawyers say CDS holdings were [...] a factor in the default filing for Chapter 11 protection of General                 Chapter 11
                                   Growths properties." Also the Economist notes that the bankruptcy of General Growth Properties "ha[s] been
                                   blamed on bondholders with unusual economic exposures." ("No Empty Threat," June 18, 2009)

                                   Faced with cash flow problems, AbitibiBowater attempted to extend the maturities of bonds due in August
                                   2009, in return for higher yields. Abitibi filed for Chapter 11 after failing to reach a deal with its creditors. The
                                   FT points out that "Some creditors, including Citigroup, which held a small exposure to AbitibiBowater,
     Abitibi Bowater        2009   hedged themselves in the CDS market, meaning their economic interest in the deal was different to lenders                      Chapter 11
                                   who had not bought credit insurance, according to people familiar with the matter." See "No Empty Threat,"
                                   Economist, June 18, 2009 and "CDSCDS Derivatives are Blamed for Role in Bankruptcy Filings,
                                                                                                                            Filings," Financial Times,
                                   April 17, 2009.
                                   Apollo Management and TGT, the owners of Harrah's, the Las Vegas gaming company, sought to restructure
                                   its debt through two exchange offers in 2009. While eventually the offer was successful, according to a
 Harrah's Entertainment     2009                                                                                                                           Out‐of‐court restructuring
                                   person involved credit derivatives "were one of the limiting factors." See "CDS Investors Hold the Cards,"
                                   Financial Times, July 22, 2009.
                                   After two failed exchange offers, the IT provider Unisys had to offer creditors bonds worth more than par to
                                   reschedule its 2010 debt. According to the Financial Times, many holders of Unisys debt also held CDS
         Unisys             2009                                                                                                                           Out‐of‐court restructuring
                                   protection, thus strengthening their bargaining position. For more details see "CDS Investors Hold the Cards,"
                                   Financial Times, July 22, 2009.




                                                                                     43
                                   Table 1: Summary of Potential Incidences of the Empty Creditor Problem


                            GM filed for Chapter 11 after failing to reach a deal with its creditors. According to the Financial Times,
                            "Hedge funds and other investors stand to make billions of dollars on credit insurance contracts if GM
                            declares bankruptcy, a prospect that is complicating efforts to persuade creditors to agree to a restructuring
     GM           2009      plan for the automaker." The article further notes that "Holders of such swaps would be paid in the event of a              Chapter 11
                            default – but would lose money if they agreed to restructure GM’s debt. For investors who own bonds and
                            CDS, this could create an incentive to favour a bankruptcy filing." See "Credit Insurance Hampers GM
                            Restructuring," Financial Times, May 11, 2009.


                            Filed for Chapter 11 after failing to reach a deal with its creditors. As in the GM case, credit default swaps may
                            have played a role in Chrysler's inability to restructure its debt. The Wall Street Journal ("Chrysler Chapter 11
                            Is Imminent," April 30, 2009) notes that "Bank‐debt holders, many of them hedge funds or distressed debt
   Chrysler       2009      funds, voted against the latest deal for various reasons [...]. Some said their funds had bigger positions in Ford          Chapter 11
                            Motor Co. or General Motors Corp. and could benefit by a Chrysler bankruptcy and the production capacity
                            that may eliminate. Some funds may also have credit‐default swaps on Chrysler bank debt that pay out in the
                            event of a bankruptcy."

                          The trucking company YRC struggled to undertake a debt‐for‐equity exchange in the fall of 2009. Initially
                          some creditors opposed the offer, even though they would likely receive less in bankruptcy than if they
                          accepted the offer. This raised suspicion that the hold‐out creditors were hoping to profit on their CDS
YRC Worldwide   2009‐2010 positions (the hedge fund Brigade Capital was named as one of the potential holdouts). Eventually YRC                  Out‐of‐court restructuring
                          managed to renegotiate its debt
                                                       debt, when the Teamsters union threatened to protest in front of the offices of
                          hedge funds which blocked YRC's debt‐for‐equity offer. See "YRC and the Street's Appetite for Destruction,"
                          Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2010.




                                                                            44
