                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 JOBLESSNESS AND PERCEPTIONS ABOUT THE EFFECTIVENESS OF DEMOCRACY

                                          Duha Tore Altindag
                                           Naci H. Mocan

                                         Working Paper 15994
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15994


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2010




We thank Robert Newman for helpful comments and Elif Filiz for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Duha Tore Altindag and Naci H. Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Joblessness and Perceptions about the Effectiveness of Democracy
Duha Tore Altindag and Naci H. Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 15994
May 2010
JEL No. J2,O1,P1

                                              ABSTRACT

Using micro data on more than 130,000 individuals from 69 countries, we analyze the extent to which
joblessness of the individuals and the prevailing unemployment rate in the country impact perceptions
of the effectiveness of democracy. We find that personal joblessness experience translates into negative
opinions about the effectiveness of democracy and it increases the desire for a rogue leader. Evidence
from people who live in European countries suggests that being jobless for more than a year is the
source of discontent. We also find that well-educated and wealthier individuals are less likely to indicate
that democracies are ineffective, regardless of joblessness. People’s beliefs about the effectiveness
of democracy as system of governance are also shaped by the unemployment rate in countries with
low levels of democracy. The results suggest that periods of high unemployment and joblessness could
hinder the development of democracy or threaten its existence.


Duha Tore Altindag
Louisiana State University
2128 Patrick F. Taylor Hall
Baton Rouge, LA, 70803
daltin2@tigers.lsu.edu

Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2119 Patrick F. Taylor Hall
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu
I. Introduction

        Economists are increasingly interested in the impact of institutions on economic

development. Rigobon and Rodrik (2005), Dollar and Kraay (2003) and Acemoglu and

Robinson (2000) argue that high quality institutions in a country, represented by a number

of dimensions such as the protection of property rights and a functioning democracy, foster

economic development because they promote investment in human capital and physical

capital. Countries that are governed by high quality institutions experience higher capital

accumulation, productivity, and output per worker (Hall and Jones 1999). Rodrik (1999)

shows that the extent of democracy in a country has a positive impact on wages received by

manufacturing workers. Barro (1996) argues that a more democratic regime stimulates

economic growth when the level of political freedom is low.1

        The potential impact of economic development on the extent of democracy is an

equally important research question, and whether an increase in income of a country causes

its democracy to improve has been a subject of recent debate. As widely quoted in this

literature, a common perspective, articulated by Lipset (1959) is that “From Aristotle down

to the present, men have argued that only in a wealthy society in which relatively few

citizens lived in real poverty could a situation exist in which the mass of the population

could intelligently participate in politics an could develop the self-restraint necessary to

avoid succumbing to the appeals of irresponsible demagogues.” Barro (1999) finds that the
1
  In the same paper Barro identifies a nonlinear impact of democracy; i.e. democracy hinders growth when a
moderate level of democracy has already been attained. He argues that this could because democracy may
encourage redistribution of income from the rich to the poor and may enhance the power of interest groups.
It has also been suggested that institutions have no direct impact on economic growth. Rather, human capital
is the main driver of economic growth and good economic policies, sometimes implemented by dictators, can
generate high economic growth.




                                                      2
propensity for democracy rises with per capita GDP. Minier (2001) shows that an increase

in per capita GDP is associated with an enhanced demand for democracy, approximated by

pro-democracy public demonstrations. Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008) report that

economic development is a key factor determining the intensity of democratic reforms in a

country. On the other hand, Acemoglu et al. (2008) find no significant impact of GDP

growth on democratization.

       This paper aims to contribute to the literature on the determinants of democracy.

However, it differs from the previous work in an important way. It employs individual-

level, rather than country-level data. The paper investigates the extent to which an

individual’s own joblessness and the unemployment rate of his/her country make him/her

more likely to reveal a distaste towards the effectiveness of democracy. Acemoglu and

Robinson (2001) argue that regime changes are more likely during recessionary periods; and

Haggard and Kaufman (1995) point out that many Latin American transitions to democracy

coincided with economic crises. The implication is that short-term economic downturns

may prompt reactions towards the existing regime. While it is sensible to think that

undesirable economic conditions would trigger enhanced opposition movements against

existing undemocratic regimes, it is equally reasonable to argue that tough economic

conditions in a democratic regime could prompt negative feelings towards democracy. For

example, Gasiorowski (1995) and Prezworski et al. (1996) demonstrate that recessions

significantly increase the probability of a coup. Because of the free-rider problem, a change

in perceptions about the effectiveness of democracy among the residents of a country does

not necessarily imply involvement in direct actions against democracy, such as participation

in a revolt (MacCulloch 2005). Nevertheless, it is important to understand how perceptions


                                              3
about democracy are impacted by personal economic conditions as these perceptions may

translate into political actions against democracy in subtle ways such as voting for a political

party which has an explicit or implicit anti-democratic platform.

       We use micro data on 131,615 individuals from 69 countries to investigate the extent

to which personal joblessness of individuals and the unemployment rate in their country

impact their perceptions of operational efficiency of democracy. We find that

observationally identical individuals have weaker beliefs about democratic efficiency if they

are jobless and if duration of joblessness is longer than one year. The same is true if the

unemployment rate of the country goes up and if these individuals live in countries with low

levels of democracy. These results underline the importance of labor market policies in

developing countries with struggling democracies. We also find that higher household

income and personal education promote stronger perceptions about the effectiveness of

democracy. Section II describes the empirical specification and the data. Section III

presents the results and Section IV is the conclusion.



II. Empirical Specification

The basic model can be specified as follows:


(1)            Dict*=αict+β Joblessict+γURct+XictΩ’+YctΨ’+ τt + εict ,


       where Dict* measures individual i’s propensity for unhappiness with democratic

efficiency who lives in country c, who was surveyed in year t. Although an individual’s

propensity for negative feelings towards democracy is unobservable, an indicator variable

Dict is observed to be equal to 1 when Dict*>0 so that


                                               4
(Dict=1)= Prob(αict+β Joblessic+γURct+XictΩ’+YctΨ’+ τt + εict>0). If the error term εict in

Equation (1) is normally distributed, then the result is a standard single-equation probit

specification.

       We employ three different variables to represent Dict to capture the beliefs about the

effectiveness of democracy. The first measure is an indicator of the extent to which the

individual believes that the economic system runs badly in democracies. The second one

gauges general effectiveness of democracy as a political decision-making system. It

measures whether the individual believes that democracies are indecisive and have too much

quibbling. The third one measures the preference of the individual towards a leader who

does not bother with key aspects of a democracy such as the parliament and elections. The

details of these variables are described in the data section below.

       The specification depicted by Equation (1) is similar in spirit to a line of research

conducted by political scientists and economists to explain the voting patterns and to

forecast election results. For example, Kramer (1971), Stigler (1973), Fair (1978) analyzed

the impact of economic conditions on the percentage of votes received by incumbent and

opposition parties in the U.S. Presidential or Congressional elections. Markus (1988) and

Nannestad and Paldam (1997) analyzed the propensity to vote for the incumbent as a

function of personal economic circumstances and aggregate macroeconomic conditions in

the U.S. and in Denmark, respectively. Garand and Ulrich (2009) investigate the impact of

macroeconomic conditions on individuals’ subjective evaluations of the state of the

economy, and the resultant voting behavior.

       The key explanatory variable Joblessict is a dichotomous indicator that identifies if

person i who lives in country c and surveyed in year t is unemployed. We also investigate


                                               5
the extent to which the aggregate unemployment rate in the country (UR) has an impact on

people’s attitudes towards the efficiency of democracy. The impact of the unemployment

rate, holding constant one’s own employment status, may work through at least two

different channels. First, regardless of whether a person is employed or unemployed, an

increase in the unemployment rate of the country may impact the individual’s expected

future utility. Specifically, an increase in overall joblessness in the economy may decrease

the individual’s subjective probability of future employment and therefore it would reduce

his/her expected future utility. This could in turn influence his/her propensity for

satisfaction with democracy as a system of governance. Second, an increase in the

unemployment rate may have a direct impact on individuals’ level of happiness if the utility

function contains other-regarding preferences. For example, it has been shown that

individual happiness declines as the unemployment rate goes up, conditional on personal

employment. (Clark and Oswald 1994, Clark 2003, Winkelmann and Winkelmann 1998).

Therefore, an increase in the unemployment rate may alter attitudes towards democracy

through its direct impact on utility.

       Differences across individuals with respect to their general attitudes towards

democracy are represented by αict in Equation (1), where larger values indicate higher

baseline propensity for dissatisfaction with democracy. Note that α has a subscript c

indicating that the extent of unhappiness with democracy may vary between countries. This

could be because of cultural, historical and institutional differences between countries. Also

note that α has subscript i, indicating that predisposition to dissatisfaction with democracy

may vary between people who live in the same country. This could be because of

differences in family background and personal characteristics.


                                               6
        It is possible that individuals who have negative attitudes towards democracy (those

with large values of α) face difficulties in finding and retaining jobs.2 If α is positively

correlated with the propensity for joblessness, the failure to account for it would bias β

upwards. To guard against this possibility, the model includes the vector X, containing

personal attributes of the individual, such as age, gender, type of employment if the person

is not jobless (such as having a part-time job, having a full time job, being a student, being a

housewife and so on), marital status, the number of children, the level of education and

income of the individual. However, inclusion of personal characteristics may not fully

control for the unobserved impact of the individual’s general attitude towards democracy.

Therefore, we add a control variable to the model that gauges the person’s general attitude

towards democracy as a measure of α. This variable is created by the reactions to the

question “Democracy may have problems but it is better than any other form of

government.” Possible answers to this question are strongly agree, agree, disagree and

strongly disagree. The variable Democracy is Not Better takes the value of one if the

respondent disagrees or strongly disagrees with the statement about the merit of democracy.

We discuss potential empirical issues, and threats to identification in the results section.

Specifically, we address potential reverse causality and a potential for a spurious

relationship between joblessness and perceptions about democratic efficiency.

       In Equation (1) Y stands for a vector of country attributes such as the proportions of

Muslims, Catholics and Protestants in the country, an indicator variable to specify if the

country was ever colonized, and the Human Development Index of the United Nations

   2
     This is because the empirical analyses are conducted in a sample of countries, the majority of
   which is democratic, although the extent of democracy differs between the countries. Examples
   of undemocratic countries are Morocco, which is governed by a constitutional monarchy and
   Saudi Arabia, which is an Islamic monarchy.

                                                 7
Development Program (UNDP). This index includes such elements as life expectancy at

birth, the adult literacy rate and GDP per capita. Other country variables include the

magnitude of international trade (the share of exports plus imports in total GDP) as a

measure of openness, military expenditures as a proportion of GDP, and the inflation rate in

the country during the survey year.

III. Data

        The primary data are obtained from the two waves of the World Values Survey

(WVS). The WVS includes information on individual’s beliefs, values and attitudes

towards various issues ranging from politics to environmental protection to religion. The

data set also includes information on personal characteristics of the respondents. Interviews

have been carried out with nationally representative samples (at least 1,000 individuals from

each country) of 69 countries (which make up about 85 percent of the world's population)

on all six inhabited continents in five waves between 1981 and 2007. We merged the WVS

data with various country attributes to obtain our final sample of 131,615 individuals from

69 countries.3

        Descriptive statistics are provided in Table 1. The three dependent variables are

Democracy is Bad for the Economy, Democracies are Indecisive and Rogue Leader.

Democracy is Bad for the Economy takes the value of 1 if the respondent agrees or strongly

agrees with the statement that “In democracies, the economic system runs badly,” and zero

if the respondent disagrees or strongly disagrees. Democracies are Indecisive takes the

value of 1 if the respondent agrees or strongly agrees with the statement that “Democracies


3
  Data from 69 countries in the 3rd and the 4th waves covering years 1994 to 2004 are analyzed in
this paper since the dependent variables are based on the questions that are asked only in these
waves.

                                                 8
are indecisive and have too much quibbling,” and zero if he/she disagrees or strongly

disagrees. Rogue Leader takes the value of 1 if the respondent indicated that “Having a

strong leader who does not have to bother with parliament and elections” is very good or

fairly good; and zero if the respondent replied that such a leader is bad or very bad.

       Low Income is a dichotomous indicator that takes the value of 1 if the person’s

household income belongs to the bottom third of the income distribution of his/her country.

Medium Income is equal to 1 if the household income is in the middle-third of the income

distribution of the country and zero otherwise. High Income identifies whether the personal

household income belongs to the top third of the country’s income distribution.

       Low Education is a dummy variable which indicates that the person has completed at

most elementary education, but has not completed a technical or vocational training. If the

person has completed secondary school, which includes technical or vocational training or

university-preparatory type education, Middle Education takes the value of 1, and it is zero

otherwise. The indicator variable High Education is equal to 1 if the individual has a

university degree, has attended university, or has received a tertiary certificate.

       Family characteristics of the individuals are captured by dummies for marital status

and the number of children. Specifically, we categorized individuals into three groups

according to their marital status: Single, Married, and Divorced/Widowed, where

Divorced/Widowed includes those who are separated. Similarly, five mutually exclusive

dummy variables identify the number of children of the person: No Children, 1 Child, 2

Children, 3 Children and 4+ Children. Personal employment indicators classify the

respondent into various categories. If the person holds more than one job, he/she is

classified based on the characteristics of the main job. The categories include being jobless


                                                9
(unemployed), working full-time, working part-time, being self-employed, having been

retired, being a student, being housewife, or other employment.

        Country-level variables include an indicator variable to represent if the country was

ever colonized. Past colonization experience of the country may have an impact on the

attitudes toward democracy. 4 Also included in the group of country attributes is the

religious make-up of the country, measured by proportion of the population that is Muslim,

proportion Catholic, proportion Protestant and the proportion that adheres to other religions.

Religion is a major part of culture, and in countries with hierarchical religions such as

Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and Islam, it may be culturally more difficult to challenge

the authority of office-holders in comparison to cultures with more individualistic or

egalitarian religions such as Protestantism. Second, as argued by Treisman (2000), in

religions such as Protestantism, which emerged as a reaction to a state-sponsored religion,

there may be stronger emphasis on monitoring potential abuses of state officials. By

contrast, in more traditional religions such as Islam or Catholicism, such a check-and-

balance role may be absent.

        Regressions also include the Human Development Index created by the United

Nations Development Program (UNDP). The Human Development Index (HDI) is a

composite index that measures the average achievements in a country in three basic

dimensions of human development: a long and healthy life, as measured by life expectancy

at birth; knowledge, as measured by the adult literacy rate and the combined gross

enrolment ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary schools; and the standard of living, as

measured by GDP per capita in purchasing power parity US dollars.

4
 Feyrer and Sacerdote (2009) show that the colonial origins of a country influence its economic
development.

                                                10
          We control for the share of military expenditures in GDP to account for the

differences in the government policies between more democratic and less democratic

regimes. Specifically, if governments in countries with low levels of democracy require

more suppressive mechanism to be able to keep competitors out of office, and such

governments may spend a larger fraction of GDP on military. Further, leaders of such

authoritarian regimes have greater incentives to avoid conflict with the military to keep the

military as a political ally, in comparison to the leaders of democratic regimes. This is

because, authoritarian leaders may want the support of military in case of a revolt or they

may want to use the military as domestic police in the country (Mulligan, Gil and Sala-i-

Martin 2004).

          The unemployment rate of the country is obtained mainly from the World

Development Indicators of the World Bank. The other source of the unemployment rate is

the International Labour Organization’s KILM database. If the unemployment rate is not

available for one country at a specific year through WDI, it is imputed by assigning either

the most recent year’s unemployment or the average of the closest years’ unemployment

rates for that country in WDI. If neither of the imputation methods work (such as in the

cases when there was no recent years’ unemployment rates for a country or no data was

available in WDI), then the unemployment rate from KILM database is employed.

          For each country we also have data on the level of democracy. This variable,

obtained from Polity IV5, measures various aspects of democracy in the country including

competitiveness of political participation, competitiveness of executive recruitment,

constraints and limitations on chief executive’s authority. The democracy index ranges from


5
    http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm

                                                 11
-10 to 10, where a higher value represents a better-functioning democracy. 6 The means and

standard deviations of country characteristics are calculated by considering each country-

year as one observation.



III. Results

        Table 2 displays the marginal effect obtained from estimation of Equation (1) using

probit. Standard errors, that are corrected for arbitrary covariance structure and that are

adjusted for clustering within a country in a specific year, are reported in parentheses.

Regressions also include time dummies to control for the fact that different countries are

surveyed in different years, and continent fixed effects to control for unobservable

characteristics that may be common to the countries in the same broad geographic area.

        Column (1) reports the results of the model where the dependent variable is whether

the respondent believes that democracy is bad for the economy. The second column displays

the results of the models where the dependent variable is whether the respondent believes

that democracies are indecisive and have too much squabbling. The third column pertains

to the model where the dependent variable indicates if the respondent believes that a strong

leader who does not bother with the parliament and elections is good for the country.

        Column (1) of Table 2 demonstrates that being jobless is associated with about a 5

percentage point increase in the propensity to declare that democracy is bad for the


6
  The data on democracy variable were not available for some countries for some years from the
source. The democracy variable is completed by assigning the closest year’s democracy index value
in that country or that of the previous governing country. For example, the democracy scores of
Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Czechoslovakia in 1991 are assigned to Belarus, Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania and Czech Republic in 1990, respectively (and in 1991 for Czech Republic).
Similarly, democracy index values for Russian Federation in 1992 and Slovakia in 1992 are assigned
to the same countries in 1990 and 1991.

                                               12
economy. Similarly, columns 2 and 3 show that if the individual is jobless, his/her

propensity to indicate that democracies are indecisive or that a rogue leader can better

manage the country goes up by 3 to 5 percentage points. Holding constant personal

employment, a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate of the country

increases the propensity to declare that democracy is bad for the economy by 0.4 percentage

points and that a rogue leader is desirable by 0.6 percentage points. That is, the extent of

joblessness in the economy has an additional impact on the negative attitudes towards

democracy. As expected, those who agree with the statement that democracy is not better

than any other form of government (Democracy is Not Better=1) tend to indicate that

democracies are bad for the economy, that democracies are indecisive, and that a rouge

leader can better manage the country.

       Individuals who live in households where household income is in the middle of the

income distribution of the country are 2 percentage points less likely to reveal negative

feelings towards the efficiency of democracy in comparison to individuals who live in

households where the household income belongs to the bottom one-third of the income

distribution (the left-out category). Individuals who belong to the richest one-third of the

households of a country (High Income=1) are 3 to 5 percentage points less likely to reveal

negative feelings toward the efficiency of democracy or for the desire to have a rouge

leader. Education of the individual has a significantly negative impact on the propensity to

have negative feelings toward democracy. Specifically, those who attended college or who

have college degrees are about 12 percentage points less likely to indicate that democracies

are bad for the economy in comparison to those who have an elementary school education

or less. Those who have a secondary degree (Middle Education=1) are 5 percentage points


                                              13
less likely to give positive responses to the same question in comparison to those who are

not educated. The same is true regarding preferences about other questions as revealed by

columns 2 and 3. Thus, regardless of their joblessness situation, individuals’ beliefs about

the efficiency of democracy goes down the poorer they are and the less educated they are.

       All else the same, retired people display stronger negative feelings towards

democracy. While the unemployment rate of the country has an impact as discussed above,

other economic indicators of the country, such as the extent of openness to international

trade and the inflation rate, do not impact individuals’ beliefs about democratic efficiency.

The same is true for the Human Development Index. The impacts of ever having been

colonized and that of military spending are positive in column (1), although the coefficient

is not significantly different from zero in models displayed in columns 2 and 3. As will be

discussed below, the impact of colonization on people’s preferences for democracy will

change direction if the models are estimated by the level of democracy of the country. As

the proportion of people who are Protestant in the country goes up, the propensity for

disapproval of the effectiveness of democracy goes down.

Political Misfits and Reverse Causality

       Consistent with our expectations, β in Equation (1) is estimated to be positive,

indicating that jobless individuals have less favorable perceptions of the effectiveness of

democracy in comparison to the perceptions of those who have jobs. The model controls for

individuals’ general attitudes toward democracy, measured by the variable Democracy is

Not Better. However, it is still possible that the results are driven by those individuals

whose views about democracy are not in line with the majority view of the population and

that they are jobless because of this political conflict. That is, causality may run from the


                                               14
opinions about the effectiveness of democracy to joblessness. A person who is a “political

misfit” in a society may find it difficult to find a job. To control for this effect, we classify

countries into two categories. The first group consists of countries with a high level of

functioning democracy and the second group contains countries where the level of

democracy is lower. Specifically, we divide countries into two groups depending on

whether the democracy index is less than seven, or greater than or equal to seven.7 We

create a dichotomous indicator, Dislikes Democracy in a Democratic Country, which takes

the value of 1 if the person thinks that democracy is not the best form of government

(Democracy is Not Better=1) but who lives in a country with high-level of democracy.

Similarly, the indicator variable Likes Democracy in a Less Democratic Country takes the

value of 1 if the person lives in a country with low level of democracy, but thinks that

democracy is the best form of government (Democracy is Not Better=0). The results

obtained from the specification that includes these additional control variables are reported

in Panel A of Table 3. In the interest if space only the coefficients and the corresponding


7
 The first groups ( Democracy<7) consists of Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Armenia, Belarus,
China, Croatia, Estonia, Iran, Jordan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Egypt, Tanzania. The second group
(Democracy>=7) includes Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Republic of
Korea, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Republic of Moldova, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, Great Britain, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela. The
countries Albania, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Pakistan and Peru appear in both high democracy
and low democracy samples. This is because the two waves of interviews were conducted in these
countries in different years and the level of democracy has changed between the two survey years.
For example, the democracy index was 5 in Albania in 1998 and it rose to 7 in 2002; it was 6 in
1996 in the Republic of Korea and rose to 8 in 2001. The index took a value of 4 in 1996 for
Mexico, but it rose to 8 in 2000 in that country. Democracy index was 7 in Pakistan in 1997 and it
went down to -6 in 2001; and it was 1 in 1996 in Peru and rose to 9 in 2001.



                                                15
standard errors of Joblessness the Unemployment Rate and the variables to indicate whether

the person is a political misfit in his/her country are reported. This specification did not

alter either the point estimates or their estimated standard errors. The panel B of Table 3

displays the results of the same specification with one difference. These results are obtained

from the model which omits the country variables, but includes country fixed-effects

instead. In this specification the coefficients of Jobless remain the same, but the impact of

the country unemployment loses statistical significance and/or changes sign. We also

estimated the models by excluding political misfits from the sample. That is, we analyzed

the relationship between joblessness, unemployment rate and preferences for democracy in

sample of individuals whose general feelings towards democracy are aligned with the

society they live in. The results remained the same.

      It is plausible that the impact of joblessness on the beliefs about the effectiveness of

democracy is different in countries with low levels of democracy in comparison to countries

with a high level of democracy. Therefore, we estimated the model separately for countries

with low levels of democracy (Democracy<7) and for countries that have a high level of

democracy (Democracy ≥7). The results are presented in Tables 4A and 4B. The

specifications also include the indicator variable to identify if the respondent is a political

misfit in his/her country.8

      There are commonalities in the results that are obtained from countries with low and

high-levels of democracy. For example, in both groups of countries joblessness of an

individual has a negative influence on the feelings towards democratic efficiency. The

impact is similar between the two group of countries. Although the marginal effect of

8
  The results did not change appreciably when we classified the countries based on the democracy
cutoffs at 6 or 8).

                                                16
joblessness is slightly larger in countries with high levels of democracy, so are the baselines

in these countries.9 Being divorced, separated from the spouse or being a widow is also

correlated with having negative feelings toward democracy; and the same is true of being

retired.

           There are also interesting contrasts between the results obtained from the two groups

of countries. The unemployment rate has a strong impact on the feelings toward democracy

for people in countries where the level of democracy is low (Table 4A), while the

unemployment rate has no impact on people’s feelings towards the effectiveness of

democracy in countries where the level of democracy is high (Table 4B). The former group

consists of mostly, but not exclusively, of developing countries (see footnote 7), where the

societies are collectivist, rather than individualistic (Mocan 2008). Thus, an increase in the

unemployment rate may have a direct impact on the utility of the individual based on other-

regarding preferences. It could also be the case that an increase in the unemployment rate

triggers a higher level of anxiety in these countries because an increase in the

unemployment rate may be associated with a larger degree of uncertainty about the future of

the labor market in these countries.

           In the group of countries where democracy is higher, having ever been a colony has

no impact on the extent of people’s feelings towards democracy. On the other hand, among

the group of countries with low levels of democracy, having been colonized in the past

decreases the propensity to indicate that democracies are bad for the economy. In countries

       9
         In countries with low levels of democracy, the proportion of people who indicated that
democracy is bad for the economy is 0.33, while it is 0.35 in the countries with high levels of
democracy. The proportion of people who indicated that democracies are indecisive is 0.47 in the
former group and it is 0.54 in the latter. Finally the proportion who prefers a rogue leader is 0.33 in
the former group and 0.37 in the latter.


                                                  17
with low levels of democracy, the propensity to respond in the affirmative that democracies

are bad for the economy, democracies are indecisive, and a rouge leader is good for the

country is lower if the individual’s household income belongs to the top one-third of the

country’s income distribution and if the individual has attended or completed college. In

comparison, in the sample of people who live in countries with high levels of democracy, a

switch in household income from the lowest third of the distribution to the middle income

group is associated with a reduction in negative feelings towards the effectiveness of

democracy. The same is effect is achieved with an increase in personal education from the

lowest echelon (elementary education or less) to the secondary education level. This means

that in countries with low levels of democracy, a change in feelings towards the

effectiveness of democracy can only be achieved with a more substantial increase in

personal education and household income in comparison to countries where high levels of

democracy.

Potential for a Spurious Relationship

       The specifications we estimated include a large number of country-level variables as

well as a large number of personal attributes, including the individuals’ general feelings

towards democracy. To analyze the significance of a potential reverse causality, we also ran

specifications that included a variable that gauges the extent of the mismatch between the

individual’s general feelings towards democracy and the level of democracy of the country

as described above. In all specifications the impact of joblessness on the perceptions of the

effectiveness of democracy remained robust. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the

possibility that preferences for the effectiveness of democracy are indications of a general

feeling towards the government or towards public policy. If that is the case, what we


                                              18
identify as the impact of joblessness on attitudes towards the effectiveness of democracy

could be nothing but the relationship between joblessness and general unhappiness about the

government or governance of the country.       To investigate if this is the case, we estimate

the same models by using three different dependent variables. These dependent variables

aim to gauge the extent of confidence people reveal in the government and the level of

satisfaction with the manner in which country’s affairs are handled. The first variable is

based on the question “Could you tell me how much confidence you have in the

government?” Potential answers are: a great deal of confidence, quite a lot of confidence,

not very much confidence or none at all. A dummy variable is created that takes the value

of one if the individual indicated he/she did not have very much confidence or had no

confidence in the government. The second question aims to measure the extent of

dissatisfaction with the government, where people were asked: “How satisfied are you with

the way the people now in national office are handling the country's affairs? Would you say

you are very satisfied, fairly satisfied, fairly dissatisfied or very dissatisfied?” We classified

individuals as dissatisfied with the people in the national office if they indicated that they

were fairly dissatisfied or very dissatisfied. The third variable is based on the question:

“Generally speaking, would you say that this country is run by a few big interests looking

out for themselves, or that it is run for the benefit of all the people?” A dichotomous

variable, which takes the value of 1 is created if the respondent indicated that the country

was run by a few big interests.

       We ran probit models using these three indicators as dependent variables. We

employed the same specifications as in Tables 2 and 3, using the same samples. That is, we

included individuals that were part of the regressions in Tables 2 and 3 and who also


                                                19
answered the three questions above. 10 The results are displayed in Table 5. We ran two

specifications for each question. Panel A displays the results which are based on the

specification presented in Table 2, and Panel B displays the results which include the

variable which measures if the person is political misfit in his/her country. The coefficient

of Joblessness is not different from zero in any specification in Table 5. This indicates that

the impact of being jobless on the beliefs about the effectiveness of democracy, displayed in

Tables 2-4, is not likely to be an artifact of a general displeasure towards government, but

rather, it is targeted towards democracy.



Duration of Joblessness

        It is possible that the impact of joblessness on the perceptions about the effectiveness

of democracy changes by the duration of joblessness. That is, individuals’ attitudes may

depend on how long they have been without a job. To investigate if this is the case, we

replace the variable Jobless with three mutually exclusive dummy variables: Jobless-Less

than 6 months, Jobless 6 months to 1 year, and Jobless: More than 1 year. These variables

identify whether the person was unemployed for less than six months, six months to a year,

or more than one year, respectively. The information about the duration of joblessness was

based on the following question: “For how long are you unemployed?” The responded could

choose among six categories ranging from “less than half a year” to “more than two years”.

This question was asked in 1999 in the overwhelming majority of cases, and it was asked

only in European countries. Therefore, the sample used in this analysis is smaller and is not

10
  Using all individuals who answered these two questions regardless of whether they answered the
questions about democratic efficiency (which generated a 10% increase in sample size) did not alter
the results.


                                                20
comparable to the sample used in previous analyses.11 Nevertheless the results, displayed in

Table 6 are informative, and they indicate that in the sample of Europeans, the duration of

joblessness matters. More specifically, the perceptions about the effectiveness of

democracy and the desire for a rouge leader impact of joblessness is driven by long-term

unemployment. Short-term unemployment (less than six months) may be voluntary or

frictional, which would not prompt negative feelings towards democracy. Table 6 shows

that those who are unemployed for less than six months do not have systematically different

perceptions about the effectiveness of democracy in comparison to those who have jobs.

The same is true for those who are unemployed for a period of six months to a year.

However, those who are unemployed for more than one year are significantly more likely to

indicate that democracy is bad for the economy, that democracies are indecisive and involve

too much quibbling, and that a rouge leader is preferable.      Thus, the results obtained from

the European sample indicate that long-term joblessness alters people’s perceptions of

democracy.



IV. Summary and conclusions

        This paper employs micro data on more than 130,000 people from 69 countries to

investigate the relationship between personal joblessness of the individuals and their

perceptions of the effectiveness of democracy. We control for a large set of personal

characteristics, country attributes, as well as individuals’ general feelings towards

democracy. In non-experimental data sets, such as the one used in this paper, one can never

11
   The sample covers the following countries: Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Latvia, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovenia, Spain, and
Turkey.

                                                21
be certain about the true cause-and-effect relationship between the variables. For example,

reverse causality is possible; i.e., an individual’s perceptions about the effectiveness of

democracy may impact his/her employability. This could especially be the case if the

person is a political misfit in his/her country. For example, a person may believe that

democracy is not a desirable form of government. This person would be a political misfit if

he/she lives in country that has a high level of democracy, and being a political misfit may

prevent the person from finding or holding a job. To avoid a potential bias that may emerge

through this channel, we adjust for the alignment of the person’s general feelings towards

democracy with the extent of the democracy in the country.

       We find that observationally identical individuals who live in the same country have

different perceptions about the effectiveness of democracy if they differ in their joblessness

experience. Specifically, being jobless increases people’s propensity to declare that

economic system runs badly in democracies, that democracies are indecisive and involve

too much quibbling, and that a leader who does not bother with the parliament and elections

is preferable. This impact of joblessness exists both in countries with low levels of

democracy and in countries with high levels of democracy. Information available in a

subsample of data (people who live in European countries) indicates that the source of

discontent with democracy is joblessness that lasts longer than one year. An increase in the

unemployment rate of the country evokes negative feelings about the performance of

democracy for individuals who live in countries with low levels of democracy. We also find

that well-educated and wealthier individuals are less likely to indicate that democracies are

ineffective, regardless of joblessness.




                                               22
       When we employ alternative dependent variables such as whether the person has

confidence in the government, whether the person is satisfied with the way people in the

national office are handling the country’s affairs, and whether the person believes that the

country is run by a few big interests looking out for themselves, we find that joblessness has

no impact on these opinions. This suggests that the impact of joblessness on negative

perceptions about the effectiveness of democracy is not a reflection of a general disapproval

of the government.

       Given the research that indicates a strong impact of democratization and institutional

quality on economic development, it is important to identify the determinants of

democratization. The results of this paper suggest that the beliefs about the effectiveness of

democracy as system of governance are shaped by personal joblessness experience of the

individuals. This in turn implies that periods of high unemployment and joblessness could

hinder the development of democracy, or threaten its existence.




                                              23
                                             Table 1
                           Summary Statistics and Descriptions
Variable                  Description                                         Mean    Std. Dev.
Democracy is Bad for the  =1 if the individual agrees or strongly agrees      0.340     0.474
Economy                   that in democracies the economic system runs
                          badly and zero otherwise. (A)
Democracies are           =1 if the individual agrees or strongly agrees      0.513    0.500
Indecisive                that democracies are indecisive and have too
                          much squabbling and zero otherwise. (A)
Rogue Leader              =1 if the individual believes that a strong         0.353    0.478
                          leader who does not have to bother with
                          parliament and elections is good or very good
                          for governing the country. (A)
Jobless                   =1 if the individual is unemployed. (A)             0.088    0.284
                    a
Unemployment Rate         Unemployment Rate (F)                               9.571    6.185
Democracy is Not Better   =1 if the individual disagrees or strongly          0.127    0.333
                          disagrees to “Democracy may have problems
                          but it's better than any other form of
                          government” (A).
Dislikes Democracy in a   =1 if the individual disagrees or strongly          0.080    0.271
Democratic Country        disagrees to “Democracy may have problems
                          but it's better than any other form of
                          government” and lives in a democratic country
                          (A).
Likes Democracy in a Less =1 if the individual agrees or strongly agrees to   0.242    0.428
Democratic Country        “Democracy may have problems but it's better
                          than any other form of government” and lives
                          in a less democratic country (A).
Female                    Dummy for females. (A)                              0.505    0.500
Age                       Age of the individual. Scaled by 0.1. (A)           4.071    1.602
Low Income                =1 if the individual’s household income is less     0.335    0.472
                          than the 33th percentile of the income
                          distribution in his/her country. (A)
Medium Income             =1 if the individual’s household income is          0.359    0.480
                          between 33th and 67th percentiles of the income
                          distribution in his/her country. (A)
High Income               =1 if the individual’s household income is          0.306    0.461
                          greater than 67th percentile of the income
                          distribution in his/her country. (A)
Low Education             =1 if at most the individual either has             0.356    0.479
                          inadequately or fully completed elementary
                          education or has not adequately completed
                          secondary school. (A)



                                               24
                                      Table 1 (continued)
Variable                   Description                                        Mean     Std. Dev.
Middle Education           =1 if the individual has completed secondary       0.429      0.495
                           school but not tertiary. (A)
High Education             =1 if the individual has completed tertiary        0.215     0.411
                           education in full or in part. (A)
Single                     =1 if the individual is single. (A)                0.254     0.435
Married                    =1 if the individual is married or living          0.627     0.484
                           together with a partner. (A)
Divorced/Widowed           =1 if the individual is separated divorced or      0.119     0.324
                           widowed. (A)
Full-time                  =1 if the individual is working full-time. (A)     0.371     0.483
Part-time                  =1 if the individual is working part-time. (A)     0.075     0.263
Self-employed              =1 if the individual is self-employed. (A)         0.098     0.297
Retired                    =1 if the individual is retired. (A)               0.136     0.343
Housewife                  =1 if the individual is a housewife. (A)           0.137     0.344
Student                    =1 if the individual is a student. (A)             0.077     0.266
Other Employed             =1 if employment status of the individual is       0.018     0.134
                           something other than those listed. (A)
No Children                =1 if the individual has no children. (A)          0.289     0.453
1 Child                    =1 if the individual has 1 child. (A)              0.163     0.370
2 Children                 =1 if the individual has 2 children. (A)           0.266     0.442
3 Children                 =1 if the individual has 3 children. (A)           0.139     0.346
4+ Children                =1 if the individual has 4 or more children. (A)   0.143     0.350
Democracya                 Extent of Democracy in a country obtained          6.248     5.226
                           from the Combined Polity Score of POLITY
                           IV. Ranges from -10 (Least democratic) to 10
                           (Most democratic). (I)
Country Ever Colonized a   =1 if the country where the individual lives has   0.385     0.478
                           ever been colonized. (B)
HDI a                      Human Development Index. A composite               79.400    12.935
                           index that measures the average achievements
                           in a country in three basic dimensions life
                           expectancy at birth, the adult literacy rate and
                           the combined gross enrolment ratio for
                           primary, secondary and
                           tertiary schools and real GDP per capita (E)
Openness to Trade a        Total trade (exports plus imports) as a            75.697    51.329
                           percentage of GDP in 2000 prices. (G)
Military Expenditure a     Military expenditures as a % of GDP. (H)           2.223      1.549
Inflation Rate a           Inflation Rate calculated from GDP deflator.       0.245     0.959
% Muslim Population a      Percent of population who are Muslims. (D)         13.685    30.380



                                              25
                                             Table 1 (concluded)
Variable                          Description                                                  Mean        Std. Dev.
% Catholic Population a           Percent of population who are Catholics. (D)                 37.047       39.246
% Protestant Population a         Percent of population who are Protestants. (D)               13.906       24.968
% Other Religion a                Percent of population who are of other                       35.362       34.915
Population a                      denominations. (D)
Europe a                          =1 if the country is located in Europe.                      0.529         0.502
Africa a                          =1 if the country located in Africa.                         0.087         0.283
Asia a                            =1 if the country is located in Asia.                        0.183         0.388
South America a                   =1 if the country is located in South America.               0.135         0.343
Oceania a                         =1 if the country is located in Oceania.                     0.019         0.138
North America a                   =1 if the country is located in North America.               0.048         0.215
   Numbers of non-missing observations for “Democracy is Bad for the Economy”, “Democracies are
   Indecisive” and “A strong Leader can better manage the country” are 118,365, 120,739 and 131,615,
   respectively. For the rest of the variables, the number of non-missing observations range from 115,159 and
   131,540 (except for controls misfit and preferences about democracy for which the numbers of non-missing
   observations is around 110,000).
   Sources of the variables used are presented below.
   (A) World Values Survey. The original sources of the variables used are indicated in parenthesis after the dash.
   (B) Hadenius, A. and Teorell, J. 2005. “Assessing Alternative Indices of Democracy”, C&M Working Papers
   6, IPSA, August 2005.
   (C) Vanhanen, T. 2003b. Democratization and Power Resources 1850-2000 [computer file]. FSD1216,
   version 1.0 (2003-03-10). Tampere : Finnish Social Science Data Archive [distributor].
   (D) La Porta, R., López-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A.. and Vishny, R. 1999. The Quality of Government. Journal
   of Law, Economics and Organization, 15(1): 222-279.
   (E) United Nations Development Program (UNDP). http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/data/
   (F) World Bank’s World Development Indicators, International Labour Organization’s KILM database. If the
   unemployment rate was not available for one country at a specific year, it is imputed by using either the most
   recent year’s unemployment rate or the average of the closest year’s unemployment rate. If neither of the
   imputations work, then the unemployment rate from KILM database is employed.
   (G) Penn World tables 6.2
   (H) World Bank’s World Development Indicators
   (I) POLITY IV. http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm. The data on democracy variable were not
   available for some countries for some years from the source. The democracy variable is completed by
   assigning the closest year’s democracy index value in that country or that of the previous governing country.
   See footnote 6 in the text for details.
   a: The descriptive statistics of the country level variables are calculated using each country-year as one
   observation.




                                                         26
                                         Table 2
     Influence of Joblessness on Perceptions about Performance of Democracy
                                      (1)                  (2)             (3)
                           Democracy is Bad for     Democracies are      Rogue
                               the Economy             Indecisive       Leader
Jobless                           0.049***              0.028***       0.054***
                                   (0.008)               (0.011)        (0.011)
Unemployment Rate                  0.004**                0.002        0.006***
                                   (0.002)               (0.002)        (0.002)
Democracy is Not Better           0.224***              0.160***       0.178***
                                   (0.036)               (0.030)        (0.018)
Female                            0.024***                0.002       -0.015***
                                   (0.004)               (0.006)        (0.005)
Age                               -0.006**               -0.000        -0.006**
                                   (0.003)               (0.003)        (0.003)
Medium Income                    -0.020***             -0.020***      -0.018***
                                   (0.007)               (0.007)        (0.006)
High Income                      -0.050***             -0.037***      -0.030***
                                   (0.010)               (0.012)        (0.010)
Middle Education                 -0.052***             -0.039***      -0.035***
                                   (0.011)               (0.012)        (0.010)
High Education                   -0.124***             -0.108***      -0.086***
                                   (0.014)               (0.015)        (0.015)
Married                              0.008               0.016*          0.013
                                   (0.008)               (0.009)        (0.009)
Divorced/Widowed                  0.026**               0.039***        0.028**
                                   (0.011)               (0.010)        (0.011)
Part-time                            0.014                0.007          0.014
                                   (0.009)               (0.009)        (0.010)
Self-employed                       -0.003                0.009          0.008
                                   (0.010)               (0.011)        (0.011)
Retired                           0.048***              0.053***       0.043***
                                   (0.008)               (0.009)        (0.009)
Housewife                           -0.014              -0.023**        0.029**
                                   (0.010)               (0.012)        (0.014)
Student                             -0.006                0.001          0.005
                                   (0.010)               (0.013)        (0.010)
Other Employed                      -0.010               -0.018          0.003
                                   (0.018)               (0.019)        (0.020)


                                      27
                                         Table 2 (concluded)
                                               (1)                  (2)                                 (3)
                                     Democracy is Bad for    Democracies are                         Rogue
                                        the Economy            Indecisive                            Leader
  1 Child                                     0.007              -0.001                               0.013
                                            (0.008)              (0.008)                             (0.010)
  2 Children                                0.014*                0.005                               0.009
                                            (0.008)              (0.009)                             (0.010)
  3 Children                                 0.008                0.002                               0.005
                                            (0.010)              (0.011)                             (0.011)
  4+ Children                                 0.003              -0.020                              0.025*
                                            (0.012)              (0.013)                             (0.014)
  HDI                                        -0.001                0.002                             -0.002
                                            (0.001)              (0.002)                             (0.002)
  Openness to Trade                          -0.000              -0.000                               0.000
                                            (0.000)              (0.000)                             (0.000)
  Military Expenditure                      0.017**                0.005                              -0.004
                                            (0.008)              (0.011)                             (0.010)
  Inflation Rate                              0.013                0.002                              0.018
                                            (0.014)              (0.014)                             (0.012)
  Country Ever Colonized                   0.169***                0.088                              0.093
                                            (0.058)              (0.065)                             (0.076)
  % Muslim                                -0.002***               -0.001                              -0.001
                                            (0.000)              (0.001)                             (0.001)
  % Catholic                                 -0.001               -0.000                            -0.001**
                                            (0.001)              (0.001)                             (0.001)
  % Protestant                            -0.002***             -0.002**                           -0.003***
                                            (0.001)              (0.001)                             (0.001)
  Observations                             118,365              120,739                             131,615
Notes – The dependent variables, listed at the top of rows 1 to 3, take the value of 1 if the individual agrees or
strongly agrees to the statements “Democracy is Bad for the Economy,” “Democracies are Indecisive” and “A
strong leader can better manage the country,” respectively. The descriptions of the other variables are
presented in Table 1. All regressions include year dummies as well as continent fixed effects. ***, ** and *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the country-
year level.




                                                        28
                                         Table 3
        Influence of Joblessness on Perceptions about Performance of Democracy
                              Controlling for Political Misfit

                       Panel A: Models with Country Characteristics
                                        (1)                 (2)                                           (3)
                               Democracy is Bad for   Democracies are                                 Rogue Leader
                                  the Economy           Indecisive
 Jobless                            0.045***             0.025**                                        0.049***
                                      (0.008)             (0.011)                                         (0.010)
 Unemployment Rate                  0.005***               0.002                                         0.007***
                                      (0.002)             (0.002)                                         (0.002)
 Dislikes Democracy in a            0.212***             0.128***                                        0.175***
 Democratic country                   (0.027)             (0.026)                                         (0.016)
 Likes Democracy in a Less          -0.091***           -0.112***                                       -0.104***
 Democratic country                   (0.031)             (0.031)                                         (0.031)
 Observations                        118,365             120,739                                         131,615


                        Panel B: Models with Country Fixed Effects
                                        (1)                  (2)                                          (3)
                               Democracy is Bad for   Democracies are                                 Rogue Leader
                                  the Economy            Indecisive
 Jobless                            0.041***              0.025***                                      0.033***
                                     (0.007)               (0.008)                                       (0.007)
 Unemployment Rate                    -0.000               -0.005*                                         0.004
                                     (0.005)               (0.003)                                       (0.005)
 Dislikes Democracy in a            0.219***              0.140***                                      0.166***
 Democratic country                  (0.028)               (0.025)                                       (0.014)
 Likes Democracy in a Less          -0.125**              -0.126**                                        -0.036
 Democratic country                  (0.053)               (0.059)                                       (0.030)
 Observations                        118,365               120,739                                       131,615
Notes – The dependent variables, listed at the top of rows 1 to 3, take the value of 1 if the individual agrees or
strongly agrees to the statements “Democracy is Bad for the Economy,” “Democracies are Indecisive” and “A
strong Leader can better manage the country,” respectively. The descriptions of the other variables are
presented in Table 1. All regressions include individual level variables, year dummies as well as continent
fixed effects as in Table 2. The models in Panel A and B include country characteristics and country fixed
effects, respectively. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard
errors are clustered at the country-year level.




                                                        29
                                         Table 4A
        Influence of Joblessness on Perceptions about Performance of Democracy
                      In Less Democratic Countries (Democracy<7)
                                       (1)                    (2)             (3)
                              Democracy is Bad for     Democracies are   Rogue Leader
                                  the Economy             Indecisive
Jobless                             0.040***                0.023*           0.004
                                     (0.010)                (0.013)         (0.013)
Unemployment Rate                   0.007***               0.013***        0.019***
                                     (0.002)                (0.003)         (0.003)
Likes Democracy in a Less           -0.178**                -0.152*       -0.128***
Democratic country                   (0.089)                (0.083)         (0.044)
Female                            0.027***                0.006             -0.001
                                    (0.008)              (0.011)           (0.010)
Age                                   0.006              0.010*              0.004
                                    (0.005)              (0.005)           (0.004)
Medium Income                        -0.022             -0.021*             -0.011
                                    (0.015)              (0.012)           (0.012)
High Income                        -0.045**            -0.056***            -0.026
                                    (0.019)              (0.018)           (0.016)
Middle Education                     -0.016               0.002              0.005
                                    (0.015)              (0.018)           (0.018)
High Education                    -0.070***               -0.043           -0.051*
                                    (0.022)              (0.028)           (0.027)
Married                               0.018              -0.000              0.001
                                    (0.012)              (0.018)           (0.015)
Divorced/Widowed                  0.061***               0.040*              0.011
                                    (0.017)              (0.022)           (0.016)
Part-time                             0.031               0.006              0.011
                                    (0.021)              (0.021)           (0.024)
Self-employed                         0.024               0.014             -0.001
                                    (0.017)              (0.016)           (0.014)
Retired                             0.035**            0.040***             0.039*
                                    (0.014)              (0.015)           (0.021)
Housewife                             0.006               -0.014             0.009
                                    (0.017)              (0.018)           (0.016)
Student                               0.012               -0.012           0.033**
                                    (0.017)              (0.012)           (0.015)
Other Employed                        0.010              -0.027              0.012
                                    (0.033)              (0.033)           (0.024)


                                          30
                                          Table 4A (concluded)
                                                (1)                  (2)                                (3)
                                       Democracy is Bad for   Democracies are                       Rogue Leader
                                          the Economy           Indecisive
1 Child                                       -0.012               -0.013                                -0.000
                                             (0.011)              (0.016)                               (0.015)
2 Children                                     0.009               -0.001                                0.016
                                             (0.014)              (0.013)                               (0.015)
3 Children                                     0.021               0.015                                 0.014
                                             (0.016)              (0.018)                               (0.022)
4+ Children                                   -0.017             -0.029**                                0.020
                                             (0.015)              (0.013)                               (0.025)
HDI                                         -0.004***               0.007                                -0.001
                                             (0.002)              (0.004)                               (0.003)
Openness to Trade                              0.000               -0.000                                -0.000
                                             (0.000)              (0.001)                               (0.000)
Military Expenditure                         0.031**              -0.057*                                 0.018
                                             (0.012)              (0.030)                               (0.021)
Inflation Rate                                 0.014              0.120**                                 0.116
                                             (0.037)              (0.058)                               (0.095)
Country Ever Colonized                      -0.172***              -0.060                                -0.107
                                             (0.033)              (0.078)                               (0.084)
% Muslim                                      -0.000              0.002**                                -0.002
                                             (0.001)              (0.001)                               (0.001)
% Catholic                                  -0.003***              -0.001                                -0.003
                                             (0.001)              (0.002)                               (0.002)
% Protestant                                -0.002***           -0.004***                               -0.002*
                                             (0.001)              (0.001)                               (0.001)
Observations                                  34,697              35,232                                 37,365
  Notes – The dependent variables, listed at the top of rows 1 to 3, take the value of 1 if the individual agrees or
  strongly agrees to the statements “Democracy is Bad for the Economy,” “Democracies are Indecisive” and “A
  strong Leader can better manage the country,” respectively. The descriptions of the other variables are
  presented in Table 1 and in the text. The sample consists of individuals from countries with a democracy index
  less than 7.All regressions include year dummies as well as continent fixed effects. ***, ** and * indicate
  significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the country-year
  level.




                                                         31
                                    Table 4B
   Influence of Joblessness on Perceptions about Performance of Democracy
                   In Democratic Countries (Democracy>=7)
                                     (1)               (2)           (3)
                             Democracy is Bad    Democracies    Rogue Leader
                             for the Economy     are Indecisive
Jobless                          0.052***          0.034***       0.064***
                                  (0.010)           (0.011)        (0.011)
Unemployment Rate                  0.001             -0.005        -0.002
                                  (0.004)           (0.004)        (0.003)
Dislikes Democracy in a          0.221***          0.133***       0.178***
Democratic country                (0.027)           (0.026)        (0.016)
Female                        0.025***             -0.002        -0.017***
                                (0.005)            (0.006)         (0.005)
Age                           -0.009***            -0.004          -0.006*
                                (0.003)            (0.003)         (0.003)
Medium Income                  -0.019**           -0.017**        -0.018**
                                (0.008)            (0.008)         (0.008)
High Income                   -0.053***           -0.026**         -0.021*
                                (0.010)            (0.013)         (0.011)
Middle Education              -0.066***          -0.053***       -0.049***
                                (0.012)            (0.012)         (0.012)
High Education                -0.154***          -0.146***       -0.119***
                                (0.015)            (0.014)         (0.014)
Married                         -0.000              0.008          0.019*
                                (0.011)            (0.008)         (0.010)
Divorced/Widowed                 0.007            0.026***        0.047***
                                (0.014)            (0.009)         (0.012)
Part-time                        0.010               0.007           0.011
                                (0.010)            (0.009)         (0.010)
Self-employed                    0.002              0.003           -0.003
                                (0.010)            (0.011)         (0.009)
Retired                       0.053***            0.059***        0.046***
                                (0.008)            (0.010)         (0.010)
Housewife                        0.000              -0.004        0.036***
                                (0.011)            (0.011)         (0.012)
Student                          -0.016            -0.007          -0.020*
                                (0.013)            (0.013)         (0.011)
Other Employed                  -0.000               0.012         0.031*
                                (0.019)            (0.016)         (0.018)


                                     32
                                          Table 4B (concluded)
                                                  (1)               (2)                        (3)
                                          Democracy is Bad   Democracies                   Rogue Leader
                                          for the Economy    are Indecisive
    1 Child                                      0.001             0.001                        0.004
                                               (0.011)           (0.007)                       (0.011)
    2 Children                                   0.014            0.012                        -0.009
                                               (0.010)           (0.008)                       (0.009)
    3 Children                                   0.005            0.004                       -0.018*
                                               (0.012)           (0.010)                       (0.010)
    4+ Children                                  0.010           -0.010                        -0.010
                                               (0.014)           (0.010)                       (0.012)
    HDI                                       -0.011***        -0.010***                     -0.012***
                                               (0.003)           (0.003)                       (0.004)
    Openness to Trade                           -0.000           -0.001                         0.001
                                               (0.000)           (0.001)                       (0.001)
    Military Expenditure                         0.024             0.004                        0.023
                                               (0.020)           (0.022)                       (0.020)
    Inflation Rate                               0.013             0.011                      0.026**
                                               (0.014)           (0.013)                       (0.011)
    Country Ever Colonized                       0.009            -0.106                        -0.021
                                               (0.098)           (0.103)                       (0.120)
    % Muslim                                  -0.002***           -0.001                        -0.000
                                               (0.001)           (0.001)                       (0.001)
    % Catholic                                   0.001           0.001*                         0.000
                                               (0.001)           (0.001)                       (0.001)
    % Protestant                                -0.000             0.001                        -0.001
                                               (0.001)           (0.001)                       (0.001)
    Observations                                80,954           82,727                        91,341
Notes – The dependent variables, listed at the top of rows 1 to 3, take the value of 1 if the individual agrees or
strongly agrees to the statements “Democracy is Bad for the Economy,” “Democracies are Indecisive” and “A
strong Leader can better manage the country,” respectively. The descriptions of the other variables are
presented in Table 1 and in the text. The sample consists of individuals from countries with a democracy index
greater than or equal to 7. All regressions include year dummies as well as continent fixed effects. ***, ** and
* indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
country-year level.




                                                       33
                                         Table 5
    Influence of Joblessness on Satisfaction with and Confidence in the Government

                                                   Panel A
                                                   (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                            Dissatisfied with        No Confidence          Country is run
                                              the people in          in government          for the Interest
                                             national office                                  of the few
   Jobless                                        0.010                  -0.014                  -0.019
                                                 (0.016)                 (0.016)                (0.014)
   Unemployment Rate                            0.009***                  0.003                 0.006**
                                                 (0.003)                 (0.002)                (0.002)
   Democracy is Not Better                      0.084***                0.079***               0.045***
                                                 (0.020)                 (0.019)                (0.016)
   Observations                                  96,710                  95,215                  92,590


                                                   Panel B
                                                   (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                            Dissatisfied with        No Confidence          Country is run
                                              the people in          in government          for the Interest
                                             national office                                  of the few
   Jobless                                        0.011                  -0.015                  -0.019
                                                 (0.016)                 (0.016)                (0.013)
   Unemployment Rate                            0.009***                  0.003                0.006***
                                                 (0.003)                 (0.002)                (0.002)
   Dislikes Democracy in a                      0.084***                0.087***               0.045***
   Democratic country                            (0.015)                 (0.019)                (0.017)
   Likes Democracy in a Less                       0.044                   0.001                  0.045
   Democratic country                             (0.047)                 (0.033)                (0.038)
   Observations                                   96,710                  95,215                 92,590
Notes – The dependent variables, listed at the top of rows 1 to 3, take the value of 1 if the individual indicates
that he is fairly dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with the way the people now in national office are handling the
country's affairs (column 1), if he/she does not have very much confidence or had no confidence in the
government (column 2), and if he/she indicates that the country is run by a few big interests rather than the
interests of all people (column 3). The descriptions of the other variables are presented in Table 1 and in the
text. All regressions include individual level variables, year dummies as well as continent fixed effects as in
Table 2. The models in Panel A and B include country characteristics and country fixed effects, respectively.
***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at
the country-year level.




                                                        34
                                         Table 6
 Influence of Joblessness Duration on Perceptions about Performance of Democracy
                                      (1)                (2)              (3)
                             Democracy is Bad      Democracies are   Rogue Leader
                              for the Economy        Indecisive
Jobless: Less than 6 months         0.075               0.101            0.090
                                   (0.058)             (0.062)          (0.069)
Jobless: 6 months to1 year           0.051              0.015            0.073
                                   (0.053)             (0.062)          (0.058)
Jobless: More than 1 year         0.203***             0.098*          0.221***
                                   (0.058)             (0.059)          (0.060)
Unemployment Rate                   0.053*              0.041            0.011
                                   (0.026)             (0.025)          (0.024)
Dislikes Democracy in a           0.650***            0.400***         0.513***
Democratic country                 (0.132)             (0.134)          (0.078)
Likes Democracy in a Less      -0.753***            -0.935***          -0.503**
Democratic country               (0.266)              (0.209)           (0.182)
Female                         0.117***                 0.013            -0.021
                                 (0.020)              (0.025)           (0.023)
Age                               -0.008                0.014            0.006
                                 (0.012)              (0.011)           (0.012)
Medium Income                    -0.035                -0.022         -0.057***
                                 (0.026)              (0.032)           (0.022)
High Income                    -0.152***            -0.106***         -0.097***
                                 (0.035)              (0.035)           (0.031)
Middle Education               -0.243***            -0.187***         -0.167***
                                 (0.039)              (0.039)           (0.033)
High Education                 -0.540***            -0.406***         -0.371***
                                 (0.049)              (0.044)           (0.049)
Married                          -0.064                -0.031            0.016
                                 (0.041)              (0.038)           (0.036)
Divorced/Widowed                 -0.029                 0.029           0.093**
                                 (0.055)              (0.042)           (0.044)
Part-time                        -0.032                 0.049            -0.013
                                 (0.041)              (0.040)           (0.048)
Self-employed                   -0.108**              -0.081*          -0.130**
                                 (0.045)              (0.042)           (0.052)
Retired                        0.111***              0.155***            0.072*
                                 (0.031)              (0.035)           (0.039)
Housewife                       -0.129**              -0.094*            0.084
                                 (0.051)              (0.048)           (0.064)



                                       35
                                         Table 6 (concluded)
                                               (1)                (2)                           (3)
                                      Democracy is Bad     Democracies are                  Rogue Leader
                                      for the Economy        Indecisive
 Student                                   -0.121**           -0.081*                         -0.147***
                                            (0.046)            (0.046)                          (0.041)
 Other Employed                              0.069              -0.026                           0.054
                                            (0.078)            (0.088)                          (0.071)
 1 Child                                     0.065            0.065**                            0.024
                                            (0.041)            (0.028)                          (0.047)
 2 Children                                0.082**               0.050                          -0.041
                                            (0.040)            (0.039)                          (0.041)
 3 Children                                  0.071               0.051                          -0.025
                                            (0.046)            (0.049)                         (0.053)
 4+ Children                              0.130***             -0.008                            0.019
                                            (0.048)            (0.062)                         (0.050)
 HDI                                         -0.008             -0.007                          -0.023
                                            (0.015)            (0.018)                         (0.022)
 Openness to Trade                           0.000               0.001                           0.002
                                            (0.002)            (0.001)                         (0.002)
 Military Expenditure                       0.129*               0.077                           -0.049
                                            (0.069)            (0.092)                          (0.084)
 Inflation Rate                             0.677*             0.735*                            0.305
                                            (0.347)            (0.430)                          (0.295)
 % Muslim                                    0.007               0.026                          0.040*
                                            (0.023)            (0.034)                          (0.022)
 % Catholic                                  -0.000              0.003                           -0.002
                                            (0.002)            (0.002)                          (0.004)
 % Protestant                                -0.003              0.001                           -0.004
                                            (0.003)            (0.003)                          (0.004)
 Observations                               33,964             35,013                           35,791
Notes – The dependent variables, listed at the top of rows 1 to 3 in each panel, take the value of 1 if the
individual agrees or strongly agrees to the statements “Democracy is Bad for the Economy,” “Democracies are
Indecisive” and “A strong leader can better manage the country,” respectively. The descriptions of the other
variables are presented in Table 1. The sample used includes individuals from countries to which joblessness
duration question is asked. The countries in the sample are Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine and Great
Britain. All regressions include year dummies. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the country-year level.




                                                      36
                                        References

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2001. “A Theory of Political Transitions,”
       American Economic Review 91(4), pp. 938-63.

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2000. “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise?
       Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 115, pp. 1167-99.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
       Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
       Review 91(5), pp. 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson and Pierre Yared. 2008. “Income and
       Democracy,” American Economic Review 98(3), pp. 808-42.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson and Pierre Yared. 2005. “From
       Education to Democracy?” The American Economic Review 95(2), pp. 44-49.

Barro, Robert. 1999. “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy 107(S6),
       pp.S158-S183.

Barro, Robert. 1996. “Democracy and Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth 1(1), pp.1-27.

Clark, Andrew. 2003. “Unemployment as a Social Norm: Psychological Evidence from
       Panel Data,” Journal of Labor Economics 21(2), pp. 323-51.

Clark, Andrew and Andrew Oswald. 1994. “Unhappiness and Unemployment,” Economic
       Journal 104(May), pp. 648-59.

Dollar, David and Aart Kraay. 2003. “Institutions, Trade, and Growth,” Journal of
       Monetary Economics 50(1), pp. 133-62.

Eckstein, Harry and Robert Gurr. 1975. “Patterns of Authority: A Structural Basis for
       Political Inquiry,” New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Fair, Ray. 1978. “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President,” Review of
       Economic and Statistics 60, pp. 159-73.

                                            37
Feyrer, James and Bruce Sacerdote. 2009. “Colonialism and Modern Income: Islands as
       Natural Experiments,” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(2), pp.245-62.

Garand, Games C. and Justin Ulrich. 2009. “The Economy, Subjective Economic
       Evaluations, and the Presidential Vote.” LSU Department of Political Science
       Working Paper.

Gasiorowski, Mark. 1995. "Economic Crises and Political Regime Change: An Event
       History Analysis." American Political Science Review 89(4), pp. 882-97.

Glaeser, Edward, Giacomo Ponzetto andAndrei Shleifer. 2007. “Why does democracy need
       education?,” Journal of Economic Growth 12, pp.77-99.

Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2004.
       “Do Institutions Cause Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth 9(3), pp. 271-303.

Hadenius, A. and J. Teorell. 2005. “Assessing Alternative Indices of Democracy”, C&M
       Working Papers 6, IPSA, August 2005.

Haggard S. and Kaufman R. 1995. “The political economy of democratic transitions,”
       Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Hall, Robert and Charles Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output Per Worker Than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1), pp. 83-
       116.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten. 2006. “Penn World Table Version 6.2”,
       Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the
       University of Pennsylvania.

Kramer, Gerald. 1971. “Short-Term Fluctuations in U.S. Voting Behavior, 1896-1964,”
       American Political Science Review 65, pp.131-43.

La Porta, R., López-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A.. and Vishny, R. 1999. “The Quality of
       Government,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15(1), pp. 222-79.

Lipset, Seymour. 1959. “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development
       and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review 53(1), pp. 69-105.


                                             38
Markus, Gregory. 1988. “The Impact of Personal and National Economic Conditions on the
       Presidential Vote: A Pooled Cross-Sectional Analysis,” American Journal of
       Political Science 32(1), pp. 137-54.

McCulloch, Robert. 2005. “Income Inequality and the Taste for Revolution,” Journal of
       Law and Economics 48, pp. 93-123.

Minier , Jenny. 2001. “Is Democracy a Normal Good? Evidence from Democratic
       Movements,” Southern Economic Journal 67(4), pp. 996-1009.

Mocan, Naci, 2008. “Vengeance,” NBER Working Paper No:14131.

Mulligan, Casep B., Richard Gil and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2004. “Do Democracies Have
       Different Public Policies than Nondemocracies?” Journal of Economic Perspectives
       18(1), pp. 51-74.

Nannestad , Peter and Martin Paldam. 1997. “From the Pocketbook of the Welfare Man: A
       Pooled Cross-Section Study of Economic Voting in Denmark, 1986-92,” British
       Journal of Political Science 27(1), pp. 119-36.

Papaioannou, Elias and Gregorios Siourounis. 2008. Economic and Social Factors Driving
       the Third Wave of Democratization,” Journal of Comparative Economics 36(3),
       pp.365-87.

Prezworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, Jose Cheibub and Fernando Limongi. 1996. "What
       Makes Democracy Endure?" Journal of Democracy 7(1), pp. 39-55.

Rigobon , Roberto and Dani Rodrik. 2004. “Rule of Law, Democracy, Openness, and
       Income: Estimating the Interrelationships,” NBER Working Papers 10750, National
       Bureau of Economic Research.

Rodrik, Dani. 1999. “Democracies Pay Higher Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       114(3), pp. 707-38.

Stigler, George. 1973. “General Economic Conditions and National Elections,” American
       Economic Review 63(2), pp. 160-7.




                                              39
Teorell, Jan, Nicholas Charron, Marcus Samanni, Sören Holmberg and Bo Rothstein. 2009.
       The Quality of Government Dataset, version 17June09. University of Gothenburg:
       The Quality of Government Institute, http://www.qog.pol.gu.se.

Treisman, Daniel. 2000. “The Causes of Corruption:A Cross-National Study,” Journal of
       Public Economics 76(3), pp.399-457.

Vanhanen, T. 2003b. Democratization and Power Resources 1850-2000 [computer file].
       FSD1216, version 1.0 (2003-03-10). Tampere : Finnish Social Science Data Archive
       [distributor].

Winkelmann, Liliana and Rainer Winkelmann. 1998. “Why Are the Unemployed So
       Unhappy? Evidence from Panel Data,” Economica 65, pp. 1-15.




                                             40
