NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MATCH QUALITY, WORKER PRODUCTIVITY, AND WORKER MOBILITY:
DIRECT EVIDENCE FROM TEACHERS
C. Kirabo Jackson
Working Paper 15990
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15990
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

I thank John Abowd, Simon Woodcock, and Derek Neal for helpful suggestions. I thank Kara Bonneau
of the North Carolina Education Research Data Center. All errors are my own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by C. Kirabo Jackson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Match Quality, Worker Productivity, and Worker Mobility: Direct Evidence From Teachers
C. Kirabo Jackson
NBER Working Paper No. 15990
May 2010, Revised February 2012
JEL No. I20,J01,J63
ABSTRACT
I investigate the importance of the match between teachers and schools for student achievement. I
show that teacher effectiveness increases after a move to a different school, and I estimate teacher-school
match effects using a mixed-effects estimator. Match quality "explains away" a quarter of, and has
two-thirds the explanatory power of teacher quality. Match quality is negatively correlated with turnover,
unrelated with exit, and increases with experience. This paper provides the first estimates of worker-firm
match quality using output data as opposed to inferring productivity from wages or employment durations.
Because teacher wages are essentially unrelated to productivity, this is compelling evidence that workers
may seek high-quality matches for reasons other than higher pay.
C. Kirabo Jackson
Northwestern University
School of Education and Social Policy
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
kirabo-jackson@northwestern.edu

Match Quality, Worker Productivity, and Worker Mobility:
Direct Evidence from Teachers
C. Kirabo Jackson1, Dec 23th 2011
Northwestern University, IPR, and NBER
I investigate the importance of the match between teachers and schools for student achievement. I show that teacher
effectiveness increases after a move to a different school, and I estimate teacher-school match effects using a mixedeffects estimator. Match quality "explains away" a quarter of, and has two-thirds the explanatory power of teacher
quality. Match quality is negatively correlated with turnover, unrelated with exit, and increases with experience.
This paper provides the first estimates of worker-firm match quality using output data as opposed to inferring
productivity from wages or employment durations. Because teacher wages are essentially unrelated to productivity,
this is compelling evidence that workers may seek high-quality matches for reasons other than higher pay.

The productive quality of the match between workers and firms plays a central role in
canonical models of worker mobility (Jovanovic 1979, Mincer and Jovanovic 1981, Neal 1999,
Burdett 1978, Mortensen 1998, Johnson 1978). The labor market is hypothesized to efficiently
allocate workers to firms through workers leaving/seeking jobs where the productivity match
between the worker and firm is low/high. Match quality is also used to explain the stylized facts
that changing jobs is associated with earnings growth (Bartel and Borjas 1981, Altonji and
Shakotko 1987, Topel and Ward 1992) and job separations decline with tenure and experience.2
Despite the importance of match effects for understanding the labor market, there is little
direct evidence of their existence. Data on match-specific productivity are essentially nonexistent, forcing researchers to specify how wages relate to match-specific productivity and then
study how wages and their distribution vary with tenure and job mobility (Nagypal 2007). This is
undesirable for two reasons. First, there are many different ways to specify wage setting, making
mis-specification and omitted variables bias likely. For example, taste-based discrimination can
depress wages and increase job separations for certain workers at certain firms – mimicking
empirical patterns consistent with productivity match effects. Second, it is difficult to distinguish
workers leaving/seeking jobs with low/high match quality from workers leaving/seeking jobs
with low/high pay because pay may vary across workers and firms for reasons unrelated to
productivity. To avoid these problems, one must estimate match quality on actual output. Micro-

1

I thank John Abowd, Simon Woodcock, and Derek Neal for helpful suggestions. I thank Kara Bonneau of the
North Carolina Education Research Data Center. All errors are my own.
2
By match quality, I am referring to the fixed time-invariant productivity associated with a particular worker-firm
pairing. I am not referring to match quality that changes over time, such as that due to firm specific human capital.

1

data with student test scores linked to teachers and schools provides a unique opportunity to
estimate worker (teacher), firm (school), and match (a given teacher at a particular school)
productivity on a measure of output (student achievement) directly.
Using a longitudinal dataset of student test scores linked to teachers and schools in North
Carolina, I aim to (1) determine the extent to which teacher effectiveness, as measured by ability
to improve student test scores, changes depending on the schooling environment, (2) quantify the
importance of the match between a teacher and a school in determining student achievement, (3)
document the relationship between match quality and teacher mobility, and (4) present evidence
on observable characteristics associated with high match quality.
Match quality is of interest in its own right because we have little understanding of the
role of school-teacher match quality for student achievement. Studies that identify teachers
associated with student test-score gains show that a one standard deviation increase in teacher
quality leads to between one-tenth and one-fifth of a standard deviation increase in math and
reading scores (Aaronson, Barrow and Sander 2007, Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain 2005, Rockoff
2004). However, because observable teacher characteristic explain only a fraction of a teacher
value-added3, we have little understanding of exactly what they measure, and whether a teacher
who is effective at one school (e.g. with affluent suburban kids) would be equally effective at
another school (e.g. with low-income inner-city students).4 Given the increasing use of estimated
teacher value-added to identify effective teachers, and policies that aim to move strong teachers
from high-achieving schools into low-performing schools, it is important to understand the
importance of school specific teacher value-added; that is, the importance of match quality.
Moreover, it is also important to assess the importance of the teacher-school match itself. If
match effects are economically important, policymakers should consider what kinds of teacherschool pairings are most productive and should consider the effect of policies on match quality.
I find that teachers who switch schools are more effective after a move than before ─
suggestive of match effects. I present a variety of empirical tests showing that this cannot be
explained by teachers moving to higher-achieving schools, endogenous teacher movement, or
student selection. I use both a fixed effects model and a random effects model to estimate the
3

There is evidence that years of experience, college selectivity, teachers’ test scores, and regular licensure are
associated with higher student achievement (Anthony and Goldhaber 2007, Brewer and Ehrenberg 1994, Brewer
and Goldhaber 2000, Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2006, Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2007, Hanushek 1997)
4
Ost (2009) finds that holding total experience constant, teachers with grade-specific experience have higher valueadded. This suggest that teacher value-added changes over time and may be context specific.

2

importance of match quality. Across both models, one standard deviation increase in match
quality increases math scores by about 0.09σ, and reading scores by about 0.07σ ─ roughly twothirds the effect of a one standard deviation increase in teacher quality. Match quality can
account for between 10 and 40 percent of what is typically estimated as teacher quality, so that a
sizable portion of what is typically considered a teacher effect is not portable across schools.
Exploratory data analysis reveals that certain identifiable kinds of teachers have much better
outcomes at certain identifiable kinds of schools such that an optimal matching of teachers to
schools could yield meaningfully improved outcomes overall.
Consistent with canonical models of job search, (a) among mobile teachers, match quality
is higher in the new match than in the previous match, (b) general teacher quality is unrelated to
switching jobs within teaching while match-specific quality is negatively correlated with
switching teaching jobs, (c) while general teacher quality is negatively correlated with exiting the
profession match-specific quality is unrelated to exiting the profession. These patterns are robust
across estimation strategies and to the inclusion of both teacher and school fixed effects. The
patterns suggest that match quality is an important determinant of mobility for reasons other than
the level of pay because productivity and pay are largely unrelated for teachers. This is consistent
with either schools providing greater non-pecuniary benefits for effective teachers or teachers
caring about their effectiveness directly. As such, these findings suggest that models of worker
mobility that do not account for non-pecuniary job benefits may be incomplete, and further
underscore that using wages to infer match quality has some important limitations.
This is the first paper to validate the extant job search literature using direct measures of
output, and the first to document the relationship between match quality and worker mobility in a
context where wages and productivity are unrelated ─ underscoring the importance of nonpecuniary benefits. Also, this paper is the first to highlight and quantify the importance of match
effects in education, and the first to document that a sizable portion of what we call teacher
quality does not port across schools. The findings speak to the theoretical literature on job search
and the empirical literature on teacher quality, and have important policy implications.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section I outlines the empirical framework
behind estimating match effects and lays out a theoretical framework based on Jovanovic (1979).
Section II describes the data. Section III provides evidence of match effects. Section IV describes
the estimation strategies and presents estimates of the variability of teacher, school, and match
3

effects. Section V tests the theoretical predictions regarding the relationship between match
quality and teacher mobility. Section VI presents evidence on what kinds of teacher-school
combinations are associated with higher match quality, and Section VII concludes.

I.

Match Quality for Teachers
The literature that decomposes wages into a worker effect and a firm effect starts out with

a Cobb-Douglas production function describing the output Qij of worker i at firm j as below.5

Qij  Li K j .

(1)

In (1), Li is the human capital of worker i (such as education, years of experience, quality of
schooling, etc), Kj summarizes the productive characteristics of the firm (such as technology,
capital intensity, incentive structure, leadership skills, etc), and θ and φ are parameters in the
production function. Where certain worker and firm attributes are complementary certain
pairings of workers and firms are relatively more or less productive. This is incorporated in the
model with the inclusion of a match term Mij (Woodcock 2008) yielding (2) below.

Qij  Li K j M ij .

(2)

Where worker i's wage at firm j is a share πij of output, the log of worker wages is given by (3)
which is comprised of four additively separable components; one due to worker productivity

 ln Li , one due to workplace productivity  ln K j , one due to the productivity match between
the worker and firm  ln M ij , and the relative bargaining power of worker i at firm j ln  ij .

ln wij   ln Li   ln K j   ln M ij  ln  ij .

(3)

If differences in bargaining power across worker-firm pairings exist, relative productivity and
match-specific relative bargaining power may be confounded. For example, if some
discriminating firms pay equally productive female workers less than their male counterparts this
would result in low ln  ij for female workers at such firms. This discrimination could also be
associated with poor treatment which would lead to increased job separation among females at
such firms, leading one to wrongly infer a relationship between match quality and worker
mobility based on wages. To further complicate matters, many theories of wage determination
predict that wages have little relation to contemporaneous productivity. Furthermore, important
5

See Abowd et. al. 2002, 1999, 2004.

4

parts of worker compensation such as working conditions, in-kind benefits, and deferred
compensation are typically not measured. For these reasons, using wage data to infer match
quality has inherent limitations. This motivates the use of teacher (worker) data linked to schools
(firms) and student outcomes (a direct measure of output).
I.2

The Production of Student Achievement
Consider the following model where student achievement is a function of the entire

history of school and parental inputs and a student's endowment.
Tijsa  Ta [ X ijs ( a ), i 0 ,  ijsa ] .

(4)

In (4) Tijsa is student i’s achievement with teacher j at school s at age a, X ijs ( a ) is the history of
parental and school inputs up to age a, i 0 is the student's endowment (ability) and  ijsa is an
idiosyncratic error (other inputs). With additive separability of inputs and where lagged
achievement is a summary statistic for the full history of family, school, and student inputs, we
can write (4) as the commonly used value-added model described by (5) below.6
Tijsa  X ijsa   Tia 1  ijsa .

(5)

While there are many specifications that one could use, the predictive power of estimated teacher
effects are surprisingly robust across specifications (Kane and Staiger 2008). Explicitly
incorporating teacher human capital, school technology, and the productivity of the specific
teacher-school pairing as inputs into the model yields (6) below.
Tijsa   Tia 1  X ijsa   j   s   sj  ijsa .

(6)

Both equations (3) and (6) contain additively separable components; one due to worker (teacher)
productivity  j , one due to workplace (school) productivity  s , and one due to the match
between the worker and the firm  js . However, unlike (3), in (6) the school, teacher, and match
components reflect differences in actual productivity, and there is no problematic unobserved
relative bargaining power of the worker and their firm. As such, the use of education data where
output is observed may validate previous studies on match quality and may provide new insights.
1.3

Identifying Match Quality Empirically
With data on multiple teachers at multiple schools, one can estimate match (teacher-by-

school) effects separately from teacher effects and school effects. Consider the ideal empirical
6

This will be true if coefficients on inputs are geometrically declining with distance (in age), and the impact of the
ability endowment is geometrically declining at the same rate as inputs (Todd and Wolpin 2003).

5

setup where each teacher is observed in all schools, and there is zero correlation between
potential match, teacher, and school effects.7 Under these conditions, mean match quality for
each teacher is zero, and mean match quality for each school is zero so that mean scores
(conditional on controls for selection) of teacher j at school s would be a consistent estimate of
match (teacher-by-school) effect  js . Also, the mean of the matches for teacher j (across
schools) would be a consistent estimate of teacher effect  j , and the mean of matches for school
s (across teachers) would be a consistent estimate of school effect  s . One could obtain
consistent estimates of teacher, school, and match effects with the a fixed-effects estimator.
Identification of match effects comes from the fact that multiple teachers are observed
switching across the same set of schools. To make this clear, consider two schools A and B and
two teachers p ={1 ,2}. The difference in outcomes when teacher p switches from school A to
school B is ( B   A )  ( pB   pA ) . This reflects the difference in school effects between school
A and B, plus the difference in match effects for teacher p between schools A and B. If there are
no match effects, then 1B  1 A  0 , and the difference in expected outcomes associated with
switching from A to B is equal to the difference in school effects only, and is the same for both
teachers. With no match effects E[Y1B  Y1 A ]  E[Y2 B  Y2 A ]  ( B   A )  ( B   A )  0 . However,
with match effects, expected differences associated with switching from schools will not be the
same for both teachers so that E[Y1B  Y1 A ]  E[Y2 B  Y2 A ]  1B  1 A  ( 2 B   2 A )  0 .
This shows that systematic performance differences associated with switching schools
across teachers is how match effects can be identified empirically.8 The intuition can be
illustrated with a simple example. Suppose school A has a strong principal who, all else equal,
improves the outcomes of all teachers by δ. School A enrolls high-income students while school
B enrolls average students. Teacher 1 teachers performs μ1 better with high-income students
while teacher 2 performs μ2 worse (where |μ2|>|δ|). When teacher 1 switches from school B to
  s   2s I S
  
Cov   j    0
 js   0
  

0

 2 j I J




2
  js I M 
.
0
0

0
Mathematically this condition means that
With the assumptions that the mean of the match effects is equal to zero in expectation for each school and for
each teacher these match estimates above can be computed. Specifically, these assumptions mean that in large
samples 1B  1 A  0 and  2 B   2 A  0 and 1B   2 B  0 and 1 A   2 A  0 . With four equations and four unknowns
7
8

there is a unique solution for the values of the match effects.

6

A, her outcomes are δ+μ1 better in school A than B. However, when teacher 2 switches from
school B to A, her outcomes are δ-μ2 worse. Even though there is a positive school effect δ
enjoyed by both teachers, the difference in outcomes associated with switching schools is not the
same because the match effect for school A is positive for teacher 1 and negative for teacher 2.
This differential switching response is the basis for indentifying match effects in this paper.
The discussion above assumes that all teachers are observed in all schools. In reality,
most teachers are observed in just a few schools. While this complicates estimation of match
effects, the logic of the identification is most saliently illustrated in this idealized setting. In
section IV, I detail an approach to consistently estimate match effects outside of an ideal setting.
I.4

How Does One Interpret Match Quality for Teachers?
While it is difficult to disentangle a school or teacher with a large effect from a school or

teacher that has high quality matches empirically, these concepts are distinct. A match effect is
anything that makes a teacher more or less productive at one school versus another that is not
due to a school characteristic that affects all teachers equally. Anything that affects all teachers
at a school equally would be part of a school effect (e.g. high-achieving students, or strong
leadership) and only those combinations of characteristics that vary at the teacher-by-school
level are part of a match effect. Such effects arise when there is heterogeneity in the marginal
effectiveness of school inputs across teachers. For example, certain teachers may be good at
teaching certain types of students (e.g. same race, high-motivation) that attend certain schools.
Alternatively, certain schools may have a work culture in which certain teachers thrive and
others do not. There may be differences due to differential responses to the characteristics of
other employees (e.g. experienced teachers, high value-added teachers). Note that teacher peer
effects such as those found in (Jackson and Bruegmann 2009) will be part of a school effect and
will only be a match effect if some teachers are more responsive to the quality of their peers than
others. In sum, match quality captures systematic complementarities between particular teachers
and particular schools. I present the correlates of high/low match quality in section VI.
I.5

Theoretical Framework
Most theories of match quality are predicated on the notion that workers seek out high

quality matches in order to increase their monetary compensation. However, teacher salaries are
based primarily on years of experience and level of education. In this section I present a
framework to explain how and why match quality may be related to mobility for teachers.
7

The theoretic framework follows (Jovanovic, 1979). There is imperfect information about
which matches are more or less productive and when a teacher searches for a job she receives a
random draw from a known distribution of match quality. Match quality is an experience good so
that only after a match is made is the quality of the match revealed to the employee and all
employers. Employers can contract with workers on an individual basis and are able to reward a
worker with whom he matches well by improving the worker’s total job-related utility. Unlike
canonical models, I assume that employers can improve job-related utility not only by altering
wages but also by altering the non-wage aspects of compensation. 9 For example, principals can
assign teachers to more desirably committees, offer them extra positions to supplement their
income, pay for more of their training costs, or appoint them to positions of leadership. Given
that teachers often spend money out of pocket to pay for classroom supplies, another way
principals can, and do, effectively increase teacher pay without giving a "raise" is to pay for such
supplies.10 Even without action on the part of employers workers may also seek high
productivity matches because they derive utility directly from being productive.11 In this
framework, workers well-matched with their employers are less likely to quit either due to
employers increasing job related utility or due to non-pecuniary job characteristics. Because
information about match quality is revealed after being employed at a school, teachers who
realize that they are poorly matched have an incentive to leave their current job (select out of bad
matches) and take a new draw from the known distribution of matches. Because having a bad
match is indicative of being bad at a particular school but not the profession as a whole, low
match quality should be associated with switching schools, but not be related to leaving teaching.
In addition to match-quality which is specific to a particular teacher-school pairing,
teachers also have general teaching ability that is transferable across schools (but not necessarily
across occupations). Similar to match quality, general teaching ability is an experience good that
9

Going as far back as Adam Smith it has been recognized that the utility a worker derives from their job is
associated with more than monetary compensation. As stated by Smith "Wages vary by ease vs. hardship,
cleanliness, honourableness." (Smith, Adam. 1776. Wealth of Nations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press). This
is illustrated by the fact that the unemployed are much less happy than the employed, and by more than their lower
incomes would predict (Korpi 1997; Winkelmann and Winkelmann 1998; Di Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald 2001)
and that one's ordinal rank in the wage hierarchy affects one's happiness conditional on ones level of pay (Brown,
Gardner, and Oswald, 2006). Aside from consumption aspects of the job, in-kind benefits make up a substantial part
of a worker's compensation, and workers care about working conditions and prestige (Duncan, 1976).
10
The average teacher surveyed for the 2010 Retail Market Awareness Study released by the National School
Supply and Equipment Association said they spent $936 on classroom materials in the 2007 academic year.
11
Insofar as teachers have some intrinsic motivation to teach and believe in service, they may be willing to trade off
monetary rewards for the non-pecuniary gains of being of service as discussed in Akerlof and Kranton (2005).

8

is only revealed to all parties after entering the teaching profession. Because low general
teaching quality is indicative of being bad in the profession, teachers with low general teaching
ability should be more likely to exit the profession entirely. However, because teaching ability is
a general skill, it should not be associated with school switching within the teaching profession.
This framework generates predictions that can be taken to the data; (1) among mobile
teachers, match quality should be higher in the new match than in the previous match, (2) higher
general teacher quality should be negatively correlated with exiting the profession, (3) general
teacher quality should be uncorrelated with switching, (4) higher match specific quality should
be negatively associated with switching, (5) match quality should be unrelated to exiting the
profession. A number of studies have found that effective teachers are less likely to exit teaching
or transfer schools (Jackson 2010; Hanushek et. al. 2005; Sass and Feng 2011; Sass, et. al. 2011).
These patterns are consistent with the predictions above. However, these studies do not
distinguish between teacher quality and match quality so that testing these predictions may put
these documented patterns into theoretical context.

II.

Data
This paper uses data on all third-grade through fifth-grade students in North Carolina

from 1995 to 2006 from the North Carolina Education Research Data Center.12 The student data
include demographic characteristics, standardized test scores in math and reading, and codes
allowing one to link the student test score data to information about the schools the students
attend and the teachers who administered their tests. Discussions with education officials in
North Carolina indicate that tests are always administered by the students’ own teachers when
these teachers are present. To limit the sample to teachers who I am confident are the students’
actual teachers, I include only students who are being administered the exam by a teacher who
teaches math and reading to students in that grade. I also remove teachers who are co-teaching or
have a teaching aide. This process yields roughly 1.37 million student-year observations.
Summary statistics for these data are presented in Table 1.
The students are roughly 62 percent white 30 percent black, and are evenly divided
between boys and girls. About 11 percent of students’ parents did not finish high school, 43
12

These data have been used by other researchers to look at the effect of teachers on student outcomes (Clotfelter,
Ladd and Vigdor 2006, 2007) and the effect of student demographics on teacher quality (Jackson 2009).

9

percent had just a high school diploma, 30 percent had some post-high school education, and 14
percent had parents with a four-year degree or higher. The average class size is 23. Reading and
math scores are standardized in each grade-year cell to have a mean of zero and unit variance.
About 92 percent of teachers is the sample are female, 83 percent are white, and 15
percent are black. The average teacher in the data has thirteen years of experience, and roughly 6
percent of the teachers have no experience.13 Roughly 20 percent of teachers have advanced
degrees. About 67 percent of the teachers in the sample have regular licensure as opposed to
working under a provisional, temporary, emergency, or lateral entry license. I normalize scores
on the Elementary Education or the Early Childhood Education tests that all North Carolina
elementary school teachers are required to take, so that these scores have a mean of zero and unit
variance for each year in the data. Teachers perform near the mean, with a standard deviation of
0.81. About 4 percent of teachers have National Board Certification.
There are 27,498 teachers and 1545 schools in the final dataset. The average school is
observed with 21.3 teachers while about 80 percent of teachers are observed in only one school.
About 16 percent of teachers are observed in two schools, 2 percent in three schools, and about 1
percent in four or more schools. The average teacher is observed in the data for 3.26 years, and
about 37 percent are observed for one year. There are 32,922 teacher-school matches observed in
the data, and each match contains data from about 98 students and 4.2 classrooms, on average.
Matches for mobile teachers contain on average 78 student observations and 3.4 classrooms.
II.1

Who are the mobile teachers?
Because match quality is a within-teacher concept, match effects can only be estimated

for mobile teachers and may not be representative of match effects for non-mobile teachers.
While this does not affect the internal validity of the exercise, one may wonder how mobile
teachers compare to the average teacher. To gain a sense of this, I estimate linear probability
models for the likelihood that a teacher switches to another school next year, as a function of
observable teacher characteristics. I estimate the (7) below by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS).

Yjst  Tjt    t   jst

(7)

In (7), Yjst is whether teacher j switches from her current school s at time t, Tjt are time varying
teacher characteristics, τt is a year fixed effect, and εjst is the idiosyncratic error term. I present
13

Teacher experience is based on the amount of experience credited to the teacher for the purposes of determining
salary; therefore, it should reflect total teaching experience in any school district.

10

these results in column 1 of Table 2. These estimates are descriptive; I model teacher switching
and exiting the profession formally in Section V.
Column 1 shows that the likelihood of switching schools is monotonically decreasing in
experience— consistent with more experienced teachers finding better matches and remaining in
these schools. On average, teachers with higher licensure scores and teachers with an advanced
degree are no more likely to switch schools, while those with a regular teaching license are 4.2
percentage points more likely to switch schools. Because these relationships could reflect the fact
that mobile teachers differ from non-mobile teachers in their school locations, and certain
schools have higher teacher turnover than others, the estimates in column 2 includes school fixed
effects. The patterns are similar. In sum, the sample of switchers are most likely to have fewer
than 10 years of experience, less likely to have more than 24 years of experiencing, and more
likely to be regularly licensed teachers than the average teacher.
II.2

How do destination schools differ from sending schools?
Because a large part of the analysis involves comparing teacher performance in one

school to their performance in another, it is instructive to describe how the schools teachers
move to differ from those they leave. I present the difference in school characteristics between a
teacher's school the year before and after she switches schools. For each characteristic Xij for
teachers who switch schools in year t, I present ∆Xij = Xij't-1 - Xijt, and I test for the statistical
significance of these differences. To see if the patterns of school switching are different for
different kinds of teachers, I present theses differences for all teachers, and also for sub-samples
of teachers. These comparisons are presented in Table 3.
On average teachers move to schools where mean school level reading test scores are
0.023σ higher, and classes are 0.23 students smaller. Also, teachers move to schools where the
percentage of black and low-income students in the school is 2.5 and 3.8 percentage points
lower, respectively. Teachers also experience a 7.3 percent pay increase after a move. Teachers
are not switching out of large cities into other areas, but they are more likely to switch out of
schools in mid-sized cities and towns into rural areas. The patterns here are consistent with
teachers leaving low-performing schools that serve low-income ethnic-minority students for
higher-achievement schools with fewer low-income students and fewer minority students.
Columns 2 and 3 show results for white and non-white teachers, respectively. While all
teachers experience a pay increase and go to schools with fewer low-income students after a
11

move, white teachers go to schools with higher-achieving students and more white students,
while non-white teachers move to schools that have similar levels of achievement and more
black students. Also, similar to findings in Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (2004) using Texas data,
non-white teachers are more likely to switch into inner-city schools while white teachers are not.
Teachers with high scores experience larger increase in student achievement, smaller decreases
in the percentage of black students, and are less likely to move into a less urbanized environment
after a move than low scoring teachers. Inexperienced teachers (fewer than 5 years) experience
larger increases in student achievement after a move than do veteran teachers (more than 10
years). All groups tend to leave schools with low-income students, but inexperienced teachers
see larger decreases in the percent black at their new school than experienced teachers. While
inexperienced teachers appear to be switching largely out of towns, experienced teachers are
switching out of mid-sized cities and urban fringes. In sum, not all teachers are switching to or
from the same schools, so that several schools have different teachers switching in and out. This
fact plays a central role in my identification strategy.

III.

Preliminary Evidence of the Existence of Match Effects
The first empirical prediction from the theoretic framework predicting that teachers are

more likely to leave bad matches, is that match quality should be higher in a new match than in a
previous match so that teachers should be relatively more effective after than before switching
schools. I can test this first prediction empirically by mapping-out teacher effectiveness before
and after a move. To do this, I estimate (8) by OLS.14
Tijsy   Tiy 1  X ijsy 

9

I

 10

t 

    j  ijsy .

(8)

In (8) Tijsy is student i’s achievement with teacher j at school s in year y, Xijsy is a vector of
control variables (student race, gender, parental education, limited English proficiency, the
gender and racial match between the student and the teacher, class size, and teacher experience),
and θj is a teacher fixed-effect. Because one cannot simultaneously estimate teacher, year and
experience effects15, as is common, I include indicator variables for experience bins (0, 1 to 3, 4

14

Equation (8) follows naturally from equation (7), where the age subscript for the student is replaced with the more
general year subscript that is defined for teachers, schools, and students.
15
This is pointed out in Rockoff (2004) and (Papay and Kraft 2010).

12

to 9, 10 to 24, 25+). In (8) πτ is the effect of having a teacher who is τ years from leaving her
current school (for example π-2 is the effect for a teacher who will leave her current school in 2
years and π+2 is the effect for a teacher who left another school two years ago). The reference
year is the year before a teacher switches schools. In this Difference in Difference (DID) model,
the "years before/after move" variables map out changes in outcomes for teachers who switch
schools relative to changes for teachers who do not switch schools over the same time period.16
To ensure that any pre- and post-move differences are not driven by unmeasured
achievement differences across schools, I can estimate equation (8) including school fixedeffects. In such models, none of the effects can be driven by level differences across schools that
affect all teachers equally (as this is absorbed by the school effect). As such, any within-teacher
differences in performance associated with a move across schools must be due to a differential
response to schools across teachers (i.e. match effects). While including school fixed-effects
removes mean differences across schools, one may also worry that time varying school
characteristics affect both teacher performance and teacher mobility. For example, if a school
experiences some negative shock in year t-1, this may cause some teachers to have poor
performance in year t-1 and leave the school in year t. This could lead one to wrongly infer that
teachers are more effective after a move than before. To address this issue, I estimate models that
include a year fixed effect for each school so that comparisons are made among teachers at the
same school in the same year, to control for any school-specific events that may affect both
teacher effectiveness and teacher mobility. To map-out teacher effectiveness over time while
accounting for time varying differences in outcomes across schools, I estimate (9) by OLS.
Tijsy   Tiy 1  X ijsy 

9

I

 10

t 

    j   s y  ijsy .

(9)

All variables are defined as before and θs×y is a school-by-year fixed effect. Because this model
includes both school-by-year and teacher fixed effects, this DID model compares a teacher's
outcomes before and after a move while accounting for average outcomes of the schools (in a
particular year) she moved to and from.
16

Teacher switching is defined within the sample. This definition of switching captures 72 percent of all switching
that takes place in the data. This ensures that the before/after comparisons are really a within teacher concept. As
such a teacher with only pre-move data or a teacher with only post-move data will not be included in the mobility
analysis variables. Similarly, is a teacher switches from 3rd grade at one school and then 2nd grade at another school
and then starts teaching 3rd grade in the new school 2 years later, she will enter the data in all the pre-move years
and then again in the third post move year.

13

A Test for Endogenous Teacher Mobility
In all papers on worker mobility there is the concern that productivity is endogenous to
worker mobility. Note that teachers switching because their performance is poor is not
endogenous mobility in this context and is exactly the kind of mobility I aim to characterize. The
worry would be if productivity is endogenous to the switch. Specifically, the worry is that if
teachers anticipate that they will leave their current job in one year, they may reduce their effort
the year before a move to a new school. In such a scenario, one would observe that productivity
is low before a move and wrongly infer that a teacher was leaving a low productivity match. In
this scenario, one would expect teacher effectiveness to be uncharacteristically low one or two
years immediately prior to a switch. By the same argument, if teachers aim to impress those at
their new school, they may exert more effect temporarily right after a move and seem more
productive at their new school. In this scenario, one would expect teacher effectiveness to be
uncharacteristically high one or two years immediately after a switch, and for there to be some
systematic pattern in teacher effectiveness after the first year a teacher moves. Under these
scenarios there is some systematic pattern in teacher effectiveness prior to, or after, a move. As
such, the finding that individual years before/after a move variables have no explanatory power
over a simple pre vs. post model would suggest that effectiveness is exogenous to mobility.
III.1

Findings
The "years until/since move" indicator variable coefficient estimates from equations (8)

and (9) are presented in Table 4 and visually in Figure 1. The basic within-teacher results show
that teachers perform better after a switch than before. Relative to the year before a move, all the
post-move indicator variables have positive coefficients for both subjects, while the pre-move
indicator variables are either negative or close to zero and positive. This is indicative of the
existence of match effects, and shows that teachers move from schools where the productivity of
the match between them and the school is low.17 The point estimates suggest that at a teacher
increases test scores by about 2.5 percent and 1.4 percent of a standard deviation more at her new
school than at her old school in math and reading, respectively (columns 2 and 6).18 Results that
17

Results are similar in models that include smaller bin sizes and also models that control for teacher experience
parametrically with a second order polynomial. Moreover, if these estimates merely reflected an experience effect
they would not be relatively larger in the exact same year of a move than all other years. There would be a greater
concern for bias due to an experience effect if the model were simply a before/after model.
18
Columns 1 and 5 show the results with test score growth as the dependent variable with teacher fixed effects for
math and reading, respectively. The results are largely unchanged. This is to deal with the worry that measurement

14

also include school fixed effects, or school-by-year fixed effects are very similar─ indicating that
the estimated outcome differences before and after a move are not spuriously driven by teachers
moving from low- to high-achievement schools and not driven by school-wide events that would
affect both teacher mobility and teacher performance.
For both subjects there is little evidence of endogenous teacher mobility even though
teacher effectiveness is significantly different after a move than before. In the preferred models,
for both subjects one cannot reject the null hypothesis that all pre-move year effects are the same
and that all the post move years are the same at the 20 percent level, while one rejects that pre
and post move performance is the same at the 1 percent level. This is consistent with the
relatively uniform effectiveness before a move the one time upward shift in effectiveness after a
move and the relatively uniform effectiveness after a move depicted in Figure 1.
Could dynamic student selection drive these results?
Readers may worry that sorting of students could drive the results if (a) students who are
assigned to teachers who will leave the school the following year are systematically worse in
unobserved dimensions than those who are not, and/or (b) students who are assigned to teachers
at the teacher's new school are better in unobserved dimensions. The fact that there are no pre- or
post- move trends in outcomes is prima-facie evidence that this is not driving the results.
However, to test for student sorting in unobserved dimensions directly, one can see if (a)
students in year y who will receive a teacher in year y+1 who will leave the school between year
y+1 and y+2 have worse outcomes than those who will not, and (b) if students in year y who will
have a teacher in year y+1 that transferred from another school between years y and y+1 have
better outcomes than those who do not. To do this I estimate a model similar to equation (9) but
adding indicators for the mobility status of a student's future teacher (the year y+1 mobility
status of a student's time y+1 teacher). The coefficient on the variable denoting whether the
student's teacher next year will leave the following year is 0.001 (p-value = 0.74), and the
coefficient on a variable denoting whether the student's teacher next year will be a new transfer
from another school is 0.002 (p-value = 0.26) — both close to zero. As such, it appears that the
improved outcomes observed after a teacher switches schools is not an artifact of dynamic
student sorting and likely reflects teachers schools with which they are poorly matched.

error in a lagged dependent variable can lead to bias in a quasi-differenced model.

15

IV.

Estimating Match Effects and Estimating the Importance of Match Effects
As discussed in Section 1.4, in the ideal empirical setup, after accounting for possible

student selection, the mean of all the matches for teacher j (across schools) would be a consistent
estimate of the teacher effect θj, the mean of all the matches for school j (across teachers) would
be a consistent estimate of the school effect θs, and the mean for teacher j at schools s would be a
consistent estimate of the match effect θjs. However, because teachers are typically observed in
only a few schools, it is unlikely that match effects average out to zero for each teacher. This will
lead to small sample bias in the teacher, school, and match effect estimates. In this section, I
present a fixed effects strategy and detail these shortcomings. Motivated by the limitations of the
fixed-effects approach, I also present an Empirical Bayes random effects strategy that does not
rely on large sample properties. I highlight important differences between the two, and show that
the main conclusions do not hinge on how one estimates school, teacher, and match effects.
IV.1

Orthogonal Match Fixed Effects
The first approach is to estimate orthogonal match fixed effects. To do this I estimate (10)

below (a model with school fixed effects and teacher fixed effects) and define the match effect
for each teacher-school pair, e js , as the mean value of the residual for teacher j at school s.
Tijsy   Tiy 1  X ijsy   j   s  ijsy .

(10)

Because match effects are computed from residuals, the estimated match effects are orthogonal
to teacher and school effects, the mean match quality for each teacher is equal to zero, and the
mean match quality for each school is equal to zero by construction.
This approach, while straightforward, has the undesirable feature that it mechanically
loads match quality that is correlated with the teacher or school effects (in small samples) on to
the teacher or school effects, respectively. This makes it impossible to determine how much of
what we estimate as a teacher effect may be a match effect, and will overstate the importance of
teacher and school effects while understating the importance of match effects. However, while
their magnitude may be understated, orthogonal match effects do have the intuitive interpretation
of being the observed within-teacher variation in performance that can be attributed to working
in different school environments for mobile teachers. I detail how to uncover estimates of the
variance of true teacher, school, and match quality in a fixed effects framework below.
Fixed Effect Based Estimates of the True Variance
Because the raw fixed effect estimates are estimated with noise, the variance of the
16

estimated effects will not accurately reflect the variance of true teacher, school, and match
quality. As such, I estimate a series of covariances across classrooms to remove the contribution
of idiosyncratic year-specific shocks (such as a dog barking on the day of the test) and random
sampling variation to uncover the true variability of teacher, school, and match effects. This is
done in two steps. First, I estimate an achievement model like (11) with teacher-by-school-byyear fixed effects (i.e. classroom fixed effects).
Tijsy   Tiy 1  X ijsy   jsy  ijsy .

(11)

The classroom fixed effect term  jsy contains a piece attributed to the school, the teacher, the
match between the teacher and the school, and idiosyncratic year-specific shocks (that is

 jsy   s   j   js   jsy ). Under the assumption that the idiosyncratic shocks, the teacher,
school, and match effect are all uncorrelated in the data, one can estimate the variance of the
teacher, school, and match effects with a series of covariances.

Specifically, the covariance

of classroom effects one year apart within teachers and across schools is the variance of the
persistent teacher component common across schooling environments, Cov ( jsy ,  js ' y 1 )   2 j .
Similarly, the covariance of classroom effects one year apart across teachers and within schools
is

the

variance

of

the

persistent

school

component

common

to

all

teachers,

Cov ( jsy ,  j ' sy 1 )   2 s . Finally, the covariance of classroom effects one year apart within
teachers and within schools is the variance of the persistent teacher component, the common
school component and the component specific to the match between teachers and schools,

Cov ( jsy ,  jsy 1 )   2 s   2 j   2 js . As such, one can obtain an estimate of the variance of match
effects from Cov ( jsy ,  jsy 1 )  Cov ( jsy ,  js ' y 1 )  Cov ( jsy ,  j ' sy 1 )   2 js . For comparison purposes,
I present naive estimates of the variance of teacher effects under the assumption of no match
effects. Specifically, if there were no match effects then the covariance across classrooms for the
same teacher at the same school will only reflect the teacher effect and the school effect so that

 naive
 Cov( jsy ,  jsy 1 )  Cov( jsy ,  j ' sy 1 ) . Because these estimates assume that match quality and
j
teacher quality are uncorrelated in the data, these estimates understate the importance of matches

17

and may overstate that of teachers.19 This motivates my use of a maximum likelihood approach.
IV.2

Maximum Likelihood Random Match Effects
The second approach is to estimate random match effects. For this, one estimates teacher,

school, and teacher-by-school effects simultaneously using a mixed-effects estimator. This is
done in two steps. First, I estimate a model like (12) with teacher-by-school fixed effects  js .
Tijsy   Tiy 1  X ijsy   js  ijsy .

(12)

Note that by estimating a model with teacher-by-school effects I do not assume that the teacher,
school, and match effects are uncorrelated with the included covariates. Then, I take the
combined error term  js   ijsy (the teacher-by-school effect and the idiosyncratic error term) and
estimate a random effects model to decompose the combined residual into a school effect, a
teacher effect, and a teacher-by-school effect. To account for teacher-school-year or classroom
effects (e.g. a flu outbreak that affects the scores of the whole class), I allow for a teacher-schoolyear level error θjsy. This is important insofar as one does not observe teachers for many years at
a particular school. In the extreme, if one observes a teacher for only one year in a school, it is
impossible to disentangle match effects from idiosyncratic year-specific shocks unless one
account for this additional source of variability.
The random effects estimator estimates the variances of the teacher, school, match, and
classroom effects by Maximum Likelihood under the assumptions of joint normality with the
covariance structure described in (13), that the random effects are uncorrelated with the
covariates conditional on the estimated first stage coefficients described in (14), and the fixed
effects identifying assumption that the error term  ijsy is uncorrelated with the random effects.
  s   2s I S
  
0
j
Cov    
  js   0
  
 jsy   0

0
 j I J
0
0
2

0
0
2
  js I M
0



.


 2 jsy I C 
0
0
0

E[ s | ˆ, ˆ , T , X ]  E[ j | ˆ, ˆ , T , X ]  E[ js | ˆ , ˆ , T , X ]  E[ jst | ˆ, ˆ , T , X ]  0

(13)

(14)

Similar to the orthogonal match fixed effects approach, teacher, school, and match effects are
identified largely by mobile teachers. However, unlike the orthogonal match approach that
19

For example, if a teacher has two good matches, this covariance approach will attribute covariance across schools
to the persistent teacher effect when in fact the matches are positively correlated in sample. With a large number of
matches per teacher, this would not pose a problem. However, in small samples this leads to biased estimates.

18

assumes that the actual match, school, and teacher effects observed in the data are uncorrelated,
the random match effects approach assumes that the potential match, school, and teacher effects
(that one would observe if all teachers were observed in all schools) are uncorrelated, but that the
actual match, school, and teacher effects observed in small samples (where teachers are observed
in few schools) can be correlated. I describe the mechanics of how this works in Section IV.3.
This procedure has four desirable features; (1) Because the combined residuals are
obtained from a model with teacher-by-school fixed effects, the orthogonality condition is
satisfied as long as the fixed effects identification assumptions are satisfied; (2) The estimates of
the variance of the effects are the maximum likelihood estimates and will not be overstated due
to estimation error; (3) This procedure does not mechanically impose the restriction that the
mean of the match effects is equal to zero for all teachers (and all schools), but rather apportions
variation between the teacher, school, and match effects to minimize mean squared error; (4)
Because the match effects and teacher effects are estimated simultaneously, one can disentangle
good schools and good teachers from those that are correlated with high quality matches.
IV.3

Intuition for the mechanics of the orthogonal and mixed match effects estimators
If all teachers were observed in all schools, then one could use a fixed effects estimator to

precisely estimate school, teacher and match effects because the orthogonality condition in (13)
would be satisfied in the data, there would be enough variation to cleanly identify good matches
from good teachers and good schools, and there would be enough observations so that all the
estimates would be precise. However, in the real world this is not the case.
Generally, we observe several teachers at the same school so that estimation of school
effects is not problematic. However, most teachers are not observed in most schools and many
teachers are only observed in a small number of schools, leading to uncertainty in how much of
the variation to attribute to teachers or matches. The difference between the orthogonal match
fixed effects and the maximum likelihood random match effects is best illustrated by showing an
example how these two estimators deal with this uncertainty.
Consider a teacher who is observed with two matches, both of which are positive and
large. This could be because (a) the teacher has a very large positive teacher effect, (b) the
teacher was very lucky and drew two very large positive matches, or (c) the teacher drew a large
teacher effect and two positive match effects (but none of the draws are very large). With only
two observed matches for this teacher, there is no way to know for certain which state of the
19

world generated the observed data. I detail how each of the estimators deal with uncertainty
associated with this scenario to provide intuition for how and why these estimates differ, and
why the random maximum likelihood estimates of match effects are desirable.
The orthogonal match fixed effect model mechanically imposes the condition that the
mean of the match effects is zero for each teacher. This precludes the possibility of two positive
matches ruling out situations (b) and (c). That is, the orthogonal fixed effects model assumes
situation (a) and attributes the average of the match effects to teachers. This example illustrates
that unless teachers are observed in many schools (where the mean zero match quality
assumption may hold for each teacher), the importance of match effects will be understated and
that of teacher effects overstated in orthogonal match fixed effects models. Moreover, the
example illustrates that the estimated orthogonal teacher and match fixed-effects will be biased.
The random match effects model differs from the orthogonal match effects model in that
the estimator distributes the excess variation to both the teacher and match effects in a way that
minimizes mean squared error (rather than loading it all on the teacher). The larger/smaller is the
estimated variance of the teacher effects relative to the variance of match effects, and the
greater/less is its relative precision, the more/less of the excess variation is attributed to the
teacher effect. More generally, excess variability is distributed among the effects in proportion to
their estimated variance and the precision with which those variances are estimated. The intuition
for this is can be illustrated by how it deals with the scenario from above.
Consider again the teacher who is observed with two large positive matches. This could
be because of situations (a), (b) or (c) from above. With only two observed matches for this
teacher, there is no way to know for certain which state of the world generated the observed
data. However, if the variance of teacher effects is large relative to the variance of match effects,
then it is more likely that this person drew a very large teacher effect than two very large match
effects, and therefore the model will attribute more of the excess variation to the teacher effect.
Conversely, if the variance of match effects is large relative to the variance of teacher effects,
then it is more likely that this person drew two very large match effects than a very large teacher
effect, and therefore the model will attribute more of the excess variation to the match effects.
This example illustrates how the mixed effect estimator uses distributional information (obtained
from the mobile teachers) to create the Best Linear Unbiased Predictions (BLUPS) of the teacher
and match effects (rather than mechanically attributing the excess variation to teachers as in the
20

orthogonal match model). The resulting random effect estimates are Empirical Baye's.
Both models identify match effects from the variability in teacher performance across
schools (for mobile teachers) but they differ in how they resolve uncertainty about the sources of
variability in the data. The orthogonal match fixed effects are the estimates obtained when one
ascribes any uncertain variation to the teacher, while the random effect estimates are what one
obtains when the model apportions some of the variability to the match and some to the teacher
in a way that is most consistent with the distributional assumptions of the model. In principle,
both models should yield consistent estimates in large samples, however, in small samples (as is
the case in the real world) the fixed-effect estimates will be biased.
IV.4

Estimated Variability of Match Effects
In Table 5, I present the standard deviations of the raw fixed-effects and the covariance-

based and maximum likelihood based estimates of the standard deviations of the teacher, school,
and match effects. The units are in standard deviations of student achievement.
The standard deviations of the raw school, teacher, and match fixed effects for math are
0.22, 0.35, and 0.11, respectively. For reading, the standard deviations of the raw school, teacher
and match fixed effects are 0.247, 0.356, and 0.118, respectively.20 While these variances are
inflated due to estimation error and idiosyncratic classroom level shocks, if one were to take the
estimates at face value, one would conclude that match quality is about half as important as
school quality and one-third as important as teacher quality.
The third and fourth columns present the estimates of the true variability of teacher,
school, and match effects based on covariance across classrooms to remove estimation error and
idiosyncratic classroom level errors. In models that assume that match effect are equal to zero
the estimated standard deviation of teacher math quality is 0.1667, and that of schools is 0.0882.
These estimates are very similar to shrinkage estimates of teacher and school effect in other
studies and are consistent with about 40 percent of estimated effectiveness being persistent
(Stiager and Rockoff 2010; McCaffrey et al. 2009; Goldhaber and Hansen 2010). The similarity
to other studies should assuage concerns that the variability of teacher quality among mobile
teachers (for whom these correlations are computed) is different from that for all teachers.
For math, in models that allow for orthogonal match effects, the estimated standard
20

It is important to note that the results are similar but not identical with the inclusion of match fixed effects because
in the first stage of the orthogonal match fixed effect estimator match fixed effects are included. Where orthogonal
match effects are not estimated, only teacher and school fixed effects are included in the first stage.

21

deviation of teacher math quality is 0.1498, and that of schools is unchanged. The estimated
standard deviation of match quality in math is 0.0892. These results suggest that about 10
percent of what we typically call a teacher effect in math is actually a match effect, and that the
explanatory power of match quality in math is about 60 percent of that of teacher quality. For
reading, in models that assume that match effects are equal to zero, the estimated standard
deviation of teacher quality in reading is 0.1095, and that of schools is 0.0504. In models that
allow for orthogonal match effects, the estimated standard deviation of teacher quality in reading
falls to 0.0569. The estimated standard deviation of reading match effects is 0.0878 ─ suggesting
that about half of what we typically call a teacher effect in reading is actually a match effect, and
the explanatory power of match quality in reading is greater than that of teacher quality.
The fifth and sixth and seventh columns presents maximum likelihood estimates. The
mixed effects estimator suggests that with no match or classroom effects, the standard deviations
of teacher quality for math and reading are 0.19 and 0.11, respectively, and that the standard
deviations of school quality for math and reading are 0.106 and 0.0926, respectively. These
estimates are similar to the covariance based estimates, providing confidence in the variability
estimates, and underscoring the importance accounting for estimation error. In the mixed effect
model that allows for match effects only (that can be correlated with school or teacher effects)
the standard deviation of school effects falls to 0.099 for math and to 0.0655 for reading ─
suggesting that match quality can "explain away" about 7 and 30 percent of school effects in
math and reading, respectively. Where match effects are included, the standard deviation of
teacher effects falls to 0.141 for math and 0.0837 in reading ─ suggesting that match quality
"explains away" about 25 percent of teacher effects in both subjects. Because one may confound
match effects with classroom effects in small samples, the estimated standard deviations of
match effects of 0.13 for math and 0.077 for reading are likely inflated. In the maximum
likelihood model that accounts for classroom level effects, the standard deviation of match
effects is 0.0953 for math and 0.0597 for reading. As such, match effects have about two-thirds
of the explanatory power of teacher effects and are economically important.
One may worry that these calculations may overstate the relative importance of match
effects because the variation in teacher quality is measured within schools. If there is substantial
sorting of teachers across schools the variability in teacher quality within schools may understate
the importance of teachers. To assess the degree to which this might be true I compare the
22

standard deviation of teacher effects in models that do and do not include school effects. Starting
with the naïve model, the standard deviation of estimated raw teacher fixed effects without the
inclusion of school or match fixed effects is 0.321 and 0.327 for math and reading, respectively.
This is almost identical to the variability within schools. Similarly, in the maximum likelihood
model that does not include school effects the estimated standard deviations are 0.211 and
0.1294 for math and reading, respectively. Again, this is almost identical to the estimated
variability within schools (without match effects). Furthermore, this is consistent with Rivkin,
Hanushek, and Kain (2005) and Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2007), who show that the
within-school variation in value added is as large as between-school variation, suggesting the
estimated variability of teacher quality based on within school comparisons is not understated so
that the relative importance of match effects is likely not overstated.

V.

Does Match Quality Predict Teacher Mobility?
The remaining empirical predictions from the theoretical framework in section I.5 were

that (a) match specific quality should be negatively associated with switching, (b) match specific
quality should be largely unrelated to exiting the profession, (c) general teacher quality should be
negatively correlated with exiting the profession, and (d) general teacher quality should be
unrelated to switching within teaching. To test these empirical predictions, I merge in both the
preferred estimated random estimates (the BLUPs) and the estimated orthogonal fixed-effects
with teacher-level mobility data, and see whether teacher mobility (switching schools or exiting
the data) is associated with teacher quality (occupation-specific ability) and match quality (firmspecific ability) at her current school. Specifically I estimate (15) below by logistic regression.

Pr(Y jsy 1 ) 

1

.
(15)
1 e
Yjsy+1 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the teacher switches from her current school in year y
 (1 X jy  2 X sy 1  j  2  js )

(i.e. teacher j at school s at time y is not in school s at time y+1 but is in another school teaching
any grade in the NC public school system in year y+1) or exits the NC public school system
entirely, Xjy is a set of time varying teacher level covariates, Xsy is a set of time varying school
level covariates, θj and θjs are standardized estimated teacher and match effects.
To allow for comparisons conditional on the teacher identity or school identity, and
assuage concerns that the relationships are due to high mobility teachers or schools having bad

23

matches on average, I also estimate conditional logistic regressions that condition on either the
teacher or the school. Finally, while not tractable in a non-linear model, to allow both
unobserved teacher and school level heterogeneity, I estimate a linear probability model with
both teacher and school fixed effects. Specifically I estimate (16) below by OLS.

Switch jsy 1  1 X jy   2 X sy   3 js   j   s   jsy

.

(16)

In (16), πs and πj are teacher and school fixed effects, respectively, and εjsy is the idiosyncratic
error term. This model tests for whether a given mobile teacher was more or less likely to remain
in her current school where the estimated match quality is higher, taking into account that certain
schools may have high/low mobility and high/low match quality on average. Results of these
models are presented in Table 6. For the logistic regressions I present the odds ratios (less than
one means less likely to exit or switch and more than 1 means more likely to exit or switch) and
the p-value associated with the null hypothesis that the estimates odds ratio is equal to 1 (i.e. no
change in likelihood). For the linear probability models I present the marginal effects and
compute the implied odds ratio based on the mean of the dependent variable for comparison. I
only present results for math, however they are similar for reading.
The results in columns 1 and 2 are consistent with the theory. That is, increasing teacher
quality (a transferable skill within teaching) by 1σ decreases the likelihood of exiting the
teaching profession by 12 percent but is unrelated to switching schools. This is consistent with
teachers leaving the profession for other professions with which they may have a better
"match".21 Also, while increasing match quality (a school-specific skill) by 1σ decreases the
likelihood of exiting the profession by only 6 percent, it decreases the likelihood of switching by
33 percent. While the previous literature has not made the distinction between teacher
effectiveness due to school-specific versus general skills, these results show that effectiveness
due to school-specific skills is associated with staying with the school, while effectiveness due to
general teaching ability is associated with staying in the profession.
Columns 3 and 4 include school and teacher characteristics and this has little effect on the
relationships between match and teacher quality on mobility. The observable teacher and school
characteristics predict mobility as one would expect; Higher salaries are associated with both
decreased switching and decreased exit (with stronger effects on exit), the percentage of black
21

These finding are consistent with (Loeb, Kalogrides and Béteille 2011) who find that more effective schools are
able to attract and hire more effective teachers from other schools when vacancies arise.

24

students at the school is associated with increased switching and decreased exit (with larger
effects on switching), and higher math achievement at the school is associated with less
switching and exit. While exiting the profession increases monotonically with experience,
switching schools decreases monotonically with experience. This is consistent with teachers
being more likely to retire as they age and with teachers settling in on a good match as they age.
Higher licensure scores and having an advanced degree (indicative of general cognitive skill that
may be transferable to other occupations and schools) is associated increased exit and switching.
Having regular licensure (which indicates attachment to the profession and is a marketable trait
for other schools) is associated with 53 percent less exit but 67 percent more switching.
These general relationships persist in models that condition on the individual teacher
(columns 5 and 6) or those that condition on the school (columns 7 and 8). The linear models
that condition on both teacher and school (columns 9 and 10) show that increasing match quality
by 1σ has no statistically significant effect on exiting the profession, but is associated with being
2.7 percentage points (p-value=0.000) less likely to switch schools (an implied 66 percent
reduction). This is what one should observe if the estimated match effects capture something
school-specific that is not transferable across schools but is valuable in schools. To assuage
worries that these patterns are driven by the particulars of the random effect estimates, columns
11 and 12 show the preferred mobility regressions replacing the random match effects with the
estimated orthogonal fixed match effects. The results, though less precise, are similar.
In sum, consistent with classic models of match quality and mobility, teachers (workers)
are less likely to leave their current school when match quality is high and no more likely to
leave the profession. In contrast, teachers with high general teaching ability are more likely to
stay in the profession and no more likely to switch schools. The patterns of exit and switching
are consistent with prior findings that those teachers who exit from inner city schools are those
who were the least effective and suggest that the patterns of exit and switching are due to
teacher-school and teacher-profession match quality and are consistent with standard models of
job search. Importantly, these relationships persist conditional on teacher salary so that match
quality affects teacher mobility for reasons unrelated to pay. This suggests that non-pecuniary
job aspects (such as working conditions, job satisfaction, or in-kind benefits) that are correlated
with match effects exert an important effect on employee mobility decisions.

25

VI.1

The Correlates of Match Quality
While match quality is a teacher-school concept, if teachers leave bad matches and are

more likely to have outside options if they are more desirable to other schools then there are
certain patterns that one might expect to see in the data. One might expect that teachers with
more years of experience (who have been able to shop for a good match) will on average have
better matches, characteristics that make a teacher more employable should be associated with
better matches (more able to be employed at a school with high match quality), and larger
schools and schools in more densely populated areas should have better matches (because larger
markets and school allow for greater specialization increasing the likelihood of a good match).
To test for such patterns, I regress the standard normalized match random effects on the
observable teacher and school characteristics included in equation (8).22 Table 7 presents the
observable correlates of match quality. Columns 1 and 2 show that teachers with more years of
experience have higher match quality in both math and reading. Note that teacher experience is
already accounted for when estimating match effects. To assess whether this relationship reflects
a composition effect or teachers moving to schools with higher match quality over time, I
estimate this relationship with the inclusion of teacher fixed-effects (columns 3 and 4). This
within-teacher estimate documents the relationship between match quality and experience among
those mobile teachers who switch schools over time. While the within-teacher relationship is
smaller in magnitude, there is a clear positive monotonic relationship between experience and
match quality within teachers. This is consistent with the pre and post comparisons depicted in
Figure 1 and the mobility patterns documented in Table 6, and is indicative of teachers moving
from schools with lower quality matches and remaining in schools with higher quality matches.
Columns 1 and 2 show that certified teachers, teachers with regular licensure, and
teachers with higher scores on their license exams have better matches in both math and reading.
Also, white teachers have higher match quality in math than other teachers. These results imply
that at least part of the reason more experienced teachers, teachers who have a regular license,
certified teachers, and white teachers may be associated with better student outcomes is due to
the fact that such teachers have traits that are desirable to employers so that they are better able
to search for higher match quality (as opposed to these traits being productive per se).
Relative to schools in large cities, average match quality is lower in both math and
22

These are simple regression of the form  js  1 X j   2 X s   jsy .

26

reading in small towns, mid-sized cities, and rural areas. Match quality is positively associated
with school size for both math and reading (possibly due to greater scope for classroom
specialization). These patterns are consistent with the job search model such that match quality is
higher in geographic areas with thicker markets and school with greater scope for specialization.
Columns 5 through 8 show the same models with the raw fixed effects. While patterns are less
pronounced and less precise (as one would expect), the patterns are largely similar.
VI.2

Do certain kinds of teachers perform better at certain kinds of schools?
To better understand these match effects, it is helpful to assess what kind of teacher-

school combinations are associated with better or worse outcomes. In principle, one could run a
value-added model with both teacher and school fixed effects while including each teacher
variable interacted with each school variable. Because this would results in a regression with
hundreds of variables, this approach is impractical. As such, I employ a factor analytical
approach that aggregates all the variables into a few manageable number of factors that
categorize teachers and schools into types (Appendix Table 1). I then interact the teacher and
schools factors to see if certain teacher types have better outcomes with certain school types.23
To create factors for teachers, I included teachers value-added in math and reading, their
certification status, whether they were fully licensed, their average score on licensure exams, the
75th percentile of the SAT distribution of their college, years of teaching experience and
possessing an advanced degree. These variables loaded onto three factors: (1) effective teachers,
(2) teachers with high cognitive ability, and (3) teachers with strong paper credentials. To create
factors for school characteristics, I included student demographics, student achievement levels,
enrollment and urbanicity variables. The school variables loaded onto three factors: (1) highachieving suburban schools, (2) mid achievement, rural, white schools, and (3) low-achieving,
inner city schools. I also take advantage of a teacher workplace conditions survey that can be
linked to schools but not teachers. The survey contains 23 questions common across all survey
years. Teacher are asked to state their level of agreement with statements such as "Teachers have
time to collaborate with colleagues" and "Teachers are held to high standards". These survey
responses loaded onto four factors; (1) strong leadership and high-standards, (2) well-resourced,
(3) teachers have time, and (4) emphasis on professional development.
23

This approach has been used by economists to study teaching practices associated with between student outcomes
(Lavy 2011) and the relationship between teacher traits and student outcomes (Rockoff, Jacob, et al. 2011).

27

To see which teacher-school combinations are associated with better/worse student
outcomes I estimate a value-added model like (16) below by OLS, where Zj and Zs are teacher
and school types (factors), respectively.
Tijsy   Tiy 1  X ijsy   ( Z j  Z s )   j   s  ijsy

(16)

Results are presented in Table 8. Because teacher peer characteristics are also an important part
of the school environment, I use the mean of the teacher types as a school level characteristic.
Table 8 reveals a few patterns that are robust across subjects. Effective teachers (high
value-added teachers) perform relatively better at schools with highly credentialed teachers,
better at schools with an emphasis on professional development and relatively worse at high
achievement suburban schools. In contrast, teachers with strong credentials (experienced,
licensed, and have a masters degree) perform relatively worse in schools with more cognitive
type teachers (teacher from selective colleges with high scores on their exams), better in inner
city schools and worse in schools with an emphasis on professional development. Finally, high
cognitive teachers perform worse in schools with strong leadership and schools with an emphasis
on professional development. Because researchers have found racial match effects (Dee 2004,
2005; Ouazad 2008) I test for such effects at the school level (appendix Table A2). Once teacher
and school effects are included, there is evidence that white teachers perform relatively better at
rural schools with high shares of white students but little evidence that black teachers perform
any better or worse at schools with larger shares of white or black teacher or students.
While these correlations should be interpreted with caution, the estimated effects are
sufficiently large that there could be non-trivial gains to optimally matching teachers to schools.
For example, teachers who are 1sd above the mean in effectiveness would improve test scores by
0.05σ more at schools that score 1σ higher on their emphasis on professional development. Also,
teachers who are 1σ above the mean in effectiveness would improve test scores by 0.03σ less at a
school that is more suburban, affluent, and high-achieving.
VII.

Conclusions
I document that teachers perform better in the classroom after a move to another school

than before the move. I present a variety of empirical tests showing that this cannot be explained
by teachers moving to higher-achieving schools, endogenous teacher movement, or student
selection. I then provide the first direct estimates of match effects using measures of worker

28

output (as opposed to inferring them from wages) and find that match quality an important
determinant of student achievement. The variability of match effects are about two-thirds as
large as teacher effects and about one quarter of what we typically interpret as a teacher quality
effect is a match quality effect that is not portable across schools. Even though there is no direct
relationship between productivity and wages for teachers, a variety of empirical patters are
consistent with canonical model of job search. Specifically, teachers with high school-specific
quality are less likely to switch from such schools but no more likely to exit the profession, while
teachers with high general teaching quality are no more likely to switch schools but less likely to
exit the profession. Also, match quality increases and school switching decreases monotonically
with experience ─ consistent with workers switching jobs until they find a productive match.
These findings validate previous theoretical and empirical work on worker mobility using
wages to infer match quality. Also, that match quality predicts mobility in a context where there
is no relationship between wages and productivity suggests that workers may value highproductivity matches for reasons other than monetary compensation. Both these finding are
important contributions to the literature on worker mobility. These finding are also important for
the education literature and have important policy implications. Certain kinds of teacher school
combinations are associated with better outcomes such that a teacher placement policy that
maximized match quality could lead to meaningfully improved student outcomes. The finding
also indicate that policy-makers should be cautious about identifying strong teachers in one
school and moving them to another. Moreover, because match and teacher quality are often
confounded, policy simulations based on teacher quality estimates that do not account for match
quality could be inaccurate. Fortunately, the results indicate that teachers tend to leave schools at
which they are poorly matched, so that teacher turnover (which is generally considered a bad
thing) may in fact move us closer to an optimal allocation of teacher to schools.

29

References
Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. "Teachers and Student Achievement in the Chicago
Public High Schools." Journal of Labor Economics 25 (2007): 95-135.
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis. "High wage workers and high wage firms." Econometrica
67, no. 2 (1999): 251–33.
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, P. Lengermann, and S. Perez-Duarte. "Are good workers employed by good
firms? A test of a simple assortative matching model for France and the United States." mimeo, 2004.
Abowd, John M., Robert H. Creecy, and Francis Kramarz. "Computing Person and Firm Effects Using
Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data." U.S. Census Bureau Technical Paper TP-2002-06,
2002.
Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton. "Identity and the Economics of Organizations." Journal of
Economic Perspectives 19, no. 1 (2005): 9-32.
Altonji, J. G., and R. A. Shakotko. "Do wages rise with job seniority?" Review of Economic Studies 54,
no. 3 (1987): 437-459.
Anthony, Emily, and Dan Goldhaber. "Can teacher quality be effectively assessed? National board
certification as a signal of effective teaching." Review of Economics and Statistics 89, no. 1 (2007):
134–50.
Bartel, A. P., and G. J. Borjas. "Wage growth and job turnover: An empirical analysis." In Studies in
Labor Markets, 65-90. Chicago: NBER, 1981.
Brewer, Dominic J., and Dan D. Goldhaber. "Does teacher certification matter? High school teacher
certification status and student achievement." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 22, no. 2
(2000): 129–45.
Brewer, Dominic J., and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. "Do school and teacher characteristics matter? Evidence
from high school and beyond." Economics of Education Review 13, no. 1 (1994): 1–17.
Brown, Gordon D.A., Jonathan Gardner, and Andrew Oswald. "Does Wage Rank Affect Employees’
Wellbeing?" University of Warwick Working Paper, 2006.
Burdett, Kenneth. "A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates." American Economic Review 68
(1978): 212-220.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. "How and why do teacher credentials matter
for student achievement?" NBER Working Paper 12828, 2007.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. "Who teaches whom? Race and the
distribution of novice teachers." Economics of Education Review 24, no. 2 (2006): 377–92.
Dee, Thomas S. "A teacher like me: Does race, ethnicity, or gender matter?" American Economic Review
(95) 2 (2005): 158-165.
Dee, Thomas S. "Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment." Review of
Economics and Statistics 86, no. 1 (2004): 195-210.
Di Tella, R., R . J. MacCulloch, and J. A. Oswald. "Preferences Over Inflation and Unemployment:
Evidence from Surveys of Happiness." American Economic Review 91, no. 1 (2001): 335-341.
Duncan, Greg J. "Earnings Functions and Nonpecuniary Benefits." The Journal of Human Resources 11,
no. 4 (1976): 462-483.
Hanushek, Eric A. "Assessing the effects of school resources on student performance: An update."
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19, no. 2 (1997): 141–64.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Daniel M. O'Brien, and Steven Rivkin. "The Market for Teacher
Quality." NBER working paper 11154, 2005.
Hanushek, Eric A., John Kain, and Steven Rivkin. "Why Public Schools Lose Teachers." Journal of
Human Resources 39, no. 2 (2004): 326-354.
Jackson, C. Kirabo. "School Competition and Teacher Quality: Evidence from Charter School Entry in
North Carolina." Cornell university mimeo, 2010.
Jackson, C. Kirabo. "Student Demographics, Teacher Sorting, and Teacher Qualty: Evidence From the
End of School Desegregation." Journal of Labor Economics 27, no. 2 (2009): 213-256.

30

Jackson, C. Kirabo, and Elias Bruegmann. "Teaching Students and Teaching Each Other: The Importance
of Peer Learning for Teachers." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, no. 4 (2009): 85108.
Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren. "Can Principals Identify Effective Teachers? Evidence on Subjective
Performance Evaluation in Education." Journal of Labor Economics 26, no. 1 (2008): 101–36.
Johnson, W. "A Theory of Job Shopping." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 92 (1978): 261-277.
Jovanovic, Boyan. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover." Journal of Political Econoomy, no. 87
(1979): 972–990.
Kane, Thomas, and Douglas Staiger. "Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement: An
Experimental Evaluation." NBER working paper 14607, 2008.
Korpi, T. "Is Well–Being Related to Employment Status? Unemployment, Labor Market Policies and
Subjective Well-Being among Swedish Youth." Labour Economics 4, no. 2 (1997): 125-147.
Lankford, Hamilton, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. "Teacher sorting and the plight of urban
schools: A descriptive analysis." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24, no. 1 (2002): 3762.
Lavy, Victor. "What Makes an Effective Teacher? Quasi-Experimental Evidence." working paper
Hebrew University, 2011.
Loeb, Susanna, Demetra. Kalogrides, and Tara Béteille. "Effecitve Schools: Teacher Hiring, Assignment,
Development, and Retention." working paper, 2011.
Mincer, Jacob, and Boyan Jovanovic. "Labor Mobility and Wages." In Studies in Labor Markets, 21-64.
NBER, 1981.
Mortensen, Dale. "Specific Capital and Labor Turnover." The Bell Journal of Economics 9 (1998): 572586.
Nagypal, E. "Learning by doing vs. learning about match quality: Can we tell them apart?" Review of
Economic Studies 74 (2007): 537-566.
Neal, Derek. "The complexity of job mobility among young men." Journal of Labor Economics 17
(1999): 237–261.
Ost, Ben. "How Do Teachers Improve? The Relative Importance of Specific and General Human
Capital." Cornell mimeo, 2009.
Ouazad, Amine. "Assessed by a teacher like me: Race, gender and subjective evaluations." CEE
Discussion Paper 0098, 2008.
Papay, J. P., and M Kraft. "Do Teachers Continue to Improve with Experience? Evidence of Long-Term
Career Growth in the Teacher Labor Market." working paper, 2010.
Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. "Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement." Econometrica 73, no. 2 (2005): 417-458.
Rockoff, Jonah E. "The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from Panel
Data." American Economic Review 94, no. 2 (2004): 247-52.
Rockoff, Jonah E., Brian A. Jacob, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. "Can You Recognize an
Effective Teacher When You Recruit One?" Education Finance and Policy 6, no. 1 (2011): 43-74.
Rothstein, Jesse. "Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and Student
Achievement." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010.
Sass, Timothy, and Li Feng. "Teacher Quality and Teacher Mobility." Florida State University working
paper, 2008.
Topel, R. H., and M. P. Ward. "Job mobility and the careers of young men." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107, no. 2 (1992): 439-479.
Winkelmann, L., and R. Winkelmann. "Why Are the Unemployed So Unhappy?" Economica 65, no. 257
(1998): 1-15.
Woodcock, Simon D. "Match Effects." Simon Fraser University mimeo, 2008.

31

Tables and Figures

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Unit of Observation: Student-Year
Math Scores
Reading Scores
Change in Math Score
Change in Reading Score
Black
White
Female
Parent Ed.: No HS Degree
Parent Ed.: HS Degree
Parent Ed.: Some College
Parent Ed.: College Degree
Same Race
Same Sex
Class Size

Observations

Mean

Standard Deviation

1361473
1355313
1258483
1250179
1372098
1372098
1372098
1372098
1372098
1372098
1372098
1372098
1372098
1372098

0.033
0.022
0.006
0.001
0.295
0.621
0.493
0.107
0.428
0.315
0.143
0.649
0.496
23.054

0.984
0.984
0.583
0.613
0.456
0.485
0.500
0.309
0.495
0.464
0.350
0.477
0.500
4.053

Unit of Observation: Teacher-Year
Experience
Experience 0
Experience 1 to 3
Experience 4 to 9
Experience 10 to 24
Experience 25+

91243
92511
92511
92511
92511
92511

12.798
0.063
0.165
0.230
0.365
0.164

9.949
0.242
0.371
0.421
0.481
0.371

Teacher Exam Score
Advanced Degree
Regular Licensure
Certified

92511
92511
92511
92511

-0.012
0.197
0.670
0.039

0.812
0.398
0.470
0.194

Notes: The few teachers with more than 50 years of experience are coded as having 50 years of
experience.

32

Table 2: Relationship Between School Switching and Teacher Characteristics

Experience: 1 to 3
Experience: 4 to 9
Experience: 10 to 24
Experience: 25+
Licensure Score
Advanced Degree
Regular License

1
2
Switch Schools in 1 year
-0.002
-0.003
[0.005]
[0.005]
-0.006
-0.007
[0.005]
[0.006]
-0.015
-0.012
[0.005]**
[0.005]*
-0.057
-0.054
[0.006]**
[0.006]**
-0.007
-0.003
[0.001]**
[0.002]*
0.003
0.003
[0.003]
[0.003]
0.034
0.045
[0.005]**
[0.005]**
YES
YES
NO
YES
89856
89856
0.17
0.2

3
4
Exit Teaching in 1 year
0.015
0.026
[0.009]+
[0.009]**
-0.023
-0.001
[0.009]*
[0.009]
-0.102
-0.068
[0.009]**
[0.009]**
-0.064
-0.029
[0.009]**
[0.010]**
-0.004
0.001
[0.003]
[0.003]
0.031
0.031
[0.006]**
[0.006]**
-0.19
-0.178
[0.008]**
[0.008]**
YES
YES
NO
YES
75303
75303
0.03
0.08

Year FX
School FX
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in brackets are adjusted for clustering at the teacher level.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

33

Table 3: Comparing sending and Receiving Schools (By teacher type)
1
2
3
4
5
Difference in characteristics between receiving and sending school

6

7

All
White
non-white Hi Score Low score >5 years exp <10 years
Reading scores (class)
-0.054
-0.06
-0.028
-0.076
-0.036
-0.111
-0.025
[0.009]** [0.010]**
[0.023]
[0.018]** [0.018]+
[0.024]**
[0.013]*
Reading scores (school)
-0.023
-0.03
0.013
-0.034
-0.005
-0.061
0.001
[0.005]** [0.005]**
[0.013]
[0.010]**
[0.010]
[0.014]**
[0.006]
Mean class size
0.236
0.184
0.503
0.133
0.356
-0.008
0.366
[0.052]** [0.055]** [0.141]**
[0.106]
[0.106]**
[0.137]
[0.072]**
% Non-white teachers
0.015
0.021
-0.015
0.019
-0.001
0.028
0.003
[0.004]** [0.005]**
[0.010]
[0.009]*
[0.009]
[0.013]*
[0.006]
Log of Salary
-0.073
-0.073
-0.068
-0.075
-0.07
-0.072
-0.052
[0.002]** [0.002]** [0.006]** [0.003]** [0.004]**
[0.005]**
[0.002]**
Percent Free lunch
0.038
0.039
0.034
0.038
0.039
0.046
0.035
[0.003]** [0.003]** [0.010]** [0.006]** [0.007]**
[0.009]**
[0.004]**
Percent Black
0.025
0.029
0.003
0.028
0.011
0.036
0.016
[0.003]** [0.003]**
[0.007]
[0.005]** [0.005]*
[0.009]**
[0.003]**
Log of Enrolment
-0.013
-0.016
-0.001
-0.01
-0.008
-0.019
-0.001
[0.006]* [0.006]*
[0.014]
[0.012]
[0.011]
[0.016]
[0.007]
Large City
-0.002
0.001
-0.012
-0.002
-0.008
0.002
0
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.007]+
[0.005]
[0.004]+
[0.007]
[0.003]
Mid-sized city
0.015
0.02
-0.011
0.022
-0.002
0.006
0.01
[0.005]** [0.005]**
[0.012]
[0.011]*
[0.010]
[0.016]
[0.006]+
Urban Fringe
0.003
0
0.019
-0.003
0.025
-0.011
0.015
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.012]
[0.012]
[0.011]*
[0.017]
[0.007]*
Town
0.02
0.02
0.014
0.02
0.022
0.031
0.01
[0.004]** [0.005]**
[0.010]
[0.008]*
[0.009]*
[0.014]*
[0.005]*
Rural Area
-0.036
-0.041
-0.01
-0.037
-0.036
-0.026
-0.035
[0.006]** [0.007]**
[0.013]
[0.013]** [0.012]**
[0.019]
[0.008]**
Each coefficient represents a separate regression of each covariate on an "post switch" indicator variable.
Robust standard errors in brackets are adjusted for clustering at the teacher level.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

34

Table 4: Teacher Effectiveness Before and After a Move
1

2

3

4

5

Math
10 Years before move
9 Years before move
8 Years before move
7 Years before move
6 Years before move
5 Years before move
4 Years before move
3 Years before move
2 Years before move
Year of move ( 0 )
1 Year after move
2 Years after move
3 Years after move
4 Years after move
5 Years after move
6 Years after move
7 Years after move
8 Years after move
9 Years after move
Lagged scores
Teacher Effects
School Effects
School×Year Effects

Growth
-0.059
[0.027]*
-0.046
[0.019]*
-0.011
[0.016]
-0.008
[0.013]
-0.005
[0.012]
0.002
[0.010]
-0.003
[0.009]
-0.007
[0.007]
-0.002
[0.006]
0.013
[0.006]*
0.028
[0.007]**
0.034
[0.007]**
0.031
[0.008]**
0.028
[0.010]**
0.037
[0.011]**
0.027
[0.013]*
0.043
[0.014]**
0.033
[0.016]*
0.061
[0.020]**
-

Score
-0.049
[0.025]+
-0.041
[0.018]*
-0.008
[0.015]
-0.002
[0.012]
-0.002
[0.011]
0.004
[0.009]
0.001
[0.008]
-0.003
[0.007]
0.001
[0.006]
0.016
[0.005]**
0.032
[0.006]**
0.039
[0.007]**
0.037
[0.008]**
0.034
[0.009]**
0.043
[0.010]**
0.035
[0.012]**
0.049
[0.013]**
0.04
[0.015]**
0.069
[0.018]**
0.762
[0.002]**

Score
-0.048
[0.025]*
-0.045
[0.018]*
-0.017
[0.015]
-0.009
[0.012]
-0.01
[0.011]
-0.002
[0.009]
-0.006
[0.008]
-0.007
[0.007]
0
[0.006]
0.009
[0.006]
0.026
[0.006]**
0.033
[0.007]**
0.03
[0.008]**
0.028
[0.009]**
0.038
[0.011]**
0.029
[0.012]*
0.044
[0.014]**
0.034
[0.015]*
0.062
[0.019]**
0.762
[0.002]**

Score
-0.013
[0.023]
0
[0.017]
-0.011
[0.014]
0.009
[0.012]
0.001
[0.010]
0.01
[0.009]
0.002
[0.007]
0.002
[0.006]
0.002
[0.006]
0.006
[0.006]
0.023
[0.006]**
0.027
[0.007]**
0.024
[0.008]**
0.02
[0.009]*
0.025
[0.010]*
0.02
[0.012]+
0.024
[0.013]+
0.023
[0.015]
0.04
[0.018]*
0.765
[0.002]**

Growth
-0.069
[0.027]*
-0.046
[0.015]**
-0.01
[0.012]
-0.011
[0.010]
-0.016
[0.009]+
-0.014
[0.008]+
-0.008
[0.007]
-0.005
[0.006]
-0.001
[0.006]
0.006
[0.005]
0.017
[0.005]**
0.02
[0.006]**
0.02
[0.007]**
0.022
[0.008]**
0.022
[0.009]*
0.024
[0.010]*
0.022
[0.011]+
0.02
[0.013]
0.052
[0.016]**
-

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

6

7
Reading
Score
Score
-0.053
-0.059
[0.026]*
[0.026]*
-0.033
-0.035
[0.014]*
[0.014]*
0
-0.006
[0.011]
[0.011]
0.002
-0.002
[0.010]
[0.010]
-0.004
-0.012
[0.008]
[0.008]
-0.003
-0.009
[0.007]
[0.007]
0
-0.007
[0.007]
[0.007]
0.003
-0.002
[0.006]
[0.006]
0.005
0.002
[0.005]
[0.005]
0.01
0.001
[0.005]*
[0.005]
0.02
0.011
[0.005]**
[0.005]*
0.024
0.014
[0.006]**
[0.006]*
0.025
0.015
[0.006]**
[0.007]*
0.025
0.015
[0.007]**
[0.007]*
0.025
0.016
[0.008]**
[0.008]+
0.028
0.019
[0.009]**
[0.010]*
0.025
0.016
[0.011]*
[0.011]
0.024
0.014
[0.012]*
[0.012]
0.056
0.047
[0.015]** [0.015]**
0.732
0.731
[0.002]** [0.002]**
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

8
Score
-0.042
[0.024]+
-0.034
[0.014]*
-0.013
[0.011]
-0.005
[0.010]
-0.013
[0.009]
-0.008
[0.007]
-0.011
[0.006]+
-0.007
[0.006]
-0.003
[0.005]
-0.001
[0.005]
0.009
[0.005]+
0.011
[0.006]+
0.01
[0.007]
0.014
[0.007]+
0.016
[0.008]+
0.02
[0.010]*
0.011
[0.011]
0.017
[0.012]
0.052
[0.015]**
0.732
[0.002]**
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
1249122
1249122
1249122
1249122
1241150
1241150
1241150
1241150
Prob pre=0
0.20
0.24
0.31
0.62
0.02
0.04
0.04
0.26
Prob post=0
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Robust standard errors in brackets clustered at the teacher level.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
All models include grade and year fixed effects and controls for student race, gender, parental education, and LEP status. Models also
include an indicator for the gender and racial match between the student and the teacher, teacher experience, and the class size.

35

Table 5: Estimated Variability of Effects
Math

Std. Dev. of School Effects

Raw Fixed
Effects
0.2285 0.2285

Covariance
Estimates a
0.0882 0.0882
0.1667b
-

0.1498
0.0892
-

0.19
0.50895

0.141
0.1302
0.5076

0.142
0.0953
0.141
0.4942

Reading
0.2472
0.0504

0.0504

0.0926

0.06547

0.0648

0.05695
0.08785
-

0.1107 0.08377
0.0777
0.61125 0.5553

0.08384
0.05967
0.09304
0.5499

Std. Dev. of Teacher Effects
0.3503 0.3506
Std. Dev. of Match Effects
0.1121
Std. Dev. of Classroom Effects
Std. Dev. of residuals
0.5023 0.50704

Std. Dev. of School Effects

0.2475

Std. Dev. of Teacher Effects
0.3563
Std. Dev. of Match Effects
Std. Dev. of Classroom Effects
Std. Dev. of residual
0.5481

Random Effects
0.106
0.099
0.098

b

0.3564
0.1182
0.5467

0.1095
-

Notes: The fixed effects and covariance estimates are computed under the assumption that teacher and match effects are not
correlated in the sample. Alternately, the random effects model allows for correlations between estimated school, teacher and
match effects in small samples.
a. The variance of the school effect is computed as the covariance between the classroom effect across different teachers from the
same school. The variance of the teacher effect is computed as the covariance between the classroom effect across schools from the
same teacher. Finally, the variance of the match effects is computed as the covariance between the classroom effect within the same
teachers at the same school minus the estimated variance of the school and teacher effects.
b. The naive variance of the teacher effect is computed as the covariance between the classroom effects within schools for the same
teacher minus the estimated school variance.

36

Table 6: Match Quality and Teacher Mobility
Exit
Teaching
1
Match Effect Math BLUP
Teacher Effect Math BLUP
School Effect Math BLUP

0.942**
(0.000)
0.880**
0.000
0.964**
(0.000)

Switch
Exit
Schools
Teaching
2
3
Logistic
0.669**
0.942**
0.000
(0.000)
1.102+
0.906**
(0.09)
(0.000)
0.884**
1.032**
0.000
(0.008)

Switch
Schools
4

Exit
Teaching
5

0.681**
0.000
1.004
(0.14)
0.947**
(0.013)

0.935**
(0.091)
0.9360
(0.269)

Switch
Exit
Schools
Teaching
6
7
Conditional Logit
0.851**
0.946**
(0.000)
(0.002)
0.895**
(0.000)
0.873**
(0.003)

Switch
Schools
8

Exit
Teaching
9

0.725**
0.000
1.001
(0.285)

-0.0090
(0.075)

Switch
Schools
10

Exit
Teaching
11
OLS
-0.027**
(0.000)

Match Effect Math FE
Log(Salary)
% freelunch
% Black
Log(enrollment)
Mean math scores at School
1-3 years Experience
4-9 years Experience
10-25 years Experience
25 + Years experience
Licensure score
Advanced degree
Regular licensure

0.3135
(0.000)
1.0763
(0.245)
1.1445
(0.012)
0.9911
(0.729)
0.7922
(0.000)
1.1688
(0.000)
1.2461
(0.000)
1.1468
(0.011)
1.8626
(0.000)
1.0278
(0.028)
1.2423
(0.000)
0.4644
(0.000)
0.942
N
N
Y
74,154

0.6139
(0.000)
0.9347
(0.591)
2.2524
0.000
0.9472
(0.319)
0.7827
(0.001)
0.9892
(0.887)
0.9065
(0.244)
0.7182
(0.000)
0.4471
(0.000)
1.0514
(0.035)
1.1264
(0.030)
1.6753
(0.000)
0.682
N
N
Y
74,154

0.2639
(0.000)
1.1241
(0.300)
1.8908
(0.012)
1.1806
(0.093)
0.8057
(0.011)
3.9196
0.000
5.4739
0.000
3.7886
0.000
3.1582
(0.000)
0.9707
(0.891)
0.8816
(0.287)
2.2255
(0.000)
0.935
Y
N
Y
44,215

0.6557
(0.120)
1.9079
(0.001)
3.0526
(0.000)
0.9593
(0.644)
0.7161
(0.006)
0.8033
(0.020)
0.7945
(0.086)
0.9195
(0.673)
0.9926
(0.978)
1.7437
(0.184)
1.3840
(0.142)
0.6676
(0.127)
0.851
Y
N
Y
14,142

0.3003
0.000
1.1549
(0.110)
1.3152
(0.261)
1.1309
(0.133)
0.8049
(0.000)
1.2105
(0.000)
1.3284
(0.000)
1.2700
(0.000)
2.1085
0.000
1.0152
(0.249)
1.2386
0.000
0.4700
(0.000)
0.947
N
Y
Y
74,032

0.6518
(0.011)
1.1052
(0.681)
11.7870
(0.000)
5.1500
(0.000)
0.9191
(0.604)
1.0260
(0.743)
0.9818
(0.838)
0.8187
(0.044)
0.5066
(0.000)
1.0324
(0.217)
1.1411
(0.023)
1.7986
(0.000)
0.725
N
Y
Y
59,326

-0.2820
(0.000)
0.0270
(0.220)
0.1140
(0.102)
0.0435
(0.045)
-0.0425
(0.003)
0.2290
(0.000)
0.2900
(0.000)
0.2600
(0.000)
0.2170
(0.000)
-0.0098
(0.789)
-0.0244
(0.206)
0.0828
(0.000)
0.971
Y
Y
Y
74,154

OR for match
0.942
0.670
Teacher FX
N
N
School FX
N
N
Year FX
Y
Y
74,676
Observations
74,676
Robust pval in parentheses
* added to indicate statistical significance for match school and teacher effect variables only. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

37

-0.0124
(0.432)
0.0079
(0.437)
0.1150
(0.002)
0.0282
(0.009)
-0.0062
(0.342)
-0.0026
(0.692)
-0.0009
(0.916)
0.0120
(0.241)
0.0115
(0.337)
0.0167
(0.326)
0.0072
(0.382)
-0.0061
(0.416)
0.346
Y
Y
Y
74,154

-0.0013
(0.582)
-0.2790
(0.000)
0.0268
(0.224)
0.1090
(0.121)
0.0423
(0.050)
-0.0439
(0.002)
0.2280
(0.000)
0.2890
(0.000)
0.2590
(0.000)
0.2170
(0.000)
-0.0104
(0.778)
-0.0216
(0.262)
0.0815
(0.000)
0.996
Y
Y
Y
74,008

Switch
Schools
12

-0.0104**
(0.000)
-0.0147
(0.355)
0.0076
(0.457)
0.1150
(0.002)
0.0277
(0.010)
-0.0070
(0.282)
-0.0027
(0.680)
-0.0010
(0.903)
0.0117
(0.255)
0.0110
(0.358)
0.0178
(0.301)
0.0075
(0.366)
-0.0066
(0.379)
0.746
Y
Y
Y
74,008

Table 7: The Correlates of Match Quality

Teacher: 1-3 years exp.
Teacher: 4-10 years exp.
Teacher: 10-25 years exp.
Teacher: 25+ years exp.
Teacher: White
Teacher: Black
Teacher: Certified
Teacher: Regular license
Teacher: License score
Teacher: Advanced degree
School: Small Town
School: Midsized city
School: Rural
School: %White
School: %Free lunch
School: Enroll

Math
1
0.059
[0.012]**
0.094
[0.017]**
0.142
[0.019]**
0.254
[0.023]**
0.201
[0.073]**
-0.004
[0.076]
0.172
[0.033]**
0.071
[0.010]**
0.051
[0.010]**
-0.048
[0.022]*
-0.092
[0.054]+
-0.052
[0.052]
-0.063
[0.053]
-0.024
[0.031]
0.019
[0.031]
0.049
[0.014]**

Standardized BLUPS
Reading
Math
2
3
0.022
0.043
[0.011]* [0.012]**
0.108
0.061
[0.016]** [0.020]**
0.247
0.081
[0.018]** [0.024]**
0.388
0.088
[0.023]** [0.028]**
0.077
[0.081]
-0.048
[0.085]
0.135
0.019
[0.032]**
[0.021]
0.077
-0.002
[0.010]**
[0.009]
0.024
-0.019
[0.011]*
[0.028]
-0.057
0.014
[0.022]*
[0.020]
-0.192
-0.152
[0.042]** [0.087]+
-0.157
-0.067
[0.039]**
[0.083]
-0.171
-0.098
[0.040]**
[0.082]
0.052
-0.167
[0.030]+
[0.080]*
-0.011
0.001
[0.030]
[0.029]
0.025
0.087
[0.014]+ [0.033]**

Reading
4
0.015
[0.010]
0.037
[0.018]*
0.047
[0.022]*
0.049
[0.024]*
0.014
[0.018]
-0.007
[0.007]
0.039
[0.026]
0.002
[0.018]
-0.111
[0.102]
-0.066
[0.098]
-0.103
[0.096]
-0.013
[0.071]
-0.015
[0.025]
0.049
[0.029]+

Observations
88944
88768
88944
88768
R-squared
0.02
0.02
0.82
0.86
Teacher Effects
N
N
Y
Y
Robust standard errors in brackets
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Omitted categories are "large city" and "zero years of experience".

38

Math
5
0.031
[0.017]+
0.035
[0.016]*
0.028
[0.016]+
0.048
[0.017]**
-0.066
[0.038]+
-0.059
[0.039]
0.021
[0.022]
-0.015
[0.009]+
0
[0.005]
-0.005
[0.012]
-0.027
[0.033]
-0.042
[0.031]
-0.032
[0.032]
-0.021
[0.019]
-0.024
[0.022]
0.003
[0.009]
88944
0
N

Standardized Raw Fixed Effects
Reading
Math
Reading
6
7
8
0.025
0.052
0.052
[0.017]
[0.036]
[0.031]+
0.028
0.056
0.077
[0.018]
[0.044]
[0.039]*
0.03
0.065
0.122
[0.018]+ [0.028]*
[0.046]**
0.031
0.084
0.132
[0.018]+ [0.050]+
[0.049]**
-0.057
[0.035]
-0.055
[0.036]
0.025
0.003
0.048
[0.018]
[0.034]
[0.037]
-0.024
-0.026
-0.013
[0.008]** [0.014]+
[0.014]
-0.005
0.004
-0.056
[0.005]
[0.070]
[0.092]
-0.007
0.008
0.022
[0.012]
[0.043]
[0.044]
-0.01
-0.252
-0.082
[0.029]
[0.193]
[0.176]
-0.012
-0.24
-0.101
[0.027]
[0.187]
[0.172]
-0.004
-0.215
-0.071
[0.027]
[0.186]
[0.172]
-0.02
-0.205
-0.052
[0.018]
[0.125]
[0.121]
-0.012
-0.079
-0.071
[0.021]
[0.051]
[0.046]
0.008
0.009
0.054
[0.009]
[0.051]
[0.050]
88768
0
N

88944
0.2
Y

88768
0.21
Y

Table 8: Match Quality and Teacher School Combinations
Effective * Mean(Effective at school)
Effective * Mean(cognitive at school)
Effective * Mean(Credentialed at school)
Cognitive * Mean(Effective at school)
Cognitive * Mean(Cognitive at school)
Cognitive * Mean(Credentialed at school)
Credentialed * Mean(Effective at school)
Credentialed * Mean(Cognitive at school)
Credentialed * Mean(Credentialed at school)
Effective * Suburban, High Achieving, White School
Effective * Rural, low income, White School
Effective * Urban, Low Achieving, Poor, Black School
Cognitive * Suburban, High Achieving, White School
Cognitive * Rural, low income, White School
Cognitive * Urban, Low Achieving, poor, Black School
Credentialed * Suburban, High Achieving, White School
Credentialed * Rural, low income, White School
Credentialed * Urban, Low Achieving, poor, Black School

math
-0.00905
[0.0296]
-0.142**
[0.0407]
0.0898**
[0.0259]
-0.00593
[0.0116]
-0.0472**
[0.0169]
-0.0137
[0.0115]
-0.0306*
[0.0134]
-0.0417*
[0.0184]
-0.0133
[0.0124]
-0.0658**
[0.0116]
-0.0289*
[0.0145]
-0.0870**
[0.0140]
0.00638
[0.00479]
0.00911
[0.00687]
0.00196
[0.00663]
-0.00175
[0.00551]
0.00427
[0.00789]
0.0216**
[0.00753]

read
-0.0129
[0.0324]
-0.0383
[0.0446]
0.0607*
[0.0283]
-0.00553
[0.0126]
0.0297
[0.0184]
0.0042
[0.0126]
-0.000829
[0.0147]
-0.0476*
[0.0201]
0.00546
[0.0136]
-0.0486**
[0.0126]
-0.00669
[0.0158]
-0.0191
[0.0154]
0.0083
[0.00523]
-0.00234
[0.00751]
0.00252
[0.00724]
-0.0021
[0.00602]
0.0127
[0.00862]
0.0198*
[0.00823]

39

Effective* Strong Leadership
Effective*Well Resourced
Effective* Time
Effective* Professional Development
Cognitive* Strong Leadership
Cognitive*Well Resourced
Cognitive* Time
Cognitive* Professional Development
Credentials* Strong Leadership
Credentials*Well Resourced
Credentials* Time
Credentials* Professional Development

Observations

math
-0.00462
[0.0109]
-0.0264*
[0.0120]
0.00874
[0.0129]
0.0796**
[0.0154]
-0.0101*
[0.00464]
0.00441
[0.00567]
-0.0045
[0.00606]
0.00889
[0.00663]
-0.0178**
[0.00539]
-0.00388
[0.00680]
-0.00551
[0.00702]
-0.0253**
[0.00755]

read cont'd
-0.00196
[0.0119]
-0.0105
[0.0131]
0.012
[0.0141]
0.0354*
[0.0169]
-0.00933+
[0.00508]
0.00402
[0.00620]
0.00205
[0.00662]
0.0113
[0.00726]
-0.00671
[0.00590]
-0.00121
[0.00743]
-0.00556
[0.00767]
-0.0206*
[0.00826]

1,133,980

1,127,033

Pr[ttype_int]=0
5.36E-08
0.0315
Pr[stype_int]=0
6.73E-09
0.0416
Pr[sstype_int]=0
0
0.00162
Robust standard errors in brackets
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
All models include teacher and school fixed effects and control for lagged
student achievement

Math: With School-by-Year Effects

-.05

-.05

0

0

.05

.05

Math: Without School Effects

-10

-5

0
Year

5

10

-10

0
Year

5

10

Reading: With School-by-Year Effects

-.04 -.02

-.04 -.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

Reading: Without School Effects

-5

-10

-5

0
Year

5

10

-10

-5

0
Year

5

10

Figure 1: Change in Teacher Math Value-added Before and After a Move and the 95 Percent
Confidence Interval

40

Appendix Tables and Figures
Appendix Table A1: Teacher and School Factors
Factor
1
0.5551
0.5534
0.0184
0.0326
0.0512
-0.01
0.0219
0.0566

Math Estimated Value-Added
Reading Estimated Value-Added
Fully Certified
Average score on Licensure Exams
Years of Experience
Advanced Degree
75th percentile of the SAT distribution at College
Fully Licensed
Factor 1: High value-added teachers (effective) (σ=0.81)
Factor 2: High test score and selective college (cognitive) (σ=0.42)
Factor 3: Experienced, fully licensed and fully certified (credentials) (σ=0.40)

2
0.0554
0.0087
0.1316
0.5485
-0.1082
0.0841
0.5296
-0.0251

1
2
Percent white students at school
0.3993
0.7873
Percent black students at schools
-0.3556
-0.7592
Percent on free lunch
-0.5794
-0.5389
Mean math scores
0.8808
0.3504
Mean reading scores
0.8954
0.3493
Mean parental education
0.7023
0.1071
City
0.045
-0.1869
Rural
-0.0331
0.1102
Total enrollment
0.194
0.0682
Factor 1: Suburban, high achieving, high parental education, affluent, white students (σ=0.95)
Factor 2: Rural, medium achieving, affluent, white students (σ=0.93)
Factor 3: Urban, low achieving, low income, non-white students (σ=0.51)
Question
1
Teachers have reasonable student loads.
0.1417
Teachers are protected from duties that interfere with teaching.
0.3488
Teachers have time to collaborate with colleagues
0.1729
Time is provided for professional development.
0.2776
Leadership tries to address concerns about time
0.7442
Teachers have quiet space to work individually
0.1314
Teachers have sufficient office supplies.
0.2736
Classrooms/labs have current technology.
0.1901
Teachers have reliable communication technology
0.1782
School environment is clean and safe.
0.4246
Leadership tries to address concerns about facilities
0.7551
Principal is a strong, supportive leader.
0.8701
Leaders shield teachers from disruptions.
0.7358
Administrators give priority to supporting teachers
0.8625
Teachers are held to high standards.
0.6411
New teachers have effective mentors.
0.58
Leaders try to address concerns about leadership
0.8828
Teachers are centrally involved in decision-making
0.7446
Teachers are recognized as educational experts
0.7277
Parents have many avenues to express concerns.
0.6153
There is an atmosphere of mutual respect at school
0.8205
Resources are available for professional development
0.3436
Leadership tries to provide quality professional development
0.6664
Factor 1: Strong leadership, good school culture, high standards (σ=0.97)
Factor 2: Well resourced (σ=0.84)
Factor 3: Teachers have time (σ=0.80)
Factor 4: Emphasis placed on professional development (σ=0.81)

2
0.1877
0.2315
0.1968
0.216
0.2
0.566
0.5754
0.6579
0.7121
0.5251
0.3876
0.1612
0.2583
0.1861
0.2602
0.2504
0.1963
0.2004
0.1983
0.211
0.2229
0.3042
0.2258

41

3
0.0545
0.0413
0.1161
-0.0439
0.5006
0.3209
-0.0416
0.3782

4
0.0012
0.0033
0.0809
0.0326
0.0417
0.162
-0.005
-0.0712

Uniqueness
0.6858
0.692
0.9623
0.6951
0.7334
0.8636
0.7173
0.8481

Factor
3
-0.3828
0.4077
0.0909
-0.0099
0.0101
0.3153
0.6289
-0.5789
0.0967

4
0.091
-0.1415
-0.4711
0.2295
0.2327
0.459
0.0288
-0.1118
0.4311

5
0.031
0.0519
-0.1633
-0.1021
0.0147
0.177
0.0157
0.008
-0.0129

Uniqueness
0.065
0.1083
0.1169
0.0382
0.0218
0.1538
0.5665
0.639
0.7623

Factor
3
0.5683
0.6701
0.5757
0.3985
0.4263
0.2647
0.2058
0.1088
0.154
0.1522
0.2202
0.1464
0.334
0.2034
0.1144
0.1252
0.2033
0.2649
0.2658
0.0706
0.1818
0.226
0.1394

4
0.0783
0.1308
-0.3025
-0.6199
0.1789
0.0778
0.129
-0.2193
0.0954
-0.0895
0.1697
-0.119
-0.0795
-0.1245
-0.2135
-0.2617
0.1829
0.2089
0.1623
0.1903
0.1369
0.5956
0.4731

5
0.031
0.0462
0.0383
0.0056
0.0217
0.0011
0.1198
0.041
0.014
0.0508
0.0018
0.1012
0.0556
0.0397
0.1496
0.026
0.0313
0.2898
0.3226
0.0343
0.0913
0.0541
0.0282

Uniqueness
0.6081
0.3511
0.4851
0.3299
0.1641
0.5456
0.5169
0.4565
0.4222
0.3937
0.1415
0.1577
0.2371
0.1519
0.3669
0.466
0.0915
0.1955
0.2216
0.4655
0.202
0.378
0.2469

Appendix Table A2: Relationship between teacher ethnicity and match quality

Lagged Achievement
White teacher
Black teacher
White teacher X Percent White teachers at school
Black teacher X Percent Black teachers at school
Black X Suburban, High Achieving, Affluent, White School
Black X Rural, Medium Achieving, low income, White School
Black X Urban, Low Achieving, low income, Black School
White X Suburban, High Achieving, Affluent, White School
White X Rural, Medium Achieving, low income, White School
White X Urban, Low Achieving, low income, Black School

Grade and year FX
School FX
Teacher FX
Observations
Pr(Ethnicity interactions are all=0)
Robust standard errors in brackets
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1

42

1

2

3

4

Math

Reading

Math

Reading

0.805**
[0.00124]
0.0575
[0.0719]
-0.101**
[0.0251]
-0.0677
[0.0900]
0.237*
[0.0964]
-0.00873
[0.0177]
0.0252
[0.0275]
-0.000445
[0.0243]
-0.00464
[0.0170]
0.0199
[0.0266]
-0.00669
[0.0232]

0.781**
[0.00142]
0.0201
[0.0487]
-0.0404*
[0.0164]
-0.0198
[0.0604]
0.126*
[0.0641]
-0.0112
[0.0112]
0.0265
[0.0170]
0.0207
[0.0145]
-0.00602
[0.0108]
0.0268
[0.0164]
0.0141
[0.0138]

0.798**
[0.00124]

0.773**
[0.00143]

-0.0147
[0.0234]
-0.00135
[0.0609]
0.0251
[0.0377]
0.0333
[0.0390]
0.00657
[0.0459]
0.0141
[0.0363]

0.0238
[0.0204]
-0.00402
[0.0540]
0.00193
[0.0195]
0.0429
[0.0300]
0.0403
[0.0278]
-0.00278
[0.0191]

0.0619+
[0.0361]
0.00993
[0.0441]

0.0488+
[0.0274]
0.0376
[0.0264]

y
y
n

y
y
n

y
y
y

y
y
y

1,322,810
<0.000

1,314,602
<0.000

1,322,810

1,314,602

0.469

0.438

