                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EFFECT OF HOUSING ON PORTFOLIO CHOICE

                                              Raj Chetty
                                             Adam Szeidl

                                        Working Paper 15998
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15998


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




Thanks to Thomas Davidoff, Edward Glaeser, Albert Saiz, Stephen Shore, anonymous referees, and
numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. Gregory Bruich, Calin Demian, Andras Komaromi,
Jessica Laird, Keli Liu, James Mahon, Jeno Pal, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, and Philippe Wingender
provided outstanding research assistance. We are grateful for funding from National Science Foundation
Grants SES 0522073 and 0752835. Szeidl thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

Â© 2010 by Raj Chetty and Adam Szeidl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including Â© notice,
is given to the source.
The Effect of Housing on Portfolio Choice
Raj Chetty and Adam Szeidl
NBER Working Paper No. 15998
May 2010, Revised October 2014
JEL No. E6,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

Economic theory predicts that home ownership should have a negative effect on risk-taking in financial
portfolios. However, empirical work has not found a strong relationship between housing and portfolios.
We identify two reasons for the divergence between the theory and data. First, it is critical to distinguish
between home equity wealth and mortgage debt, as they have opposite-signed effects on portfolio
choice. Second, it is important to isolate variation in home equity and mortgage debt that is orthogonal
to unobserved determinants of portfolios. We estimate a model that permits home equity and mortgage
debt to have different effects on portfolio shares. We isolate plausibly exogenous variation in home
equity and mortgages by using differences across housing markets in average house prices and housing
supply elasticities as instruments. Using data for 60,000 households, we find that increases in property
value (holding home equity constant) reduce stockholding significantly, while increases in home equity
wealth (holding property value constant) raise stockholding. Our estimates imply that the stock share
of liquid wealth would rise by 1 percentage point â€“ 6% of the mean stock share â€“ if a household were
to spend 10% less on its house, holding fixed wealth. We conclude that housing has substantial impacts
on portfolio choice, as theory predicts.


Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chetty@fas.harvard.edu

Adam Szeidl
Department of Economics
Central European University
Nador u. 11
Budapest, Hungary
and NBER
szeidla@ceu.hu
1    Introduction

Houses are the largest assets owned by most households, but the impact of housing on nancial
markets remains unclear.    Theory predicts that housing generally reduces the demand for
risky assets because it increases a householdÂ’s exposure to risk and illiquidity (Grossman and
Laroque 1990, Brueckner 1997, Flavin and Yamashita 2002, Chetty and Szeidl 2007). But
empirical studies have not found a systematic relationship between housing and portfolios in
practice (Fratantoni 1998, Heaton and Lucas 2000, Yamashita 2003, Cocco 2005).
    This paper reconciles the theory with the data. We identify two key factors, one theoret-
ical and one empirical, that explain the discrepancy. Theoretically, we show that it is critical
to separate the eÂ¤ects of property value from the eÂ¤ects of home equity to characterize the
eÂ¤ects of housing on portfolios. Empirically, we show that the endogeneity of housing choice
biases prior estimates. Accounting for these two factors, we nd that increases in mortgage
debt induce substantial reductions in the share of liquid wealth held in stocks, while increases
in home equity wealth raise stock ownership.
    We structure our empirical analysis using a tractable model of portfolio choice that incor-
porates both the illiquidity and price risk eÂ¤ects of housing. We rst characterize portfolio
choice analytically in a stylized two-period model in which individuals move houses with
an exogenous probability in the second period. We then show using numerical simulations
that the key qualitative predictions of this model hold in richer environments that allows
for endogenous moves, multiple periods, labor income risk, and stock market participation
costs. The model predicts that property value and home equity have opposite-signed eÂ¤ects
on portfolio choice. Increases in property value (holding home equity wealth xed) generally
reduce the stock share of liquid wealth by increasing illiquidity, increasing exposure to risk,
and reducing the present value of lifetime wealth.      In contrast, increases in home equity
(holding property value xed) raise the stock share of liquid wealth with CRRA preferences
through a wealth eÂ¤ect, as emphasized by Yao and Zhang (2005). Since property value is the
sum of mortgage debt and home equity, conditional on the level of home equity changes in
mortgage debt are equivalent to changes in property value, and should reduce stockholding.
However, a regression of portfolio shares on mortgage debt or on property value that does
not fully control for wealth Â– as in prior empirical studies Â– may yield ambiguous estimates
because the variation in property values could be driven by variation in home equity wealth.

                                               1
      Using the insights from the model, we turn to investigate the eÂ¤ects of property value
and home equity wealth on portfolios empirically. Because both portfolios and housing are
endogenous choices that are aÂ¤ected by unobserved factors such as background risk (Campbell
and Cocco 2003, Cocco 2005), one cannot identify the causal eÂ¤ect of housing on portfolios
using cross-sectional variation across households. We use three research designs to address
this central endogeneity problem. Each strategy isolates variation in mortgage debt and home
equity that is orthogonal to unobserved determinants of portfolio choice under a diÂ¤erent set
of assumptions.
      Our rst research design instruments for property values and home equity using current
and year-of-purchase home prices in the individualÂ’s state, calculated using repeat-sales in-
dices.    The current house price index is naturally a strong predictor of property values.
However, the current house price also creates variation in a householdÂ’s wealth: increases in
house prices increase home equity wealth. To isolate the causal eÂ¤ect of a more expensive
house while holding wealth xed, we exploit the second instrument Â– the average house price
at the time of purchase. Individuals who purchase houses at a point when prices are high
tend to have less home equity and a larger mortgage. We control for aggregate shocks and
cross-sectional diÂ¤erences across housing markets by including state and year xed eÂ¤ects,
thereby exploiting only diÂ¤erential within-state variation for identi cation.
      We implement this cross-sectional IV strategy using microdata on housing and portfolios
for 64,191 households from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) panels
spanning 1990 to 2004. We use two-stage-least-squares speci cations to estimate the eÂ¤ect
of property value and home equity on the share of liquid wealth that a household holds in
stocks. We nd that housing has a large eÂ¤ect on the share of stockholdings. A $10,000
increase in property value (holding xed home equity wealth) causes the stock share of liquid
wealth to fall by 0.9 percentage points ($310), or 5.5% of mean stockholdings in the sample.
This estimate is stable and statistically signi cant with p < 0:05 across a broad range of
speci cations. In contrast, a $10,000 increase in home equity (holding xed total property
value) increases the stock share of liquid wealth by 5.9% through a wealth eÂ¤ect.1                 The
elasticity of the stock share of liquid wealth with respect to outstanding mortgage debt is

  1
    To facilitate comparison between samples with diÂ¤erent rates of stock market participation and hence
diÂ¤erent mean stock shares of liquid wealth, we report results in both percentages and percentage points
throughout the paper.


                                                   2
-0.3, while the elasticity with respect to home equity wealth is 0.4. These portfolio changes
are driven by both the extensive and intensive margins: changes in mortgage debt and home
equity wealth induces changes in both the probability of owning any stocks and the amount
of stocks held conditional on stock ownership.
   One potential concern with our rst research design is that state-level house price Â‡uc-
tuations may be correlated with other factors such as local labor market conditions that
directly impact portfolio choice. Our second research design addresses this concern. Here,
we instrument for property values and home equity using the current and year-of-purchase
national average of house prices interacted with the state housing supply elasticity, as mea-
sured by Saiz (2010) based on land availability and regulations. Intuitively, Â‡uctuations in
the national housing market generate larger price Â‡uctuations in states with inelastic housing
supply, generating diÂ¤erential variation in house prices across states over time. This strategy
yields estimates that are very similar to the rst design. We estimate that a $10,000 increase
in property value causes a reduction in the stock share of liquid wealth of approximately
5.1%, while a $10,000 increase in home equity (holding xed total property value) raises the
stock share by 4.7%.
   Our third research design uses panel data to study the short-run dynamics of portfolios
from the year before to the year after home purchase. We test whether individuals who buy
a larger house reduce their stock share of liquid wealth more than those who buy smaller
houses. We again instrument for the change in property value using the state-level house price
index at the time of home purchase.     This panel strategy complements the cross-sectional
approaches in two ways.     First, it provides evidence that households actively change the
composition of their nancial portfolios depending upon the amount they invest in a house.
Second, it further mitigates concerns about the endogeneity of housing choices by permitting
household xed eÂ¤ects. Because the SIPP is a short panel, we observe portfolio shares both
before and after home purchase for only 6,510 households. For this subset of households, we
 nd that a $10,000 increase in the price of the house leads to a 4.1% reduction in the stock
share of liquid wealth in the year after home purchase, again very similar to the estimates
from the rst two designs. This nding shows that stockholders primarily sell stocks (rather
than bonds) to nance down payments.
   The magnitudes of the impact of housing on nancial portfolios can be assessed by consid-


                                              3
ering various counterfactuals. First, suppose households have the same level of home equity
wealth but spend 10% less on their house, so property value is 10% lower. The estimates
from our the rst research design imply that the stock share of portfolios would be approxi-
mately 1 percentage point higher in this scenario. Given the mean level of liquid wealth in
our sample of $40,000 (in 1990 dollars), this translates into a $400 increase in stockholdings
per household on average. While this may appear to be a small change in absolute terms,
it constitutes a 6% increase in the stock share of liquid wealth relative to the sample mean
because many households do not hold any stocks.                 Among households that participate in
the stock market, the predicted increase in the stock share from spending 10% less on hous-
ing is 4.6 percentage points. As an alternative counterfactual, suppose households have no
mortgage debt and no home equity wealth.                The net impact of having no housing wealth
or liabilities would be an increase in the mean stock share of 5.2 percentage points (32%),
or $2,100. Among stockholders, the share of liquid wealth held in stocks would increase by
19.9 percentage points.2        Finally, as another metric, a one standard deviation increase in
mortgage debt reduces the stock share of liquid wealth by 4 percentage points (25%). This
is similar to the impact of a one standard deviation decrease in log nancial wealth on stock
shares (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2007).
       Our estimates of the eÂ¤ect of housing on portfolios are larger and more robust than pre-
vious estimates. Fratantoni (1998) nds an elasticity of stock share with respect to mortgage
debt of -0.15.     In contrast, Heaton and Lucas (2000), Cocco (2005), and Yao and Zhang
(2005) show that in cross-sectional OLS regressions in which property value is included as
a covariate, the stock share is positively associated with mortgage debt.                  In related work,
Yamashita (2003)        nds an elasticity of stock share with respect to property value of ap-
proximately -0.1 (in a speci cation that does not include mortgage debt). Yamashita uses
age, family size, home tenure, and aggregate housing returns as instruments for mortgage
debt; unfortunately, these instruments are unlikely to be valid because standard models (e.g.
Cocco 2005) generate direct relationships between all of these variables and portfolio choice,
independent of the housing channel. Consistent with these prior studies, we also nd that
OLS estimates in our data are often wrong-signed and are sensitive to covariates. Our IV

   2
   If the wealth taken out of housing were invested in other assets (e.g., nancial assets) so that total wealth
remained xed, the stock share of liquid wealth would likely rise even further.



                                                      4
estimates are less sensitive to speci cation because they are driven by variation that is or-
thogonal to most household-level determinants of portfolios and because we systematically
separate the eÂ¤ects of mortgage debt and home equity.        The robustness of these results is
underscored by a recent study by Fougere and Poulhes (2014), who replicate our analysis
using data on French households and con rm that when one isolates exogenous variation in
these variables, mortgage debt and home equity have signi cant, opposite-signed eÂ¤ects on
portfolio shares.
    The link between housing and nancial decisions that we document here has implications
for several issues. For example, our results suggest that recent increases in leverage due to the
easing of credit in the U.S. (Mian and Su 2011) may have induced households to withdraw
funds from the stock market. This reduction in demand for risky assets could have further
precipitated the sharp decline in asset prices. Our results also suggest that homeownership
ampli es the welfare cost of shocks. Policies such as unemployment and health insurance or
restrictions on the riskiness of nancial portfolios could therefore generate signi cant welfare
gains for individuals who own houses or other risky, illiquid assets.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents a portfolio
choice model, analyzes its comparative statics with respect to housing, and quanti es the
impacts one should expect using numerical simulations. Section 3 describes the data. Section
4 presents the empirical results. Section 5 concludes.


2    Theoretical Predictions

In this section, we characterize the forces through which exogenous changes in property value
and home equity aÂ¤ect household portfolios. We begin by deriving an approximate analytical
expression for optimal portfolio shares in a stylized two-period model. This stylized model
provides a simple, tractable framework that uni es the intuitions of several papers that have
highlighted diÂ¤erent mechanisms through which housing aÂ¤ects portfolio choice, including
illiquidity (Grossman and Laroque 1990, Chetty and Szeidl 2007), home price risk (Flavin and
Yamashita 2002), hedging eÂ¤ects (Sinai and Souleles 2005), and diversi cation eÂ¤ects (Yao
and Zhang 2005). We then generalize the model to allow for xed moving costs, stock market
participation costs, labor income risk, and dynamics. Using numerical simulations, we show
that the key comparative statics of the two-period model hold with plausible parametrizations

                                               5
in these extensions.


2.1   Stylized Two-Period Model

Our stylized model builds on CoccoÂ’s (2005) model of housing and portfolio choice, which
incorporates all of the mechanisms described above but does not permit an analytical solu-
tion. To obtain an analytic expression for portfolio shares, we make a number of simplifying
assumptions, most importantly that households can only move at exogenous random dates.
The more realistic model in which households can move by paying a xed cost is analytically
intractable, and we therefore analyze it using numerical methods below.
   A household endowed with a house H0 , mortgage debt M0 , and liquid wealth L0 makes
a nancial portfolio investment decision in t = 0. Consumption takes place in t = 1, and the
household maximizes                        h                   i1
                                               C11   
                                                         H1
                                      E0                                                                    (1)
                                                     1

where C1 is adjustable (e.g., food) consumption and H1 is housing consumption.                           As in
Campbell and Cocco (2003), we assume that moves in t = 1 are exogenous. With probability
 the household stays in the current house (H1 = H0 ), while with probability 1                      it moves,
and chooses H1 optimally.    One interpretation of this assumption is that the xed cost of
moving is suÂ¢ciently high that except for life-changing events, such as marriage or childbirth,
the household does not consider changing houses when making nancial investments. In this
model,  measures the strength of housing commitment.
   At t = 0 the household can invest in a riskfree nancial asset with return 1+Rf = exp (rf )
and a risky asset with return 1 + R = exp (r), where r is normally distributed with mean
r and variance  2r . The only choice variable at t = 0 is                      , the share of the risky asset
out of liquid wealth.   Let Rp =    R + (1               ) Rf denote the householdÂ’s nancial return,
and assume that short sales constraints restrict                    2 [0; 1].     Home prices are P0 = 1 and
P1 = exp (p1 ), where p1 is normal with mean p and variance  2p . The correlation between
home price growth and stock returns is  = corr[p1 ; r].
   The household chooses      to maximize (1) subject to the budget constraint


                   C1 + P1 H1 = (1 + Rp ) L0 + Y1 + P1 H0                       (1 + Rm ) M0



                                                     6
where Rm is the mortgage rate and Y1 is labor income, which for now we assume is de-
terministic.          Let the (risk-adjusted) present values of mortgage debt, labor income, liq-
uid wealth, home value, and lifetime wealth be denoted by M = M0 (1 + Rm ) = (1 + Rf ),
Y = Y1 = (1 + Rf ), L = L0 , P H = P0 H0 , and W = L + Y + P H                                        M.
   Optimal portfolio shares.                     We derive an approximate equation for the optimal stock
share     using log-linearization. Household optimization yields the following log-linear Euler
equation:
                                          2r                                                      
                        r      rf +          =   cov r; vnm
                                                             0
                                                                  + (1                              0
                                                                                      )  cov r; vm   ,                           (2)
                                         2
       0
where vnm      0 are the log marginal utilities of wealth in t = 1 in the Â“no moveÂ” and
          and vm
Â“moveÂ” states of the world and the weight

                                                                      1
                                    =                                                               :                             (3)
                                                  1       (1       ) (1       )  +
                                            1+      (P H=W )(1          )                      +
                                                                              (1 P H=W ) 


The intuition for (2) is that the agent optimizes by trading oÂ¤ the expected gain from investing
in the risky asset with the additional Â‡uctuation in marginal utilities he bears as a result of
the investment. The additional risk is measured by the covariance of the market return with
marginal utilities, weighted by  . The weight  can be interpreted as a marginal-utility-
adjusted probability of not moving, analogous to a state-price density. When the housing
share of lifetime wealth P H=W equals the optimal share , equation (3) implies that  = .
But when P H=W > ,  > : since the household starts with too much housing and too
little adjustable consumption, the marginal utility of wealth isÂ—on averageÂ—relatively higher
in the no-move state. As a result, the consumer is more sensitive to Â‡uctuations in this state,
explaining the larger weight  .
   An approximation for the optimal portfolio share can be derived from the Euler equation
using standard methods (see e.g., Campbell and Viceira 2002):

Proposition 1 Letting                c   = +             , the optimal share of stocks out of liquid wealth at
t = 0 is, to a log-linear approximation,

                                                                                                                        PH
                  r         rf +  2r =2                                                             (     1)         W
   =       h                                          i + cov [p1 ; r]  (1         )      h                                      i:
                        L                         L                                                         L                   L
         2r    c
                      W PH     + (1        )    W                                        2r      c
                                                                                                          W PH   + (1     )   W
                                                                                                                                    (4)


                                                                  7
   Proof : See Appendix.

   To understand this expression, rst consider the case in which house prices do not covary
with stock prices (cov[p1 ; r] = 0). In this case, the second term drops out and (4) has an
interpretation analogous to a familiar Â“myopicÂ” rule: the numerator measures the expected
excess return of stocks, while the denominator equals stock market risk  2r multiplied by
eÂ¤ective risk aversion over liquid wealth.        Because housing is a         xed commitment, risk
aversion is the weighted average    c L= (W     P H)+(1          ) (L=W ). When the consumer
is free to move ( =  = 0), this term simpli es to L=W , yielding the classic Merton (1969)
formula adjusted for the fact that stocks are measured as a share of liquid rather than total
wealth. When the consumer can never adjust housing ( =  = 1), eÂ¤ective risk aversion is
 c L= (W    P H). This eÂ¤ective risk aversion is diÂ¤erent for two reasons. First, because the
agent cannot move, shocks are concentrated on adjustable consumption W                 P H and hence
have an ampli ed eÂ¤ect on marginal utility (Chetty and Szeidl 2007). Second, because H1
does not adjust, curvature is determined by (1        ) (1        ) in (1), generating the   c   term.
   Finally, when cov[p1 ; r] 6= 0, home price risk generates a hedging demand for stocks,
reÂ‡ected in the second term in (4). This term is also aÂ¤ected by the strength of the housing
commitment  through  . When  =  = 1, the home is never sold, and hence home price
risk does not aÂ¤ect behavior (Sinai and Souleles 2005).
   Comparative Statics. We are interested in characterizing how the optimal portfolio share
varies with property value P H and total wealth W . With CRRA utility, the household seeks
to maintain a constant share of its total wealth in risky assets as W rises.            Therefore, an
exogenous increase in home equity wealth Â– which is relatively safe Â– induces the household
to buy more stocks. This Â“diversi cation eÂ¤ectÂ” (Yao and Zhang 2005) is captured by the
terms involving W in the denominator in (4).          In our model, an increase in wealth also
reduces  , the weight of the no-move state in the Euler equation.             Because the no-move
state is typically riskier, this additional eÂ¤ect generally acts to further raise      .


   Exogenous increases in property value P H reduce              through three channels. First, for a
given W , increasing P H implies that a larger share of wealth is Â“tied upÂ” in housing, making
marginal utility higher and more sensitive to shocks in the no-move state. This eÂ¤ect arises
from an increase in eÂ¤ective risk aversion      c L= (W   P H) in the denominator of (4) and by
a higher weight  on the no-move state. Second, when cov[p1 ; r] > 0, a higher P H results in

                                                  8
greater exposure to home price risk, which has a negative eÂ¤ect on hedging demand. Third,
holding   xed home equity, a higher property value means higher mortgage debt.                   If the
mortgage rate exceeds the risk free rate (Rm > Rf ), increased mortgage payments reduce
lifetime wealth W , resulting in lower stockholdings in (4).
    These comparative statics show that it is critical to distinguish changes in property value
from changes in home equity wealth to uncover the eÂ¤ects of housing on portfolio choice.
Increases in property value that come from more mortgage debt reduce stockholding, while
increases in property value that are accompanied by additional home equity wealth have
ambiguous eÂ¤ects.


2.2    Numerical Results in the Static Model

We now assess the quantitative importance of the comparative statics and evaluate their
robustness to incorporating additional features into the stylized model. In this subsection, we
extend the model to incorporate (1) xed adjustment costs, which permit households to move
at any time by paying a cost, (2) stock market participation costs, and (3) labor income risk.
Because these features make the model analytically intractable, we use numerical methods
to characterize the relationship between housing and portfolios.3
    We begin by calibrating the parameters of the model based on the existing literature.
For parameters related to life-cycle portfolio choice, we follow Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout
(2005) and set the annual riskfree return at Rf = 0:02, the annual equity premium at ER
Rf = 0:04, the standard deviation of the log stock return at  = 0:157, and the coeÂ¢cient of
relative risk aversion at   = 10. For housing related parameters, we set the relative preference
for housing at  = 0:2 (Yao and Zhang 2005), the annual mean growth and standard deviation
of home prices at p = 0:016 and  p = 0:062, and the annual mortgage rate at Rm = 0:04
(Cocco 2005). Both Cocco and Yao and Zhang assume a zero correlation between housing
and the stock market. To get a sense of the eÂ¤ect of this correlationÂ—which aÂ¤ects the
riskiness of housingÂ—on portfolios, we report results with both  = 0 and  = 0:1.
    We set the time horizon of our static model to balance two forces.             First, because the
average age in the sample we study below is 48 years, households have approximately 30

   3
     Details on the solution methods are given in the appendix. We thank Joao Cocco for sharing his code
for solving the model in Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005).



                                                   9
years as their investment horizon.            Second, because the household is likely to repay its
mortgage and move with high probability over the course of multiple decades, the relevant
horizon for studying housing commitments is signi cantly shorter. Because our static model
cannot simultaneously handle both of these horizons, and given that our main interest is the
eÂ¤ects of housing commitments, we set the length of time between t = 0 and t = 1 to be
10 years. Importantly, we use this horizon simply as a benchmark; solving the model with
longer horizons yield qualitatively similar results.            In addition, in the next subsection we
study a dynamic model with a twenty year horizon that more fully incorporates both the
short-term and the long-term factors that aÂ¤ect portfolio choice.
       Cocco (2005) estimates a moving probability of 24.4% over a ve year horizon, which
implies that the probability a household does not move over a ten year horizon is 57%.
We therefore set a baseline  = 0:55, but evaluate the sensitivity of our results to other
values as well. We assume that the household has liquid wealth L0 = $40; 000, home value
P0 H0 = $125; 000 and mortgage M0 = $53; 000, the sample means in our data (see Table 3a
below). Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005, Figure 3b) report that the ratio of the risk-
adjusted present value of future labor income to current nancial wealth is approximately
5 for households in their late forties and early             fties.   We therefore set labor income at
Y1 = 5L0 .
       Numerical solution of stylized model. We rst report the numerical solution of the stylized
two-period model as a reference to verify that the approximate solution in (4) accurately
captures the comparative statics of the model.4 Table 1 reports optimal portfolio shares as
a function of property value and home equity for a range of model parameters.                         Panel A
con rms that increases in property value P0 H0 (holding xed home equity wealth) reduce
the optimal share of stocks.         For example, when the probability that the household does
not move is  = 0:55 and the correlation between housing and returns is  = 0, increasing
property value from $125; 000 to $135; 000 results in a reduction in stock share from 66:5%
to 60:1%, or by about 9:6%.5 Panel B considers the eÂ¤ect of changes in home equity wealth

   4
     The quality of the approximation is high for short horizons but deteriorates slightly over longer horizons.
For example, the average absolute diÂ¤erence between the numerical and the approximate solution across all
the parameter values considered in Table 1 for a one-year horizon is only 0.05 percentage points. With a ve
year horizon, the mean error grows to 0.34 percentage points and for ten years it is 2.18 percentage points.
Despite these deviations, the approximate solution shows the same patterns as the numerical results.
   5
     Our calibrated model produces stock shares that are substantially higher than the mean stock share



                                                      10
(holding xed property value). For the same parameters, an increase in home equity from
$72; 000 to $82; 000, while holding home value xed at $125; 000, increases the stock share
from 66:5% to 72:6%, or by about 9:2%. We observe qualitatively similar eÂ¤ects for other
parameter values.
    Having established the comparative statics of interest in our stylized model, we now
consider a series of generalizations.
    Fixed adjustment costs. We begin by relaxing the assumption that households can only
move at random, exogenous dates. A more realistic assumption is that households can move
at any time by paying a xed cost.            Let  denote the size of this xed cost as a share of
property value. Smith, Rosen, and Fallis (1988) estimate the monetary component of moving
costs to be approximately  = 0:1. We consider values of  = 0:1 and  = 0:2, the latter of
which captures other utility costs of moves (e.g., the need to change a childÂ’s school). Panel
A of Table 2a reports results analogous to those in Table 1 from this model. The direction of
comparative statics are generally the same, although the property value eÂ¤ects are smaller in
magnitude, as should be expected given that housing is a weaker commitment in this model.
    One interesting feature of the xed cost model is that the comparative statics of interest
change sign for some parameter values. For instance, when  = 0:2 and  = 0, increasing
home value from $105; 000 to $115; 000 increases the stock share from 84:2% to 85:2%. Ad-
ditional increases in home value beyond this level reduce the stock share as in the exogenous
moves model. Such non-monotonicities in risk preferences in the presence of xed costs were
 rst observed by Grossman and Laroque (1990) and more extensively documented by Yao
and Zhang (2005). The intuition is that households who are relatively close to the boundary
of their inaction region have a gambling motive: by holding more stocks, they can increase the
probability of buying their Â“idealÂ” house. For households who are on the margin of moving,
this mechanism can sometimes overpower the three forces that act toward reducing                     .   Ta-
ble 2a shows that for most parameter values, the other three forces dominate. However, the
fact that the model can sometimes produce a positive relationship implies that the average
eÂ¤ect of property value on the stock share is ultimately an empirical question.

of liquid wealth in our data (16%). The model matches the data better if we focus on the subsample of
stockholders, among whom the average stock share is 55%. As Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005) and Davis,
Kubler and Willen (2006) emphasize, calibrated models of portfolio choice frequently overpredict stockholdings
because relatively safe future labor income creates an incentive to leverage nancial investment. As we discuss
below, xed costs of stock market participation can help address this issue.


                                                     11
       Participation costs. Next, we consider the eÂ¤ect of incorporating stock-market participa-
tion costs. We extend our baseline model by assuming that the household must pay a xed
cost F at t = 0 if it wishes to hold any stocks. Vissing-Jorgensen (2003) estimates that, when
allowing for cross-sectional variation in xed costs, a cost distribution with median cost of
$350 per year (in 1982-84 prices) can explain the pattern of non-participation in 1994. Con-
verting this median estimate to 1990 prices (the units we use to measure wealth and home
value in our empirical analysis) and computing the present value of paying this amount every
year for ten years to reÂ‡ect the investment horizon, we obtain an estimate of F = $4; 207.
Panel C of Table 2a reports optimal portfolios in the presence of this cost with  = 0:55
and  = 0. Our model predicts an active extensive margin: for example, as property value
increases from $135; 000 to $145; 000, the household changes the stock share from 64:8% to
zero. Intuitively, a higher property value leads the household to reduce the stock share, but
the xed cost of participation outweighs the bene t of investing a small amount in stocks,
inducing the household to exit the stock market entirely. These extensive margin responses
amplify the eÂ¤ects of housing on portfolio shares, but the qualitative predictions of the model
remain similar.6
       Income risk. Next, we consider the eÂ¤ects of labor income risk by allowing labor income
Y1 to be stochastic.       Because the household must repay the exogenously                   xed mortgage
(i.e., there is no default), labor income must be bounded from below for the model to be
well-de ned. We thus assume that Y1 = Y1s + Y1r where both terms are non-negative. Y1s is
a safe (deterministic) component of labor income, while Y1r is a lognormal random variable.
In keeping with the earlier parametrization, we assume EY1 = Y1s + EY1r = 5L0 .                            We
set (somewhat arbitrarily) the safe share of expected labor income to be 60%: Y1s = 3L0
and EY1r = 2L0 . We assume that Y1r and P1 are jointly lognormal, and set V ar [log (Y1r )]
and Cov [log (Y1r ) ; log (P1 )] to match the standard deviation of log (Y1 ) and the correlation
between log (Y1 ) and log (P1 ). We calibrate log (Y1 ) to the annual standard deviation of 0.13
for labor income growth as used by Yao and Zhang (2005).                     For the correlation between
log (Y1 ) and log (P1 ), we consider both zero (as a benchmark) and 0.55 (as in Cocco, 2005).

   6
    Vissing-Jorgensen (2003) also reports a lower xed cost estimate of $150 per year (in 1982-84 prices), which
explains three quarters of non-participation in a framework that does not permit cross-sectional variation in
the xed cost. For the parameters considered in Table 2a, this lower xed cost does not generate extensive
margin responses, as the household always chooses to participate in the stock market.



                                                      12
As above, we assume  = 0:55 and  = 0.
   Panel C of Table 2a shows that introducing labor income risk reduces the stock share.
Intuitively, these shocks increase background risk and hence reduce the risk appetite of in-
vestors.   However, the predictions about the eÂ¤ect of property value and home equity are
again unchanged in sign and remain similar in magnitude. The correlation between labor
income and home prices has small eÂ¤ects on portfolio shares. This is likely because home
price risk () itself has small eÂ¤ects. Intuitively, house prices only matter in the event of a
move, and even then, much of the money invested in the previous house is used to purchase
the new house, providing a natural hedge against house price risk (Sinai and Souleles 2005).


2.3   Dynamic Extensions

The model we have analyzed thus far is eÂ¤ectively static: there is a single decision about
portfolio choice, and all uncertainty is resolved in a single period. We now consider three
extensions that make the model dynamic: (1) consumption in the initial period, (2) persistent
uncertainty, and (3) a bequest motive. To isolate the eÂ¤ect of these changes, we consider
each separately.
   Consumption in the initial period.                 To allow for consumption and savings decisions in
the initial period, suppose that at t = 0 the household can freely choose adjustable con-
sumption C0 . Housing consumption is restricted to be equal to the housing endowment H0 .
Preferences are now given by

                             h                   i1             h                   i1
                                 C01   
                                           H0                      C11   
                                                                              H1
                                                        + E0                            :
                                       1                                  1

We also assume that the household receives initial income Y0 in period zero. We set  = 0:55
and  = 0, use an annual discount factor of 0:96, and set Y0 such that the household with
property value $125; 000 and home equity $72; 000 saves exactly the same amount ($40,000)
as the exogenous starting level of liquid wealth we used in the static model above. This gives
Y0 = $190; 195, which is slightly lower than Y1 .
   The qualitative eÂ¤ects of property value and home equity in this setting are the same as
in the static case. However, the stock share is now more sensitive to changes in property
value and home equity. This is because of the additional margin of savings. For example,


                                                         13
when higher property value increases future risk, the household not only reduces the dollars
it invests in stocks (as in the baseline model), but also saves more, further lowering the share
of stocks in liquid wealth.
   Persistent uncertainty. To consider the eÂ¤ects of multi-period uncertainty, we now in-
troduce a third period into the baseline model. In t = 0, the household makes a portfolio
decision as in the baseline version of the model. In t = 1, it repays its outstanding mortgage,
earns labor income Y1 , moves houses with (exogenous) probability (1                     ), consumes, and
makes a new portfolio decision. In t = 2, the household earns labor income Y2 , moves with
independent probability (1         ), and consumes. We assume that each period lasts ten years.
We set Y1 = 4L0 , Y2 = 3L0 ,  = 0:55, and  = 0. The annual discount factor is 0:96.
   Panel B of Table 2b shows that in this environment with persistent uncertainty, the eÂ¤ects
of property value and home equity, though larger in magnitude, are once again qualitatively
similar to the baseline speci cation. Thus, the results of the one-period model with a ten
year horizon continue to serve as a useful benchmark.
   Bequests. Finally, we address the concern that the household cannot monetize the house
at the end of t = 1 in our baseline model by introducing a bequest motive. Following Cocco
(2005), we assume that the household bequeaths the house as well as any unconsumed savings
(S1 ) to its oÂ¤spring, who derive CRRA utility from the total market value of these assets.
Thus implicitly we assume that death is a move-inducing event. Similarly to Cocco (2005),
total utility from the perspective of t = 0 is given by

                                   h                   i1
                                       C11   
                                                 H1                [P1 H1 + S1 ]1
                              E0                            + E0                    :
                                             1                           1

Panel C of Table 2b reports the results from this speci cation. The qualitative results remain
similar, but now the stock share responds less to changes in property value and home equity.
One force that explains this pattern is that bequest utility is bounded from below due to the
presence of housing. Intuitively, because parents know that their children will have the house
even if they cannot bequeath any nancial assets, they are less sensitive to changes in risk.
   Together, the results in Tables 1 and 2 show that mortgage debt generally reduces stock-
holding while home equity wealth increases it. However, the magnitudes of these eÂ¤ects are
sensitive to model speci cation. The quantitative impacts of housing on portfolio choice are


                                                            14
therefore an empirical question, to which we now turn.


3        Data and Sample De nition

We estimate equation the eÂ¤ects of housing on portfolio choice using data from seven Survey
of Income and Program Participation panels that began in years 1990-2001.                       Each SIPP
panel tracks 20,000 to 30,000 households over a period of 2-3 years, collecting information
on income, assets, and demographics.             During the rst four panels, asset data were only
collected once; in the last three panels, asset data were collected once per year, permitting a
panel analysis of changes in portfolios. The main advantages of the SIPP relative to other
commonly used datasets on nancial characteristics such as the Survey of Consumer Finances
are its large sample size and detailed information about covariates such a complete housing
history and geographic location.
        We obtain quarterly data on average of housing prices by state from 1975-2004 using
the repeat sales index constructed by the OÂ¢ce of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight
(OFHEO). Calhoun (1996) provides a detailed description of the construction of the OFHEO
index, which has been widely used in studies of housing markets (see e.g., Himmelberg, Mayer,
and Sinai 2005).7 We obtain land topology-based measures of housing supply elasticity by
state from Saiz (2010).8 Saiz predicts housing supply elasticities using data on physical and
regulatory constraints (land availability and use regulations), providing a convenient index
of the supply constraints in each housing market.
        The seven SIPP panels together contain information on 163,405 unique households, of
which 97,798 are homeowners, whom we de ne as individuals with positive property value
and positive home equity.9 70,924 of these households bought their current house after 1975

    7
     We use OFHEO price indices rather than other popular measures such as Case-Shiller indices because
Case-Shiller data are available only starting in 2000 for selected metro areas. Unfortunately, geographic
information below the state level is not available for more than two-thirds of the observations in our sample.
Although the two indices diÂ¤er in the way they treat appraisals and the set of loans they consider, Leventis
(2007) reports a correlation of 0.98 between the OFHEO and Case-Shiller indices for markets where both
measures are available.
   8
     We aggregate the MSA-level statistics reported by Saiz (2010, Table 6) to the state level by taking
population-weighted means across MSAs within each state. For MSAs that cross state boundaries, we use the
population in the MSA within each state, calculated from Census statistics on county population.
   9
     4.36% of households with positive property value report zero or negative home equity. We exclude
these individuals in our baseline analysis because we use log home equity as an independent variable in some
speci cations and wish to retain a xed sample across all speci cations. Including these households has
negligible impact on the estimates in levels; for instance, for the speci cation in Column 4 of Table 5, we nd


                                                     15
and therefore have OFHEO data for the year of home purchase, which is required for our
instrumental variable analysis. We exclude an additional 6,733 households whose reported
liquid wealth by our de nition is zero, making their portfolio shares ill de ned.                      These
exclusions leave us with 64,191 homeowners in our cross-sectional analysis sample.
    Table 3a reports summary statistics for the cross-sectional analysis sample.10                    In the
cross-sectional sample, homeowners own houses that are worth approximately $125,000 on
average in 1990 dollars.       The average amount of home equity is $72,000 and the average
outstanding mortgage is $53,000. The average household head is 48 years old and has lived
in his current house for 8.4 years. Mean total wealth (which includes liquid wealth, home
equity, wealth in retirement accounts, and other illiquid assets such as cars) is $173,000.11 We
de ne liquid wealth as the sum of assets held in stocks, bonds, checking, and savings accounts,
excluding retirement accounts.12 Mean liquid wealth is $40,000, but this distribution is very
skewed; the median level of liquid wealth is only $5,600.13                Households hold on average
approximately 16% of their liquid wealth in the form of stocks in taxable (non-retirement)
accounts and 84% in Â“safeÂ” assets (bonds, checking, and savings accounts). The relatively
small fraction of wealth held in stocks reÂ‡ects the fact that only 29% of the households in the
data hold stocks outside their retirement accounts, consistent with Vissing-Jorgensen (2003).
    Panel data on portfolio shares are available for households in the 1996 and 2001 SIPP
panels. In these panels, data on portfolio shares were collected annually, giving us information
on assets and homeownership between 3 to 4 times per household. We form our panel analysis
sample using the 6,150 observations for which we observe a purchase of a new house within
the panel and have data on portfolio shares both before and after this home purchase.14

a coeÂ¢cient of -8.19% (s.e. 2.97%) on property value and 8.95% (s.e. 3.33%) on home equity if we include
these households.
   10
      See Appendix Table 1 for summary statistics for the full SIPP sample.
   11
      Total wealth is gross household wealth measured on the survey. It includes nancial assets as well as all
real estate (including second homes), cars, and private business equity. Debts are not subtracted from the
total wealth measure.
   12
      We exclude retirement accounts from our de nition of Â“liquid wealthÂ” because households typically incur
signi cant penalties to withdraw money from retirement accounts prior to retirement. Moreover, the SIPP
does not contain data on portfolio allocations within retirement accounts, so we cannot study changes in
portfolio choice behavior within these accounts.
   13
      Skewness and outliers do not aÂ¤ect the results reported below. Trimming outliers (e.g. by excluding the
top and bottom 1% of households by wealth or property value) has virtually no eÂ¤ect on our 2SLS estimates.
This is because the distribution of predicted housing values generated by the instruments is not skewed. There
are few outliers in the tted values from the rst stage.
   14
      When we include these households in the cross-sectional sample, we only use data from the rst year in
which assets are observed. Hence, each observation in the cross-sectional sample is for a unique household.


                                                     16
         Table 3b reports summary statistics for the sample we use in the panel analysis. Home-
owners in the panel sample generally have similar characteristics to those in the cross-sectional
sample, with three exceptions. First, they have less home equity and more mortgage debt, as
expected for new home buyers. Second, they are slightly less wealthy, consistent with being
younger on average. Finally, they hold more stocks in their portfolios. This is because the
panel sample spans 1996-2003, a period with higher stock ownership than the early 1990s.


4         Empirical Analysis

We estimate the impacts of property value and home equity using the following linear speci-
 cation for portfolio shares:


                stock sharei = const +     1 property     valuei +       2 home   equityi + Xi + "i          (5)


where Xi denotes a vector of controls, including components of total wealth such as liquid
wealth and income. The model in Section 2 predicts                   1   < 0 and    2   > 0.15 The error term "
captures other sources of heterogeneity in portfolios. These may include entrepreneurial risk
(Heaton and Lucas 2000), investment mistakes (Odean 1999, Calvet, Campbell and Sodini
2007), heterogeneity in risk aversion , or measurement error in income (Cocco 2005).
         Some of the eÂ¤ects captured by the error term may be correlated with property value,
creating bias in OLS estimates of          1   and   2.    For instance, Cocco (2005) emphasizes biases
due to unobserved labor income, which aÂ¤ects both the stock share and property value.
Suppose that Y1 = Y1obs +Y1un where only Y1obs is observed to the econometrician. Since higher
lifetime wealth generates higher stockholdings, " is positively related to Y un . If households
with higher future labor income own larger houses Â– as predicted by the model with persistent
uncertainty Â– property value is also positively related to Y un , and hence the OLS estimate of

 1   is biased upward. Indeed, Cocco (2005, Table 6) runs cross-sectional OLS regressions using
simulated data from his model and nds a positive eÂ¤ect of mortgage debt on stockholdings

    15
     An alternative speci cation is to normalize the housing variables by liquid wealth. We show that our results
are robust to such a speci cation, but opt to use levels in our baseline model for two reasons. First, when
liquid wealth is imperfectly measured and close to zero for some observations, normalizing by it introduces
large outliers in the independent variables of interest. Second, our simulations show that one should nd a
relationship between the stock share and levels of property value and home equity wealth.




                                                          17
caused by omitting future labor income from the regression.       Such endogeneity problems
make it essential to isolate variation in property value and home equity that is orthogonal to
" in order to identify   1   and   2.

   We divide our empirical analysis into four sections.     First, we con rm that estimating
(5) using OLS in our data yields results that are similar to those of prior studies. We then
identify the causal impacts of mortgage debt and home equity wealth on portfolios by using
three diÂ¤erent research designs to estimate (5): variation in mean house prices, variation in
local housing supply constraints, and changes in portfolio shares around home purchase in
panel data.


4.1   OLS Estimates

Previous studies have estimated OLS regressions of portfolio shares on property values, mort-
gage debt, and home equity with various control vectors and obtained mixed results.         To
ensure that the diÂ¤erences between our ndings and theirs are not driven by diÂ¤erences in
data or sample de nitions, we begin by estimating similar speci cations in our sample.
   Column 1 of Table 4 reports OLS estimates of a regression of the stock share of liquid
wealth on property value and home equity wealth without any covariates. Consistent with
the ndings of Heaton and Lucas (2000), Cocco (2005), and Yao and Zhang (2005), we nd
that an increase in property value (mortgage debt) is positively associated with the stock
share of liquid wealth, contrary to the modelÂ’s predictions.     This is presumably because
individuals with larger properties tend to be wealthier or face less background risk and these
omitted factors induce them to hold more stocks.
   In column 2, we attempt to account for some of these factors by including controls for
household income and private business wealth; household headÂ’s education, number of chil-
dren, and age; and a 10 piece linear spline in liquid wealth to control Â‡exibility for a house-
holdÂ’s level of wealth. The inclusion of these covariates reduces the coeÂ¢cient on property
value by approximately 80%, but it remains positive in sign.
   In column 3, we exclude households with zero mortgage debt, who constitute 23% of
homeowners in the sample, as in Fratantoni (1998).        This change in sample speci cation
makes the coeÂ¢cient on property value negative and statistically signi cant, consistent with
FratantoniÂ’s ndings. Importantly, Fratantoni is not able to control for location as the SCF


                                              18
does not contain geographic information. Once indicators for state of residence are included,
the negative correlation between property values and stock shares is no longer signi cant, as
shown in Column 4 of Table 4.
   These OLS results echo the instability of estimates found in prior studies.       Moreover,
they indicate that the endogeneity of housing choices is likely to bias the eÂ¤ect of property
value on stock shares upward. These ndings call for research designs that isolate variation
in mortgage debt and home equity that is less correlated with unobserved determinants of
portfolios.


4.2    Research Design 1: Mean House Prices

Identi cation Strategy. Our rst research design exploits two instruments to generate varia-
tion in home equity and property value: the average price of houses in the individualÂ’s state in
the current year (the year in which portfolios are measured) and the average price of houses
in the individualÂ’s state in the year that he bought his house. The intuition for this identi-
 cation strategy is illustrated in Figure 1, which plots average real home prices in California
from 1975-2005 using the OFHEO data. Consider a hypothetical experiment involving a set
of individuals who buy identical houses and only pay the interest on their mortgage (so that
debt outstanding does not change over time). As a baseline, consider individual A who buys
a house in 1985 (dashed red line) and whose portfolio we observe in 2000 (solid blue line), as
shown in Panel A.
   Now compare this individual to individual B who buys the same house in 1990 and whose
portfolio we also observe in 2000.    Individuals A and B have the same current property
value, but individual B is likely to have less home equity and a larger mortgage, because
home prices were higher in 1990 than 1985.         Intuitively, since individual B is buying the
same house at a higher price, he needs a bigger mortgage; and because he enjoys less home
price appreciation than A, he will end up with lower home equity in 2000. Now consider a
second experiment, comparing panel C to A. Individual C buys the same house in 1985, but
we observe his portfolio in 2005. This individual has the same mortgage debt as individual
A (under the assumption that individuals only pay interest to service their debt), but has
higher home equity and wealth at the time we observe his portfolio.          Together, the two
experiments (instruments) allow us to separately identify the causal eÂ¤ects of mortgages and


                                              19
home equity on portfolios.
       The key identi cation requirement for this research design Â– which is equivalent to the
exclusion restriction for the two instruments Â– is that changes in average state house prices
are orthogonal to unobserved determinants of portfolio decisions "i in (5).                  There are two
potential threats to the validity of this exclusion restriction. First, Â‡uctuations in state hous-
ing markets may be correlated with other factors that directly aÂ¤ect portfolio choice. Prior
research has found that Â‡uctuations in house prices are driven by several factors, including
supply constraints, construction costs, momentum eÂ¤ects, and macroeconomic conditions (see
e.g., Case and Shiller 1989, Glaeser et al. 2005, Glaeser et al. 2008, Gyourko et al. 2013).
Some of these factors, such as supply constraints, are less likely to violate the exclusion
restriction by directly aÂ¤ecting portfolio choice than other factors, such as macroeconomic
conditions. Second, the exclusion restriction could be violated via selection eÂ¤ects. People
who buy houses when prices in their state are relatively high may have diÂ¤erent risk prefer-
ences from those who buy when prices are lower. This could generate a spurious correlation
between stock shares and house price indices. We address these concerns below after pre-
senting a set of baseline results by (1) controlling for observable confounding factors such as
macroeconomic conditions, (2) isolating sources of variation in house prices that are more
likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction, and (3) accounting for selection eÂ¤ects using panel
data to track a given household over time.
       Empirical Implementation. In practice, our implementation of this strategy diÂ¤ers from
the hypothetical examples above in two ways. First, we do not just compare individuals who
buy at diÂ¤erent times, as such comparisons may be contaminated by time series Â‡uctuations
in asset prices or correlations between portfolios and home tenure or age. Because we have
data on individuals who purchase houses in diÂ¤erent years and observe portfolios in diÂ¤erent
years in 50 states, we include state, current year, year of house purchase, and age xed eÂ¤ects
in every regression speci cation below. Thus, we identify           1   and   2   in (5) purely from within-
state changes in house prices.16 Second, unlike in the hypothetical example, individuals buy
smaller houses when prices are high and reduce their mortgage debt over time by paying
more than mortgage interest. The rst stage eÂ¤ects of the house price indices on mortgage

  16
     Since the instruments only vary by state and year/year of purchase, one cannot include stateyear eÂ¤ects
(i.e. allow state eÂ¤ects to vary over time).



                                                     20
and home equity account for these eÂ¤ects.
     The rst three columns of Table 5 report rst stage regressions of mortgage, home equity,
and property value (mortgage plus home equity) on the two instruments. These speci cations
include state, year of purchase, current year, and age xed eÂ¤ects as covariates.17                     These
 rst-stage eÂ¤ects remain very similar when we include the following vector of Â“full controls,Â”
which we use to evaluate robustness of each of our speci cations below: household income,
household headÂ’s education, number of children, the state unemployment rate in the current
year, private business wealth, and a ten piece linear spline for liquid wealth.
     Column 1 of Table 5 shows that higher current house prices strongly predict higher prop-
erty values, with a t-statistic of 40. Conditioning on current prices, higher house prices at
the time of purchase predict slightly lower current property values, con rming that individ-
uals purchase smaller houses if they buy at times when prices are relatively high. Column 2
shows that higher current prices strongly predict higher home equity, showing that much of
the increase in property value comes from higher home equity, as expected. Higher prices at
the time of purchase strongly predict lower home equity, with a t-statistic of 18. Conversely,
column 3 shows that higher prices at the time of purchase predict much larger mortgages.
Higher current prices also predict (to a smaller extent) larger mortgages, an eÂ¤ect that may
be driven by re nancing Â– when current prices are high, individuals tap into their home
equity.18
     2SLS Results. Columns 4-9 of Table 5 report two-stage least squares estimates of                   1   and

 2   in (5), where home equity and property value are instrumented using the two OFHEO
price indices. In column 4, we estimate the model including current year, year of purchase,
age, and state xed eÂ¤ects. The null hypothesis that changes in property value have no eÂ¤ect
on nancial portfolios is rejected with p < 0:01. The point estimate of the property value
coeÂ¢cient implies that a $10,000 increase in an individualÂ’s mortgage debt reduces his stock
share of liquid wealth by 0.89 percentage points ($350).               Given a mean stock share in the
analysis sample of 16.1%, this is equivalent to a 5.5% reduction in the stock share of liquid

  17
     By including both year of purchase and current year xed eÂ¤ects, we control non-parametrically for home
tenure.
  18
     Re nancing does not aÂ¤ect our 2SLS estimates because it rescales both the rst-stage and reduced-
form coeÂ¢cients by the same amount. Re nancing could aÂ¤ect liquid wealth; we account for this channel by
conditioning on liquid wealth using a Â‡exible spline in many of our speci cations. Note that in a heterogeneous
population, our IV strategy will estimate a local average treatment eÂ¤ect that applies to individuals who do
not fully re nance their mortgages when property values go up.


                                                      21
wealth. This impact lies within the range of estimates implied by the numerical results in
Tables 1 and 2. The point estimate is closest to the prediction of the xed adjustment cost
speci cation, which is perhaps the most plausible model. The elasticity of the stock share
of liquid wealth with respect to mortgage debt is approximately -0.3 at the sample mean
mortgage debt of $53,000.
       The estimate of the home equity coeÂ¢cient in column 4 implies that a $10,000 increase
in home equity raises the stock share by 0.95 percentage points (5.9%) when total property
value is held xed, which we interpret as a wealth eÂ¤ect.              The mean home equity in the
sample is approximately $72,000, implying an elasticity of stock share of liquid wealth with
respect to home equity wealth of approximately 0.4.
       Column 5 of Table 5 replicates column 4 with the xed eÂ¤ects and the full set of covariates:
liquid wealth spline, private business wealth, education, income, number of children, and
the state unemployment rate.         The estimate of the property value coeÂ¢cient is virtually
unaÂ¤ected by controls, unlike the OLS estimates in Table 4. Since controlling for observables
has little impact on the estimate, one can be more con dent that biases due to omitted
unobservables are not driving these IV results.
       Counterfactuals.   To interpret the magnitude of these eÂ¤ects, it is helpful to consider
some counterfactuals.       First, suppose that households had the same level of home equity
wealth and nancial wealth, but spent 10% less on their houses. Given that mean property
value is $125,154 in this sample (Table 3a), the estimates from column 5 imply that the stock
share of portfolios would be 0:125154  7:78 = 0:97 percentage points higher on average in
this scenario. This is a 6% increase relative to the mean stock share of 16.1%.19
       Second, suppose households had no mortgage debt and no home equity wealth. Based
on the mean level of property value and home equity wealth ($72,301), the net impact of
having no housing wealth or liabilities on the stock share of liquid wealth would be 7:78 
1:25154      6:22  0:72301 = 5:23 percentage points, a 32% increase. If the wealth taken out
of housing were invested in other assets (e.g., nancial assets) so total wealth remained xed,
the stock share of liquid wealth would likely rise even further because the portfolio share of
stocks tends to rise with liquid wealth (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2007).

  19
    These counterfactuals apply to the average household in the population, pooling those who hold stocks
and those who do not. We present counterfactuals for the subset of stockholders below.



                                                   22
     Because property value is the sum of mortgage debt and home equity, our estimates
of   1   and   2   imply that an increase in home equity holding xed mortgage debt does not
have a signi cant eÂ¤ect on portfolio allocations. This is because the wealth eÂ¤ect of having
more home equity is cancelled out by the eÂ¤ect of owning a more expensive house.             It is
therefore crucial to disentangle the two components of property value in order to uncover the
eÂ¤ects of housing on portfolios. It follows that the demand for risky assets will not covary
with current house price Â‡uctuations (because they aÂ¤ect both wealth and property values
simultaneously), but will covary negatively with outstanding mortgage debt.
     Robustness Checks.      In columns 6-8 of Table 5, we evaluate the robustness of our esti-
mates to alternative speci cations and sample de nitions. In column 6, we estimate a model
analogous to column 4 using logs instead of levels for the independent variables. We instru-
ment for log(property value) and log(home equity) with the logs of the two OFHEO price
indices. We retain the stock share in levels on the left hand side because of the large number
of individuals with 0 stock shares in our sample. Consistent with the previous results, the
estimates reveal that increases in property value signi cantly reduce the share of stocks in
liquid wealth, and increases in home equity wealth increase stock shares.
     Column 7 reports estimates from a speci cation analogous to column 5 except the endoge-
nous regressors are also de ned as shares of liquid wealth, like the dependent variable. We
replace property value by the ratio of property value to liquid wealth and home equity by the
ratio of home equity to liquid wealth. We then use the level of the two OFHEO price indices
as in column 4 as instruments for these ratios. This speci cation eÂ¤ectively tests whether
households with a large amount of mortgage debt to liquid wealth hold safer portfolios using
a diÂ¤erent functional form to account for variation in wealth. One problem with this speci -
cation is that we introduce substantial outliers, as there are many observations with near-zero
liquid wealth.      To reduce noise from these outliers, we exclude observations with ratios of
property value or home equity to liquid wealth above 20. The estimates are consistent with
those obtained previously, but less precisely estimated because of the instability of the ratios.
     In column 8, we replicate the levels speci cation with the controls in column 5, but restrict
the sample to individuals with more than $100,000 of total wealth.         The objective of this
speci cation is to assess whether the eÂ¤ects we have identi ed are also present among high-
wealth households, whose behavior may be most relevant for nancial market aggregates.


                                                23
The point estimate of the property value and home equity coeÂ¢cients are slightly larger in
magnitude than those in the full sample.           Housing remains an important determinant of
portfolio choice even for wealthier households.
       Extensive and Intensive Margin Response. In columns 9 and 10, we decompose the eÂ¤ects
of housing on stock shares into stock market participation decisions (whether to own any
stocks) and intensive margin changes in portfolio allocations (how much money to invest in
stocks conditional on owning stocks). Column 9 replicates column 5, replacing the dependent
variable with an indicator for owning stocks. A $10,000 increase in an individualÂ’s mortgage
is estimated to reduce his probability of owning stocks by 1.4 percentage points, relative to a
mean of 29%. Conversely, increases in home equity wealth increase the probability of stock
market participation by a similar magnitude.
       Column 10 isolates the intensive margin response Â– the change in stock shares conditional
on participating in the stock market.        This column reports estimates of a two-stage Tobit
speci cation. This model is analogous to the two-stage-least-squares estimates, but corrects
for the fact that some individuals are non-participants using a Tobit speci cation where the
stock share is left censored at 0.20 The estimates imply that a $10,000 increase in mortgage
debt reduces stock shares for stock market participants by 3.1 percentage points relative to
a base of 55%. Home equity changes again have similar eÂ¤ects in the opposite direction.
       We can use the estimates in Column 10 to consider the same counterfactuals as we did
above for the subset of stockholders. Among stockholders, mean property value is $151,492
and home equity is $90,921.        Hence, if households in this sample were to spend 10% less
on housing, they would increase the stock share of their portfolio by 0:151492  30:66 = 4:6
percentage points. This is a 8:5% increase relative to the mean stock share of 54:7% among
stockholders. The net impact of having no housing wealth or liabilities on the stock share of
liquid wealth would be 30:66  1:51492        29:18  0:90921 = 19:91 percentage points, a 36:4%
increase. The percentage changes in stockholding under these counterfactuals are similar to
those in the full sample, but naturally the magnitudes of the changes in portfolio shares are
larger among the subset of households that hold stocks.
       Threats to Identi cation. We now return to the two threats to identi cation discussed

  20
    Estimating a 2SLS model only on the subsample of stock market participants yields biased estimates
because changes in home equity and mortgages aÂ¤ect stock market participation rates, generating selection
eÂ¤ects.


                                                   24
in the previous subsection. In order to evaluate these concerns, it is useful to understand
the reduced-form relationships underlying the two-stage-least-squares estimates above. Two
reduced-form relationships drive the 2SLS results in Tables 3.     First, individuals who buy
houses when housing prices are relatively high in their state hold less stocks in subsequent
years. Second, homeownersÂ’ stock shares do not vary substantially with contemporaneous
housing prices.    The rst nding tells us that households with higher mortgage debt and
lower home equity have lower stock shares. To determine which channel is responsible for the
reduction in stockholding, we use the second nding, which shows that Â‡uctuations in home
equity have no eÂ¤ect on stock shares. This leads us to conclude that increases in mortgage
debt reduce stockholding, as shown in Tables 3.
   The rst threat to a causal interpretation of the two reduced-form relationships is that
Â‡uctuations in current home prices are correlated with portfolios through omitted variables.
For instance, house prices may be related to local economic conditions that directly aÂ¤ect
portfolio choice. We believe that such eÂ¤ects are unlikely to be responsible for our ndings
for two reasons. First, controlling for observable measures of the local business cycle by using
state unemployment rates and current household income has little eÂ¤ect on the estimates.
Second, any remaining omitted variables (e.g. expectations of future labor income) are likely
to bias the estimated eÂ¤ect of current house prices on stock shares upward. If individuals are
unobservably wealthier when house prices are high in their area, their stock shares should rise
because higher income individuals tend to hold more stocks. This would work against our
second reduced-form result that Â‡uctuations in property value have no eÂ¤ect on portfolios.
   The second threat to identi cation is that Â‡uctuations in house prices at the time of
purchase are correlated with portfolios because of selection eÂ¤ects.      Individuals who buy
houses when house prices are relatively high may have diÂ¤erent risk preferences. We believe
that such selection bias is modest in our setting for the same two reasons. Controlling for
observables has little impact on the estimates, indicating that selection on observables is
minimal.      And again, we expect such selection biases to work against our ndings: those
who are willing to buy a house when prices are relatively high are presumably less risk
averse (Shore and Sinai 2010). This would work against our rst reduced form nding that
individuals who buy when prices are high (and thus have more mortgage debt) have safer
portfolios.


                                              25
      While these arguments suggest that the results in Table 5 are unlikely to be driven by
omitted variable and selection biases, they are not conclusive.             We therefore turn to two
alternative identi cation strategies that directly address these problems by isolating portions
of the variation in house prices that are more credibly orthogonal to portfolio choice and by
using panel data to account for selection eÂ¤ects.


4.3      Research Design 2: Variation in Housing Supply Elasticities

Identi cation Strategy. Our second research design exploits national house prices interacted
with local housing supply elasticities to generate variation in home equity and property
value.21      To understand the intuition for this strategy, consider two states, one with an
inelastic housing supply (e.g. California) and another with highly elastic housing supply (e.g.
Kansas). When there is an aggregate demand shock for housing at the national level, there
is very little adjustment in the supply of housing in California, so prices covary strongly with
the national prices. However, in Kansas, most of the adjustment takes place on the supply
margin and local house prices are much more stable.                 More generally, aggregate demand
shocks for housing (which we measure using national house prices) have larger impacts on
house prices in states with low housing supply elasticities, generating diÂ¤erential variation in
house prices across states (Mian and Su 2011). The advantage of this source of variation
is that it avoids the potential for omitted variable bias due to local economic shocks because
the variation is driven purely by national demand shocks.
      To implement this strategy, we instrument for mortgage debt and home equity with
current and year-of-purchase national house prices interacted with the state housing supply
elasticity. The housing supply elasticity is taken from Saiz (2010), who constructs predicted
elasticities using measures of local physical and regulatory constraints. Including year xed
eÂ¤ects and state xed eÂ¤ects in the regressions absorbs the level eÂ¤ects of the national prices
and the state housing supply elasticity.             Therefore, our instruments are simply the two
interaction eÂ¤ects.
      Columns 1-3 of Table 6 report rst stage regressions of property value, home equity, and
mortgage debt on these two instruments. The speci cations in columns 1-3 include state,
year of purchase, current year, and age xed eÂ¤ects as covariates. As above, the rst-stage

 21
      We thank the associate editor for suggesting this approach.


                                                      26
estimates are unaÂ¤ected by the inclusion of additional controls. Column 1 shows that higher
national prices in the current year have signi cantly smaller eÂ¤ects on property values in
states with highly elastic housing supply. Column 2 shows that higher national prices also
have smaller eÂ¤ects on home equity in more elastic housing markets, as expected. Higher
national prices at the time of purchase reduce home equity by a smaller amount in areas
with elastic housing supply. Conversely, column 3 shows that higher prices at the time of
purchase have smaller impacts on mortgage debt in elastic markets. All of these rst-stage
eÂ¤ects are highly signi cant, although the t statistics are somewhat smaller than in the rst
research design because this strategy exploits a narrower source of variation.
     2SLS Results. Columns 4-6 of Table 6 report two-stage least squares estimates of    1   and

 2   in (5), where home equity and property value are instrumented using the two national price
indices interacted with state housing supply elasticity. In column 4, we estimate the model
including current year, year of purchase, age, and state xed eÂ¤ects.       The point estimate
of the property value coeÂ¢cient implies that a $10,000 increase in an individualÂ’s mortgage
reduces his stock share of liquid wealth by 1.2 percentage points. A $10,000 increase in home
equity increases his stock share by 1.4 percentage points. Both estimates are statistically
signi cant with p < 0:01.      Column 5 of Table 6 replicates column 3 with the full set of
covariates in addition to the xed eÂ¤ects. Including the full set of controls does not have a
statistically signi cant impact on the coeÂ¢cient estimates. The magnitudes of the coeÂ¢cients
are quite similar to the corresponding coeÂ¢cients in column 5 of Table 5, although slightly
less precisely estimated because the rst-stage has less power. Column 6 replicates column 5,
replacing the dependent variable with an indicator for owning stocks to estimate the extensive
margin response. A $10,000 increase in an individualÂ’s mortgage is estimated to reduce his
probability of participating in the stock market by 1.6 percentage points. Increases in home
equity wealth increase the probability of stock market participation by a slightly smaller
magnitude. These estimates are again fairly similar to those in Table 5, giving us greater
con dence that our estimates are not signi cantly biased by omitted variables.


4.4     Research Design 3: Portfolio Changes Around Home Purchase

Identi cation Strategy. Our third identi cation strategy directly addresses concerns about
selection by examining changes in portfolio shares within a household. Do individuals who


                                               27
buy more expensive houses reduce their stockholdings by a larger amount from the year
before to the year after home purchase? We answer this question using the small subsample
of households for whom we (1) observe a home purchase within our data and (2) observe
portfolio shares both before and after home purchase. Note that this sample includes both
individuals who transition from renting to owning and individuals who bought a new house
within our sample frame. As discussed in Section 3, this panel sample includes much fewer
households than the cross-sectional analysis sample because the SIPP tracks households for
only 3 years and relatively few households buy a house within that window.
     De ne x = xt+1        xt   1   for an individual who buys a new house in year t. We estimate
(5) in rst diÂ¤erences:


           stock sharei =       +     1 property   valuei +   2 total   wealthi + Xi + "i      (6)


This estimation strategy complements the preceding research designs by addressing selection
directly. If our results are driven by selection eÂ¤ects, individuals who buy houses when prices
are high would hold more conservative portfolios even before they buy their houses and we
would not nd       1   < 0 in (6).
     To account for the endogeneity of the size of the house one purchases, we instrument for
property value using the state house price index in the year of home purchase. Columns
1-3 of Table 7 document the rst-stage eÂ¤ects of the state house price index on changes in
property value, home equity, and mortgage debt in a regression that includes state and age
 xed eÂ¤ects as well a control for the change in total wealth.                 To reduce the inÂ‡uence of
outliers, we exclude 62 households who report changes in total wealth of more than 1 million
dollars in these speci cations; we show below that this exclusion has no eÂ¤ect on our estimate
of   1   but does aÂ¤ect the estimated wealth eÂ¤ects. The estimates show that individuals who
buy houses in higher priced markets spend more on their houses. Most of the increase comes
from taking on more mortgage debt rather than making a bigger downpayment to build home
equity.
     Because we only observe portfolio shares over two to three years, there is little diÂ¤erence
between house prices at the time of purchase and the point at which we observe portfolio
shares. Therefore, we cannot separately instrument for the eÂ¤ects of changes in wealth (via
home equity) on portfolios as in the preceding cross-sectional speci cations.               Instead, we

                                                      28
control for the change in total wealth in (6) directly. To the extent that this approach fails
to adjust adequately for the impacts of changes in wealth, our estimate of           1   in the panel
design will be biased toward zero because it captures not only the impacts of having more
mortgage debt but also the impacts of having more wealth.
   In practice, we nd that controlling for the change in wealth has little impact on our
estimate of   1   because local house prices are not strongly correlated with changes in total
wealth from the year before to the year after purchase. Intuitively, an individual who buys
a house in more expensive market ends up with less liquid wealth but similar total wealth
after the house purchase. As a result, the IV estimate of         1   in (6) is eÂ¤ectively identi ed
from changes in property value that are orthogonal to changes in total wealth. Therefore,
we expect the estimates of     1   from this design to be fairly comparable to the cross-sectional
estimates of the impacts of mortgage debt on stockholding.
   2SLS Results.      Columns 4-6 report 2SLS estimates of the eÂ¤ect of changes in property
value on the stock share of liquid wealth.        In column 4, we include state, age, and year
 xed eÂ¤ects and the change in total wealth as controls.          A $10,000 increase in property
value is estimated to reduce the stock share by 0.9 percentage points in this speci cation.
This estimate is statistically signi cant with p < 0:01.        A $10,000 increase in wealth is
estimated to increase stock shares by 0.6 percentage points. Reassuringly, this estimate is
quite similar to the estimated impacts of home equity wealth on the stock share from our
 rst two identi cation strategies.
   Column 5 shows that controlling for education, number of children, state unemployment
rate, and the change in household income does not aÂ¤ect the results signi cantly. Column
6 shows that the estimated impact of changes in property value on the stock share of liquid
wealth remains unchanged when the outliers with wealth changes of more than 1 million
dollars are included. Not surprisingly, however, these outliers substantially attenuate the es-
timated eÂ¤ect of wealth on portfolio shares. Finally, column 7 replicates column 5, replacing
the dependent variable with an indicator for owning stocks. A $10,000 increase in an indi-
vidualÂ’s mortgage is estimated to reduce his probability of owning stocks by 0.7 percentage
points relative to a baseline stock ownership rate of 38% in this sample.
   The panel analysis con rms that the diÂ¤erence in portfolios between individuals who
buy when house prices are high and low emerges immediately after home purchase, directly


                                                 29
addressing concerns about selection bias.        The similarity of the estimates from the three
research designs indicates that mortgage debt has a robust negative eÂ¤ect on risk taking in
 nancial portfolios over both short and long horizons.


5         Conclusion

This paper has characterized the causal eÂ¤ect of housing on portfolio choice. We nd that an
increase in property value (i.e., mortgage debt), holding wealth xed, reduces a householdÂ’s
propensity to participate in the stock market and reduces the share of stocks in the portfolio
conditional on participation. The estimated elasticity of the share of liquid wealth allocated
to stocks with respect to mortgage debt is -0.3. Increases in home equity wealth while holding
property value xed increase stockholding.          The estimated elasticity of the stock share of
liquid wealth with respect to home equity is 0.4.
         Our empirical results suggest that the interaction between housing and nancial markets
could have important consequences for the macroeconomy.              In the recent past, there have
been three rapid changes in housing markets: a substantial increase in mortgage debt, a
rapid decline in property values, and a substantial increase in the illiquidity of housing as
many individuals postpone selling their homes. Our empirical evidence suggests that each
of these factors induces households to withdraw funds from the stock market. Hence, recent
changes in the housing market could potentially have reduced the demand for risky assets
and exacerbated the decline in nancial markets. In future work, it would be interesting to
explore whether such interactions are consistent with historical Â‡uctuations in housing and
asset prices using calibrated general equilibrium models.
         Our analysis is consistent with the hypothesis that the illiquidity of housing ampli es
household risk aversion.        An interesting avenue for future research would be to explore
whether Â‡uctuations in the liquidity of housing markets over time induce changes in nancial
portfolios.       It is also important to analyze whether the commitment of having to make
mortgage payments Â– a Â“cash commitmentÂ” that arises from liquidity constraints Â– or the
commitment of being unable to adjust housing consumption easily is what ampli es risk
aversion.22        Depending upon which mechanism is more important, reducing transaction

    22
    Such an analysis would require variation in mortgage payments that is orthogonal to property value,
perhaps arising from diÂ¤erences in the term structure of loans.


                                                  30
costs in the housing and mortgage markets could raise welfare both directly and by allowing
households to bear more risk in their nancial portfolios.




                                            31
Appendix

   Proof of Proposition 1. Let W1 = L0 (1 + Rp ) + P1 H0                            M1 + Y1 . If the household can
move, the optimal consumption bundle satis es C1 = (1                         ) W1 and P1 H1 = W1 , implying
that utility in this state is

                                       h                          i1
                                            (1        )1                  
                                                                                  W1
                                                                                        1
                          Vm (W1 ) =                                                        :                       (7)
                                                   1                              P1

If the household cannot move, the consumption bundle is C1 = W1                                      P1 H0 and H1 = H0 ,
and hence utility is

                                            (1     )
                                    H
                         Vnm (W1 ) = 1                   (W1          P1 H0 )(1    )(1     )
                                                                                                 :                   (8)
                                     1

We then de ne V (W ) = Vm (W ) if the household moves and Vnm (W ) otherwise. The rst
order condition of the problem implies

                                                                 
                                 E (R             Rf )  V 0 (W1 ) = 0:


We can write this as

                                    0
                                                                            
                    E (1 + R)  Vnm    (W1 ) + (1 )  E (1 + R)  Vm0 (W1 )
                                      0
                                                                               
                =   E (1 + Rf )  Vnm   (W1 ) + (1 )  E (1 + Rf )  Vm0 (W1 )


where both sides are positive. To log-linearize each side separately, rst introduce the notation
                  0
      00 and V 0 are the marginal utilities in the two states assuming that the agent has a
that Vnm      m

fully safe nancial portfolio, and P1 = P0 (1 + Rf ) without risk. Now take logs of the left
hand side and use a rst order approximation as follows:

                                   0
                                                                            
                log   E (1 + R)  Vnm (W1 ) + (1 )  E (1 + R)  Vm0 (W1 )
                                                                    00
                                                                   
               k +  log E (1 + R)  Vnm
                                         0
                                           (W1 )     log (1 + Rf ) Vnm

                                                        log (1 + Rf ) Vm00
                                                                       
                + (1  ) log E (1 + R)  Vm0 (W1 )




                                                        32
where
                                                                    00
                                                                 Vnm
                                                 =         00 + (1
                                                                               :
                                                           Vnm        ) Vm00

The log-linearization is around the point when the agent holds no stocks and is exposed
to no home price risk. An analogous formula holds for the right hand side, with the same
constants. Using the approximation log E exp (z)  Ez +  2z =2 which is exact when z is a
normal random variable, we then obtain

                                       2r                                                         
                      Er       rf +                       0
                                              cov r; vnm   + (1                                 0
                                                                                      )  cov r; vm
                                      2

as in the text. To compute  , denote by W10 wealth in t = 1 assuming a safe portfolio and
that the home price equals P10 = 1 + Rf . Substituting into (7) and (8) yields

   00
                                                                                               (1     )                                   +
                                                                                                                            P10 H0
                                                                                                                                   
 Vnm                 1        (1         )                               +           H0
                                               W10       P10 H0
                                                                   
             =               H0                                                 =                          (1   ) 1
 W10                      0                                                              W10                                 W10
     
                     W1
  Vm00           h                        i1
                                                            (1     )
                      (1      )1   
                                                 P10
                                                       
             =
 W10
     


     which imply, after some calculations, equation (4) in the text.
                    0 (W ) is proportional to (L (1 + R ) + Y                                                   + 
     Now note that Vnm  1                       0      p     1                                     M1 )                . Let L0 (1 + Rp )+
Y1     M1 = L1 , which we can log-linearize as


                         l1  k 0 +  1 (l + rp ) +  2 (y + rf ) + (1               1         2 ) (m + rf )


where k 0 is a constant, lowercase letters denote the logs of L, Y and M de ned in the text,
and
                                                 L                                 Y
                                   1 =                           and  2 =                        :
                                               L+Y          M                    L+Y           M
                                                     (      1)
     Vm0 (W1 ) is proportional to W1 P1                           . We can log linearize W1 = L0 (1 + Rp ) + P1 H0 +
Y1     M1 as


     w1  k 0 + (1       )  1 (l + rp ) + (1           )  2 (y + rf ) + (1           ) (1     1        2 ) (m + rf ) + p1


where k 00 is a diÂ¤erent constant and  = P H= (L + P H + Y                                      M ) is the housing share in
wealth W .


                                                                   33
                                        0 (W ) and V 0 (W ) and then in the Euler equation
   Substituting these expressions into Vnm  1       m    1

yields

                 2r
                                         )  1   2 + (                                    c
                                                                                                  1 2
                                                                                     
  Er     rf +         (1     )  (1                       (1   1= ) ) cov [r; p1 ] + 
                2

and hence
                            Er   rf +  2 =2 + (1  ) ( (   1)    ) cov [r; p1 ]
                                     c    2               2
                                           1 + (1  )    1 (1 )

which gives (4) as desired.

   Numerical solution. We use the same numerical techniques as Cocco (2005) to solve
the model.      The idea is use backward induction and compute continuation values over
grids. We approximate the state and choice variables using equal-spaced grids, and the
probability density functions of shocks with three-point Gaussian quadratures. In the static
speci cations, both with random moves and xed costs, and with and without labor income
risk, we compute realized utility over each gridpoint in the state space and then expected
utility using numerical integration for each choice of . To compute utilities for points which
do not lie on the grid, we use cubic spline interpolation. In the dynamic model, we perform
the same exercise in the last period for each consumption and portfolio decision, and use the
resulting optimal continuation values to solve for the optimal portfolio in the initial period.
Using a seven-point Gaussian quadrature instead does not aÂ¤ect the results.




                                                   34
References

   Brueckner, J.K. (1997). Â“Consumption and Investment Motives and the Portfolio
Choices of Homeowners,Â” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 15(2): 159Â–80.

   Calvet, L.E., Campbell, J.Y. and Sodini, P. (2007). Â“Down or Out: Assessing
the Welfare Costs of Household Investment Mistakes,Â” Journal of Political Economy, 115(5):
707Â–747.

   Campbell, J. Y. and Cocco, J. F. (2003). Â“Household Risk Management and Optimal
Mortgage Choice,Â” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:1449-1494.

   Campbell, J. Y. and Cocco, J. F. (2007). Â“How Do House Prices AÂ¤ect Consump-
tion? Evidence from Micro Data,Â” Journal of Monetary Economics 54:591-621.

   Campbell, J. Y. and Viceira, L. M. (2002) Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio
Choice for Long Horizon Investors, Oxford University Press.

   Case, K. E. and Shiller, R. J. (1989). Â“The EÂ¢ciency of the Market for Single Family
Homes,Â” American Economic Review, 79(1) : 125-137.

   Chetty, R. and Szeidl, A. (2007). Â“Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences,Â”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2): 831-877.

   Cocco, J. (2005). Â“Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Housing,Â” Review of Financial
Studies 18, 535Â–567.

   Cocco, J. F., Gomes F. J. and Maenhout P. J. (2005) Â“Consumption and Portfolio
Choice over the Life Cycle,Â” Review of Financial Studies 18, 491-533.

   DavidoÂ¤, Thomas (2010). Â“Home Equity Commitment and Long-Term Care Insurance
Demand,Â” Journal of Public Economics 94(1), 44-49.

   Davis, J. S., F. Kubler and P. Willen (2006) Â“Borrowing Costs and the Demand for
Equity over the Life Cycle,Â” Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 348-362.



                                            35
      Flavin, M. and Yamashita, T. (2002). Â“Owner-Occupied Housing and the Composi-
tion of the Household Portfolio,Â” American Economic Review, 92(1): 345Â–362.

      Fougere, D. and M. Poulhes. (2014) Â“The EÂ¤ect of Housing on Portfolio Choice: A
Reappraisal Using French Data.Â” CREST Working Paper.

      Fratantoni, M.C. (2001). Â“Homeownership, Committed Expenditure Risk, and the
Stockholding Puzzle,Â” Oxford Economic Papers, 53(2): 241Â–59.

      Fratantoni, M.C. (1998). Â“Homeownership and Investment in Risky Assets,Â” Journal
of Urban Economics, 44(1): 27Â–42.

      Glaeser, E. L., Gyourko, J. and Saiz. A. (2008). Â“Housing Supply and Housing
Bubbles, Â” Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2) : 198-217.

      Glaeser, E. L., Gyourko, J. and Saks, R. E. (2005). Â“Why Have Housing Prices
Gone Up ? Â” American Economic Review, 95(2) : 329-333.

      Grossman, S. J. and Laroque, G. (1990). Â“Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio
Choice in the Presence of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods,Â” Econometrica 58, 25Â–51.

      Gyourko, J., Mayer, C. and Sinai, T. (2013). Â“Superstar Cities,Â” American Eco-
nomic Journal : Economic Policy, 5(4) : 167-99.

      Heaton J. and Lucas, D.J. (2000). Â“Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Background
Risk," Economic Journal 110(460): 1-26.

      Himmelberg, C., Mayer, C., and Sinai, T. (2005). Â“Assessing High House Prices:
Bubbles, Fundamentals, and Misperceptions," Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(4): 67-
92.

      Merton, R. C. (1969). Â“Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Continu-
ous Time Case,Â” Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247-257.

      Mian, A. and Su , A. (2011). Â“House Prices, Home Equity Based Borrowing, and the
U.S. Household Leverage Crisis,Â” American Economic Review 101, 2132-2156.


                                            36
   Odean, T. (1999). Â“Do Investors Trade Too Much?Â” American Economic Review, 89(5):
1279Â–1298

   Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M. and Tuzel, S. (2007). Â“Housing, Consumption and
Asset Pricing,Â” Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3): 531Â–569.

   Saiz, A. (2010). Â“The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply,Â” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 125(3): 1253-1296.

   Shore, S. and Sinai, T. (2010). Â“Commitment, Risk, and Consumption: Do Birds of
a Feather Have Bigger Nests?Â” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), 408Â–424.

   Sinai, T. and Souleles, N.S. (2005). Â“Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against
Rent Risk,Â” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2): 763Â–789.

   Smith, L., Rosen, K., and Fallis, G. (1988). Â“Recent Developments in Economic
Models of Housing Markets,Â” Journal of Economic Literature, 26(1): 29-64.

   Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2003), Â“Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does Â“Irrational-
ityÂ” Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,Â” NBER Macroeco-
nomics Annual, 139-194.

   Yamashita, T. (2003). Â“Owner-Occupied Housing and Investment in Stocks: An Em-
pirical Test,Â” Journal of Urban Economics, 53(2): 220Â–237.

   Yao, R. and Zhang, H. (2005). Â“Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Choices with
Risky Housing and Borrowing Constraints,Â” Review of Financial Studies, 18(1), 197-239.

   Yogo, M. (2006). Â“A Consumption-based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns,Â”
Journal of Finance, 61(2): 539Â–58.




                                           37
                                              TABLE 1
                                 Numerical Results from Stylized Model

Panel A: Impacts of property value on stock share of liquid wealth
(When home equity = $72,000)
      Î¸             Ï                                    Property value
                              $105,000      $115,000        $125,000    $135,000                     $145,000

     0.55              0             79.0%           72.8%            66.5%            60.1%           53.8%
     0.55             0.1            78.0%           72.1%            65.9%            59.6%           53.5%

     0.35              0             82.5%           76.3%            69.5%            62.4%           55.3%
     0.35             0.1            80.8%           74.8%            68.3%            61.5%           54.8%

       0               0             95.7%           94.0%            92.2%            90.3%           88.2%
       0              0.1            91.0%           88.4%            85.8%            83.2%           80.4%

Panel B: Impacts of home equity wealth on stock share of liquid wealth
(When property value = $125,000)
      Î¸             Ï                                  Home equity
                             $52,000        $62,000        $72,000                    $82,000         $92,000

     0.55              0             54.3%           60.4%            66.5%            72.6%           78.7%
     0.55             0.1            53.9%           59.9%            65.9%            71.9%           77.8%

     0.35              0             56.3%           62.9%            69.5%            76.0%           82.4%
     0.35             0.1            55.6%           62.0%            68.3%            74.6%           80.8%

       0               0             82.5%           87.3%            92.2%            97.0%          100.0%
       0              0.1            75.9%           80.9%            85.8%            90.8%          95.7%

Notes: Each cell lists the optimal share of liquid wealth invested in stocks (Î±*) for a different combination of
parameters. Î¸ denotes the probability that the household does not move and measures the strength of
housing commitments. Ï denotes the correlation coefficient between the (log) stock return and (log) home
price growth, and measures the degree of home price risk.
                                           TABLE 2a
                            Static Extensions of the Stylized Model

Panel A: Fixed adjustment costs
     Î»            Ï                                    Property value
                          $105,000            $115,000   $125,000     $135,000             $145,000

     0.2            0           84.2%          85.2%          84.4%          82.7%          80.0%
     0.2           0.1          81.7%          81.6%          80.2%          77.1%          74.0%
     0.1            0           92.3%          90.6%          88.5%          86.3%          84.1%
     0.1           0.1          88.4%          85.8%          83.0%          80.1%          77.1%

                                                           Home equity
                               $52,000        $62,000        $72,000        $82,000        $92,000

     0.2            0           75.3%          80.2%          84.4%          88.7%          92.5%
     0.2           0.1          70.4%          75.3%          80.2%          84.3%          88.1%
     0.1            0           78.9%          83.7%          88.5%          93.3%          98.0%
     0.1           0.1          73.0%          78.0%          83.0%          88.0%          92.9%

Panel B: Participation cost in stock market
 fixed cost                                       Property value
                             $105,000    $115,000   $125,000     $135,000                  $145,000

   $4,207                       86.0%          79.1%          71.9%          64.8%         no stocks

                                                           Home equity
                               $52,000        $62,000        $72,000        $82,000        $92,000

   $4,207                     no stocks        65.1%          71.9%          78.8%          85.6%
Panel C: Labor income risk
 corr(y1,p1)                                           Property value
                              $105,000        $115,000   $125,000     $135,000             $145,000

      0                         51.7%          44.9%          38.3%          32.0%          25.8%
    0.55                        51.9%          45.2%          38.5%          32.1%          25.9%

                                                           Home equity
                               $52,000        $62,000        $72,000        $82,000        $92,000

      0                         25.9%          32.0%          38.3%          44.6%          51.1%
    0.55                        25.9%          32.2%          38.5%          44.9%          51.4%
Notes: Each cell lists the optimal share of liquid wealth invested in stocks (Î±*) for a different
combination of parameters in alternative models. In Panel A, Î» is the share of home value that must
be paid as a fixed cost when moving. In Panel B, the household must pay the 'fixed cost' to participate
for ten years in the stock market. In Panel C, corr(y1, p1) is the correlation between log of period 1
labor income and log of period 1 house prices.
                                      TABLE 2b
                        Dynamic Extensions of the Stylized Model

Panel A: Consumption in initial period
   Y0                                    Property value
                        $105,000 $115,000 $125,000 $135,000                          $145,000

 $190,195                    100.0%         83.2%          66.5%         54.4%         45.3%
                             $27,216       $33,465        $40,000       $46,635       $53,383

                                                   Home equity
                             $52,000       $62,000   $72,000   $82,000                $92,000

 $190,195                     45.5%         54.5%          66.5%         83.5%        100.0%
                             $53,759       $46,868        $40,000       $33,129       $26,486

Panel B: Persistent uncertainty
    Î¸            Ï                                 Property value
                         $105,000          $115,000 $125,000 $135,000                $145,000

    0.55           0          96.9%          87.5%         68.4%         51.3%         41.1%

                                                   Home equity
                             $52,000       $62,000   $72,000   $82,000                $92,000

    0.55           0          41.8%          51.8%         68.4%         87.2%         96.8%

Panel C: Bequests
    Î¸           Ï                                  Property value
                             $105,000      $115,000 $125,000 $135,000                $145,000

    0.55           0          100.0%         97.1%         91.1%         80.1%         67.0%
    0.55          0.1          93.0%         89.4%         84.3%         74.7%         63.9%

                                                   Home equity
                             $52,000       $62,000   $72,000   $82,000                $92,000

    0.55           0          72.2%          81.9%         91.1%         98.4%        100.0%
    0.55          0.1         67.3%          76.2%         84.3%         90.4%         96.6%

Notes: Each cell lists the optimal share of liquid wealth invested in stocks (Î±*) for a different
combination of parameters in alternative models. In Panel A, below the stock shares, we also
display the amount of liquid savings (invested in stocks and bonds). In Panel A, Y0 is the
period 0 income. In Panel B and C, Î¸ denotes the probability that the household does not
move and measures the strength of housing commitments; Ï denotes the correlation
coefficient between the (log) stock return and (log) home price growth, and measures the
degree of home price risk.
                                        TABLE 3a
               Summary Statistics for SIPP Cross Sectional Anaysis Sample

                                                                                          Standard
                                                   Mean               Median              Deviation
                                                     (1)                (2)                   (3)


Demographics:
Age (years)                                       47.70                 46                 13.88
Years of education                                13.64                 13                  2.76
Number of children                                 0.64                  0                  1.02
Household Income ($)                              48,350              39,968               41,560

Housing:
Property value ($)                                125,154             99,664               91,035
Mortgage ($)                                       52,915             43,035               51,497
Home tenure (years)                                 8.44                7                   6.66

Wealth:
Total wealth ($)                                  173,229             94,760               588,425
Liquid wealth ($)                                  39,686             5,600                543,805
Home equity ($)                                    72,301             48,895                73,901
Equity in other real estate ($)                    15,925               0                   66,740
Vehicle equity ($)                                 6,700              5,206                 7,777
Business equity ($)                                11,381               0                   71,873
Retirement accounts ($)                            22,250               0                   51,158

Portfolio Allocation:
Percent of households holding stock               29.46%              0.00%                45.59%
Stock share (% of liquid wealth)                  16.11%              0.00%                30.49%
Safe assets share (% of liquid wealth)            83.89%             100.0%                30.49%

Number of observations                                                  64,124

Notes: This table includes all household heads (reference persons) in the 1990-2001 SIPP panels who
purchased houses in or after 1975 and for whom house price index information is available, which is the
estimation sample for the cross-sectional analysis. All monetary values are in real 1990 dollars. Home
tenure is defined as numbers of years living in current house. Income is total family income: labor
income plus all other forms of income plus transfers. Total wealth is gross household wealth measured
on the survey. It includes financial assets as well as all real estate (including second homes), cars, and
private business equity. Debts are not subtracted from the total wealth measure. Safe assets consist of
bonds, checking accounts, and savings accounts. Liquid wealth is defined as the the sum of safe
assets and stockholdings.
                                         TABLE 3b
                     Summary Statistics for SIPP Panel Analysis Sample

                                                                                         Standard
                                                   Mean              Median              Deviation
                                                    (1)                 (2)                  (3)


Demographics:
Age (years)                                       43.13                40                  13.49
Years of education                                14.02                13                   2.60
Number of children                                 0.99                 1                   1.15
Household Income ($)                              53,971             43,409                48,460

Housing:
Property value ($)                               134,979             109,832               98,184
Mortgage ($)                                      79,008              70,606               61,078
Home tenure (years)                                1.34                1.00                 0.47

Wealth:
Total wealth ($)                                 148,611             69,008               275,019
Liquid wealth ($)                                 43,745             5,683                177,950
Home equity ($)                                   56,310             32,074                74,715
Equity in other real estate ($)                   12,384               0                   55,905
Vehicle equity ($)                                5,809              4,558                 7,982
Business equity ($)                               10,199               0                   84,641
Retirement accounts ($)                           17,371               0                   44,149

Portfolio Allocation:
Percent of households holding stock              37.84%               0.00%               48.50%
Stock share (% of liquid wealth)                 23.44%               0.00%               35.62%
Safe assets share (% of liquid wealth)           76.56%              100.0%               35.62%

Number of observations                                                  6,150

Notes: This table includes the subset of household heads in the 1996 and 2001 SIPP panels for whom
we observe wealth both before and after the year of home purchase, which is the estimation sample for
the panel analysis. All monetary values are in real 1990 dollars. Home tenure is defined as numbers of
years living in current house. Income is total family income: labor income plus all other forms of income
plus transfers. Total wealth is gross household wealth measured on the survey. It includes financial
assets as well as all real estate (including second homes), cars, and private business equity. Debts are
not subtracted from the total wealth measure. Safe assets consist of bonds, checking accounts, and
savings accounts. Liquid wealth is defined as the the sum of safe assets and stockholdings.
                                     TABLE 4
                              OLS Regression Estimates


          Dependent Variable.:                           Stock Share
                                        (%)            (%)            (%)           (%)
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)

Property value                          4.78           0.80          -0.61          -0.15
 (x $100K)                             (0.23)         (0.23)        (0.27)         (0.28)

Home equity                             0.77           -1.97         -0.80          -0.93
 (x $100K)                             (0.28)         (0.28)        (0.36)         (0.36)

current year, purch.                                     x             x             x
 year and age FE's

state FE's                                               x                           x

liquid wealth spline                                     x             x             x

other controls                                           x             x             x


Observations                          64,124         64,124         49,410        49,410


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Specifications 2-4 include fixed effects for the
household head's age, current year (year in which portfolio allocations and current property
value are measured), and year of home purchase. These specifications also include a 10-
piece linear spline for liquid wealth, and the following other controls: income, private
business wealth, education, number of children, and state unemployment rate in current year
as well as year of home purchase. Specifications 2 and 4 include state fixed effects. The
dependent variable is dollars held in stocks divided by liquid wealth. All specifications are
estimated using OLS.
                                                                                  TABLE 5
                                                              Research Design 1: Variation in State House Prices

                                                 First Stage (OLS)                                           Two-Stage Least Squares                                        Two-step Tobit
         Dependent Variable: Prop Val Home Equity Mortgage                                                  Stock Share                                Stockkholder           Stock Share
                                                                                                              Logs     Shares           High-Wlth
                                         ($)            ($)             ($)           (%)          (%)         (%)      (%)                (%)               (%)                   (%)
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)               (8)               (9)                   (10)
Property value                                                                       -8.94        -7.78                                   -13.70           -13.89                -30.66
 (x $100K)                                                                          (3.10)       (2.71)                                   (5.12)           (3.88)                (8.89)
Home equity                                                                          9.48         6.22                                    14.18            10.86                  29.18
 (x $100K)                                                                          (3.55)       (3.08)                                   (6.26)           (4.42)                 (9.99)
Log property value                                                                                             -44.27
 (x $100K)                                                                                                    (16.86)
Log home equity                                                                                               19.79
 (x $100K)                                                                                                    (8.67)
Property val/iq wealth                                                                                                       -7.62
 (x $100K)                                                                                                                  (3.45)
Home eq/liq wealth                                                                                                           7.07
 (x $100K)                                                                                                                  (3.53)
OFHEO state house price                377.1           329.5          47.66
 index in current year                 (9.46)          (7.96)         (5.19)
                                      [39.86]         [41.41]         [9.18]
OFHEO state house price                -56.45         -183.0          126.5
 index in year of purchase            (12.23)         (10.28)         (6.71)
                                        [4.62]         [17.8]        [18.85]
state, curr. year, purch.                 x              x               x              x           x            x             x             x                 x                     x
 year and age FE's
other controls                                                                                      x            x             x             x                 x                     x
Observations                          64,124          64,124         64,124         64,124       63,594       63,594       33,105         30,670           63,594                63,594
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in square brackets. All specifications include fixed effects for the household head's state of residence, age, current year (year in
which portfolio allocations and current property value are measured), and year of home purchase. Specifications 5-10 include these fixed effects, a 10-piece linear spline for liquid wealth,
and the following other controls: income, private business wealth, education, number of children, and state unemployment rate in current year as well as year of home purchase. In
columns 1, the dependent variable is property value in the current year; in 2, it is home equity in the current year; and in 3, it is total outstanding mortgage debt in the current year. The
dependent variable in specifications 4-8 and 10 is dollars held in stocks divided by liquid wealth. The dependent variable in specification 9 is an indicator for holding stocks. Specifications
1-3 are estimated using OLS; 4-9 are estimated using two-stage least squares; and 10 is estimated as a Tobit model with endogenous regressors using Newey's two-step estimator.
Instruments for property value and home equity are the current-year and year of purchase OFHEO state price indices in specification 4-5 and 7-9. In specification 6, we instrument for the
logs of these variables with the logs of the price indices. In specification 6, the endogenous regressors are in logs. In specification 7, the endogenous regressors are the ratio of property
value to liquid wealth and the ratio of home equity to liquid wealth; households for whom either of these ratios exceed 20 are excluded in this specification. Specification 8 restricts the
sample to individuals with total wealth above $100,000. Coefficients for specifications 4-5 and 8-10 can be interpreted as percentage point effect of a $100,000 change in property value
and home equity.
                                           TABLE 6
                         Research Design 2: Variation in Housing Supply

                                            First Stage (OLS)                Two-Stage Least Squares
         Dependent Variable: Prop Val Home Eq                 Mortg         Stock Share       Stock Holder
                                ($)     ($)                    ($)          (%)     (%)             (%)
                                (1)     (2)                    (3)           (4)     (5)             (6)

Housing Supply Elasticity x          -182.2      -166.1      -16.13
U.S. OFHEO in current year            (6.60)      (5.56)     (3.61)
                                     [27.59]     [29.86]     [4.47]

Housing Supply Elasticity x          17.70        73.75       -56.06
U.S. OFHEO in year of purch.         (7.28)       (6.13)      (3.98)
                                     [2.43]      [12.03]     [-14.09]

Property value                                                            -11.68     -8.18        -16.09
 (x $100K)                                                                (4.05)     (3.44)       (4.95)

Home Equity                                                                13.88      7.57        13.71
 (x $100K)                                                                 (4.81)    (4.16)       (5.99)

state, age, year FE's                   x            x          x            x          x            x

other controls                                                                          x            x

Observations                         63,906      63,906      63,906       63,906 63,393           63,393

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in square brackets. The housing supply elasticity
is from Saiz (2010, Table 6), who constructs predicted elasticity measures by MSA and state using
measures of land availability and usage regulations. We measure national house prices in our sample
using the mean of the OFHEO index in each year. Specifications 1-3 report OLS estimates of the first-
stage effect of the housing supply elasticity interacted with national house prices in the current year and
the year of purchase. The dependent variables are property value, home equity, and mortgage debt in
the current year. Specifications 4-6 report 2SLS estimates using the two interactions of the housing
supply elasticity with national prices as instruments for property value and home equity. The dependent
variable in specifications 4-5 is dollars held in stocks divided by liquid wealth. The dependent variable in
specification 6 is an indicator for holding stocks. All specifications include fixed effects for the household
head's state of residence, age, current year (year in which portfolio allocations and current property
value are measured), and year of home purchase. Specification 5-6 include these fixed effects, a 10-
piece linear spline for liquid wealth, and the following other controls: income, private business wealth,
education, number of children, and state unemployment rate in the current year. Coefficients in columns
4-6 can be interpreted as percentage point effect of a $100,000 change in property value and home
equity.
                                           TABLE 7
                 Research Design 3: Portfolio Changes around Home Purchase

                                            First Stage (OLS)               Two-Stage Least Squares
       Dependent Variable:                                                                   D Stock-
                                 D Prop Val D Home Eq D Mortg                D Stock Share
                                                                                              holder
                                      ($)           ($)           ($)      (%)    (%)    (%)   (%)
                                      (1)           (2)           (3)      (4)    (5)    (6)    (7)

OFHEO state house price            479.86          82.32        387.93
 index in year of purchase         (43.37)        (31.60)       (32.32)
                                   [11.06]         [2.6]          [12]


  Property value                                                           -9.17 -9.53 -8.31         -7.01
 (x $100K)                                                                (3.82) (3.92) (3.78)       (4.84)

  total wealth                       0.21           0.22         -0.01
                                    (0.01)         (0.01)       (0.01)

  total wealth                                                             5.86 5.87 0.73             5.11
 (x $100K)                                                                (0.86) (0.87) (0.08)       (1.07)

state, age, year FE's                  x             x            x          x       x       x         x

other controls                                                                       x       x         x

Observations                        5,998          5,998        5,998     5,998 5,993 6,055          5,993

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in square brackets. Specifications 1-3 report OLS
estimates of the first-stage effect of the house price index in the year of purchase on the change in
property value, home equity, and mortgage debt from the year before to the year after home purchase.
Specifications 4-6 report 2SLS estimates of the effect of changes in property value and total wealth on
changes in the stock share of liquid wealth using this instrument. The dependent variable in specification
7 is an indicator for holding stocks. All specifications include fixed effects for state of residence and age
and also control for the change in total wealth from the year before to the year after home purchase.
Specifications 5-7 also include the following other controls: change in income from year before to year
after home purchase as well as education, number of children, and the state unemployment rate. All
specifications except 6 omit 62 households whose reported wealth changed by more than 1 million
dollars in magnitude to reduce the influence of outliers.
                                    APPENDIX TABLE 1
                            Summary Statistics for SIPP Full Sample

                                                                                         Standard
                                                   Mean              Median              Deviation
                                                    (1)                 (2)                  (3)


Demographics:
Age (years)                                       49.09                47                  16.97
Years of education                                12.69                12                   3.07
Number of children                                 0.55                 0                   1.00
Household Income ($)                              34,275             25,852                34,238

Housing:
Property value ($)                                69,718             48,315                87,466
Mortgage ($)                                      25,681              0.00                 43,537
Home tenure (years)                               14.93                10                  13.80

Wealth:
Total wealth ($)                                 108,394             42,990               430,748
Liquid wealth ($)                                 25,675             1,809                390,063
Home equity ($)                                   45,090             19,372                67,686
Equity in other real estate ($)                   10,128              0.00                 52,477
Vehicle equity ($)                                4,908              3,174                 6,779
Business equity ($)                               6,940               0.00                 55,171
Retirement accounts ($)                           12,434              0.00                 38,180

Portfolio Allocation:
Percent of households holding stock               19.17%             0.00%                39.36%
Stock share (% of liquid wealth)                  12.63%             0.00%                28.40%
Safe assets share (% of liquid wealth)            87.37%            100.00%               28.40%

Number of observations                                                 163,405

Notes: This table includes all household heads (reference persons) in the 1990-2001 SIPP panels. All
monetary values are in real 1990 dollars. Home tenure is defined as numbers of years living in current
house. Income is total family income: labor income plus all other forms of income plus transfers. Total
wealth is gross household wealth measured on the survey. It includes financial assets as well as all real
estate (including second homes), cars, and private business equity. Debts are not subtracted from the
total wealth measure. Safe assets consist of bonds, checking accounts, and savings accounts. Liquid
wealth is defined as the the sum of safe assets and stockholdings.
                                                             FIGURE 1
                                             Real Housing Prices in California, 1975-2005

                                                                (a) Baseline
     OFHEO Real House Price Index
                                    400
                                    200
                                    0




                                      1975   1980       1985        1990         1995        2000             2005
                                                                    Year


                                                    (b) Higher mortgage, lower home equity
     OFHEO Real House Price Index
                                    400
                                    200
                                    0




                                      1975   1980       1985        1990          1995       2000             2005
                                                                    Year


                                                     (c) Higher home equity, same mortgage
     OFHEO Real House Price Index
                                    400
                                    200
                                    0




                                      1975   1980       1985        1990          1995       2000             2005
                                                                    Year

NOTEâ€“This figure illustrates the concept underlying our identification strategies by plotting the OFHEO real housing price
index in California from 1975 to 2005. Panel A depicts an individual who buys a house in 1985 and whose portfolio is
observed in 2000. Panel B shows an individual who buys the same house in 1990 instead of 1985, and has approximately
$100,000 more mortgage debt when observed in 2000 as a result. Panel C shows an individual who buys in 1985 and is
observed in 2005. This individual has approximately $175,000 more home equity than individual A.
