                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   AN EMPIRICAL EXAMINATION OF
                    MUNICIPAL FINANCIAL POLICY



                         Roger H. Gordon

                           Joel Slemrod



                      Working Paper No. 1599




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenae
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and projects in Government Budget and State and Local
Public Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper 111599
                                               April 1985




                     An Empirical Examination of
                     Municipal Financial Policy

                                ABSTRACT




     Current U.S. tax law creates a variety of incentives affecting municipal

financial policy. Under   current   law,   municipalities   can borrow at a tax—

exempt interest rate yet can earn the full market rate of return on any

assets held. Residents, in contrast, if they borrow or lend as individuals,

pay or earn the market rate of return but after personal income taxes. These

differences in rates of return create a variety of arbitrage opportunities,

allowing conirnunities/residents to borrow at low rates and invest at higher

rates.

     The purpose of this paper is to examine empirically the financial policy

of municipalities in four states (Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts and Rhode

Island) to see to what degree these municipalities attempt to take advantage

of each of the available opportunities to engage in tax arbitrage. Our data

comes from the 1980 U.S. Census of Population and Housing, and the 1977 U.S.

Census of Governments. We find clear evidence that communities do actively

engage in such tax arbitrage.



                                                Roger Gordon
                                                Department of Economics
                                                University of Michigan
                                                Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                                 (313—764—6769)

                                                Joel Slemrod
                                                Department of Economics
                                                University of Minnesota
                                                Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                 (612—373—3607)
                 An Empirical Examination of MunicipalFinancial Policy

                                              by

                                       Roger H. Gordon*

                               University of Michigan and NBER

                                             and

                                         Joel Slemrod

                               University of Minnesota and NBER


     Current U. S. tax law creates a variety of incentives affecting municipal

financial policy. Under current law, municipalities can borrow at a tax—exempt

interest rate yet can earn the full market rate of return on any assets held.

Residents, in contrast, if they borrow or lend as individuals, pay or earn the

market rate of return but after personal income taxes. These differences in

rates of return create a variety of arbitrage opportunities, allowing

contnunities/residents to borrow at low rates and invest at higher rates.

     The purpose of this paper is to examine empirically the financial policy of

municipalities in four states (Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts and Rhode

Island) to see to what degree these municipalities attempt to take advantage of

eacn of the available opportunities to engaoe in tax arbitrage. Our data comes

frorr the 1930 U.      .   Census o Population and Housinc, and the 1977 U. S. Census

cf Sovernments. e fro clear evioence triat communities dc actively encae in

such tax arbitrage.

     The oroaniza:ior of the paper is as follows.         In section i, we explore in

more aeta the tax incentives affecting rnunicipa iran:iai poncy, and then

d SCLSS   otie   actc ncn may a'sc rfluence financia ecisions               n section

    we oescribe tne construction o tne cata set used in the emoir1ca stucy.

ant present tables sunrnarizing the oeneral characteristics of municipal finar—

cial nciicy.      in   section 11, we present and discuss the results of our
                                         -2-

regression analyses investigating the role of the various factors affecting

municipal financial policy. Finally, in section IV, we comment briefly on the

implications of our results for the distributional and efficiency effects of the

current tax treatment of municipal financial policy.


I.   Factors affecting municipal financial decisions.

     A. Tax Factors

            1. Base Case

      Based on a simplified view of the current tax law, individuals when

investing as individuals face a nominal before—tax interest rate of r and an

after-tax rate of r(1-t),1 where t is their marginal personal income tax rate.

Assume that all residents in a community face the same marginal tax rate, that

their marginal tax rate will remain constant over time, and that any prospec-

tive home buyer in the community will have the same tax rate. (Assume also that

if they currently itemize deductions, then they and any buyers will also itemize

in the future.)

      If an individuals community buys securities, the community can earn a

before and after tax return of r, while the community can borrow at a tax—exempt

interest rate, which we denote by rm. By construction let rm          r(l-tm). Due to

its tax—exempt status, rm has historically beer approximately 70% of the value



      Differences between

      (1)   the community's borrowing rate, rrn,

      (2) the corrLmunity's lendinc rate, r, and

      (3) the residents borroinc arc lendinc        rate, r(-t),
create   a variety of arbitrace occortunities whereby the cornunity/residents car
borro    cc a low rate and lend cc a hiahe- race.    Tnree   different forms   of

arbtraae    a—c possible civen   crc three differer: pairwise differences in the
above bO—rowinc arc lendinc rates.
                                            -3-

       In the first and simplest form of arbitrage, comparing rates of return (1)

and (2), the community can borrow a dollar through the municipal bond market,

and invest it in taxable securities, receiving on net r—rmtmr. The IRS has

been concerned about this form of arbitrage, and in 1969 a section was added to

the Internal Revenue Code which attempted to restrict severely the extent of

such arbitrage. Specifically, section 103(c) of the Internal Revenue Code

states that interest on municipal debt is taxable if a major portion of a debt

issue is used directly or indirectly to buy securities earning a materially

higher rate of return. Proceeds from a debt issue can be invested temporarily

in taxable securities, however, and by statute up to fifteen percent can remain

invested for extended periods, as a reserve or replacement fund. The IRS has

not been very aggressive in enforcing this statute. Only in 1979 did it rule

that a conrnunity which has large holdings of taxable securities relative to its

outstanding debt is in violation of section 103(c) per Se, even if the debt were

issued for a clearly different purpose. The interpretation of the statute was

less clear in 1977, the year our data were collected. In addition, the IRS has

recently allowed corrrnunities to borrow in order to invest in taxable securities

if the purpose is to raise their bond rating. We will assume for now, however,

that the IRS does enforce the statute, so communities are permitted to invest

only n percent of any debt issue in taxable securities, and that all        comunities
purusc tnis abitraa to tne lecal limit. Eviaence or tne extent to wnich

communities engaoe in     this   arbitrage is presented below.

       A second form of arbitrage available to communities, comparing rates of

return (2) and (3), is to raise property taxes now, invest the proceeds in

taxable bonds, tnen use the proceeds from the bonds to lower property taxes in

tne future. By investing indirectly throuah the community, individuals earn a

rate   of   return on their investment of r, rather than the rate of return of

r-t available wren they invest          direclty.   When they invest an extra dollar
                                        -4-

through the community, residents gain r—r(1—t)=rt each year in arbitrage

profits.3    The IRS has not attempted to restrict this second form of arbitrage.

      In the third and final form of arbitrage, comparing rates of return (1) and

(3), communities/residents attempt to take advantage of the difference between

r and r(1—t). Wealthier be individuals, for whom r(l-t)<rm, will want to

borrow as individuals and buy tax—exempt securities. In this situation, their

municipality plays no role. Individuals in lower tax brackets, however, for

whom r(l-t)>rm, cannot borrow as individuals at the tax—exempt rate in order to

invest at r(i—t) —-   only municipalities can borrow at the tax—exempt rate. But
these individuals can have their municipality borrow for them at rate r, then

use what is borrowed to lower property taxes. The residents can then invest

what they save in property taxes and earn a rate of return of r(l-t). On net

they gain r(l—t)—rm in arbitrage profits.4 However, communities are allowed by

sta.:ute to invest a fraction of what they borrow in taxable securities. Given

this, the net gain to residents each year per dollar borrowed becomes



                      (l-n)(r(l-t)-rm)+n(r-rm) =       r(t)-(l-n)t).           (1)




      For many communities, the last two forms of arbitrage (raise property taxes

and invest in bonds earning r, or lower property taxes and borrow at rate rrn)

car   sirrtaneously be   worthwhile. However,     if   bct ae pursued the community is

in effect borrowing at r and investing at r, tne policy which is restricted by

the IRS, Each community must therefore choose to pursue either one policy or

the otner. Which is preferable? That depends first on tne relative gain per

doila change in current property taxes, and second on how aggressively one

policy versus    the other can be pursuec and what offsetting costs are incurred
when doing so.

         the corrrruritv chooses to lower taxes    and oorro, wnat limits the amount
                                                      -5-

of such tax arbitrage that it can undertake? One potential limit is that states

set statutory limits on how much municipalities can borrow. Generally, the

statutes specify that the outstanding debt in a municipality cannot exceed some

per cent of the assessed property value of the community.5 Commonly, separate

limits are set for school bonds and for debt of special districts, so that

creating special districts allows more debt to be issued. In addition, some

forms of debt are normally entirely exempt from these limits, and states often

provide a mechanism to relax a binding restriction on debt issues.                         It therefore

seems unlikely that a community would face such a binding limit.

       Similarly, states often allow debt to be issued for only certain purposes,

e.g. capital expenditures and short—run cash flow needs. These restrictions set

some upper limit on debt issues, though communities should have some flexibility

in broadening the definition o 'capital expenditures when the restriciton is

binding. Aogregate data, however, suggest that this constraint is not close to

binding on average. For example, Peterson (1978) and Peterson (1981) report the

per cent of        state and local capital expenditures           financed by long term bonds, by

federal   aid,      and oy other local resources for selected years between 1952 and

1977. In these figures, long term debt issues never exceeded 56% of                        total
capital outlays, and never exceeded 65.4% of                  non-federal    expenditures on capital

outlays. (The average           figures     were 42.7% and 55.8% resoectively.)

Urorojnate, : was no: possiole to test exoiici:iy whethe sucr a                            constraint

was   close   to    biacing in any of       the towns in our sample.6

      Some othe nonstatutory factor seems to limit the extent to which com-

munities issue debt. One possible factor limitino the amount of borrowing by a

community     is    risk   aversion   or   tre part   of    residents. The    reaT value   of   the

outstanding        mur:icpal debt     is   random, oependinc Or:    interest    rate fluctuations

and   iniation. ince           the reia:ive interest rates on municipal            oonos and taxable
bonds cranoe substantially over time, as showr in Poterba (i9S: , borrowing in
                                                —6-

the municipal market and investing in the taxable market is by no means a fully
hedged investment. Risk aversion would limit the size of municipal debt rela-

tive to the individual s total wealth, everything else equal.

       Alternatively, the same set of factors appealed to in discussion of cor-

porate financial policy,7 agency costs and bankruptcy costs, could also play a

role in limiting the amount of municipal debt. The only implicit security that

lenders have is the tax base of the community, so they would be increasingly

reluctant to lend as the outstanding debt grows relative to this tax base.8 In

sumary, agency costs and risk aversion each provide an explanation for why

municipal debt cannot become too large relative to the municipal property tax

base, or the total wealth, of the community.

        Related factors presumably limit the extent to which residents will invest

their wealth through the community. Accounting standards in communities would

no tally be viewed as lax compared with those of mutual funds, so residents may

well    fear   that municipal employees could divert surplus funds into excess

expenditures on municipal services, or           invest   it   poorly.     The more money that is

invested in the community, presumably the more difficult it would be to auard

acainst such behavior. In addition, the risk individuals face on such invest-

ments includes not only the risk in the return on the securities, but also the

risk    in the   value of    their   property relative to the total        tax    base of the

:orru ty, and the risk tnat ar ouve                   not aoe:ua:ei\' take into account tne
value of the      asset oeinc    purchased with tne house. Individuals would become
increasingly risk averse at the margin as mora of               their    wealth depends on the

value of their      house.

       Tnc benefits    fran ourusinc one         tn atner a:i treoc         stratecies vary     with
one ta. rate of tne resioents — one ocir: fror investinc                  through the community,

'o,    c—ows wtr t,    whereas tne 35r rcn o:rrowinç :nrouar, toe communit,
  t__i_r't). fails wtr, t. In ccnoaso. toe offsettinc                     costs    limtn: one
                                             —7—

extent of such arbitrage should not depend directly on the tax rate of the

residents. We would therefore expect corinunities with low tax rates to favor

issuing municipal bonds, while wealthy corrinunities would prefer to invest

through their corrrnunity. These are two of the principal relationships we will

look for in the empirical analysis.


       2. Complicating factors

       In the above discussion, we assumed that the after-tax rate of return to

savings for the individual was r(1—t), and ignored the individual1s portfolio
problem. However, if individuals can exchange taxable and tax exempt bonds

freely and without constraint, they will do so until they are indifferent at the

margin to owning one or the other. For example, at this point the cost of

bearing the extra risk in the return on municipal bonds just offsets any gain in

expected return. In this situation, as residents they would be indifferent bet-

ween having the community borrow in the municipal bond market or raising taxes

(assuming n0). Wealthier individuals (those facing a t>trn) will normally be

in just this situation, investing in taxable and tax exempt securities                Until
indifferent.9 They would then find the riskier return on municipal bonds just

equivalent to the return r(i—t), implying that the gain from having the

community borrow an extra dollar, as expressed in equation (I),                simplifies    to

nrt.     Poorer jndiyidualc. in contrast, cannot sel muricipa bonos short as
individuals    anc invest tne oroceecs in     taxable bonas aver exis:nc insttU-
tions.     Instead, they have their community borrow         for them   on   the municipal
market, just as described previously,         in summary, the gain to residents from an

extra dollar of municipal        debt would now   ecual max(tm-(i—ri)t,      nt)r.

       The above discussion also focussed on        a   situation where residents do not

itemzc.      if residents   do   itemize, then any property tax payment costs residents
only (i—t)   per cent of the tax payment. Therefore,          everythnc else equal,

ieners    can hope to collect 1/(I-t)      times as much from residents when residents
                                               -8-

itemize, so would view 1/(1-t) dollars of debt from a community where residents

itemize as equivalent in risk to one dollar of debt from a community of non—

itemizers. As a result, both the costs of issuing an extra dollar of debt and

the benefits of issuing an extra dollar (see footnote 3) are reduced by (1-t)

per cent when residents itemize. Communities where residents itemize should

therefore undertake the same amount of tax arbitrage as communities where resi-

dents do not itemize, everything else equal, but in doing so would issue 1/(1—t)

times as much debt.

      This argument assumes that if residents itemize deductions in one year,

then they itemize in all years. If not, then individuals face an incentive to

shift tax payments towards those years in which they itemize, when the payments

are tax deductible. Most new homeowners itemize, but as time passes owners

would eventually become increasingly unlikely to itemize. Therefore, new owners

WOLd face a strong incentive to pay as much as possible in property taxes while

they itemize, so ought to avoid having their municipality borrow (and would

prefer having it build up a reserve). Similarly, during the years in which

the individual does itemize, he would prefer to push his property tax payments

towards the years in which his personal income tax rate is highest. Furthennore,

ar individual who is no longer itemizing, and who is expecting to sell his house

in   tne near future   to   someone wno will    be itemizinc, would much prefer to keep

cr: taxes as o as pcssioe no anc have the municipalit go into debt.

Tne ver car occuoc the cost o repaying tnis debt, and will therefore reduce
his bid for the property by oni'v (1-t) per cent of the value of the outstanding

aeb:. Tne cain to the seller from lowering taxes is the full reduction in

taxes, since ne does not itemize. anc losinc (-t) per cent of the gain through

the sale price o his house is an attractive exorance. By the same argument, an

irdvcul in tris situation would be reluctant to buiic up assets in the corn—
                                         —9-

       B. Nontax factors

           1. Lumpiness of capital expenditures.

       Conventional wisdom says that lumpy expenditure are more likely to be

financed with debt, because it is difficult to adjust property tax rates enough

to cover extraordinary capital expenditures. However, this factor does not

necessarily imply high debt on average, as corrinunities could build up assets in

anticipation of heavy expenditures, and pay off any debt quite quickly. Most

large expenditures, e.g., school buildings, are easily anticipated, making this

process straightforward. Also, for large comunities, any given lumpy capital

expenditure would not be so large relative to the total budget, making it easier

to pay for the expenditure over a short period of time. There seems to be

little reason to expect in the data a strong association between the level of

debt and the size of the community's capital stock.

           2. Burden on current versus future residents.

       Conventional wisdom also says that bond finance of capital projects and tax

finance of current expenditures is more equitable, because under this system

payments and benefits coincide in time.        If trie housing stock is unchanging,

however, any difference in timinc of payments and benefits ought to be capital-

ized in house prices, thus leaving incentives on financial policy unaffected.

Wra:   current   residents avoid payinc no through use of oebt tney end up payinc

tnrcor redu:ec p—cpe: va ucs.        Tr.i s is tu as ion: as ouvers an sd lers arc

in   :ne same tax bracket, and buyers correctly perceive the fiscal position of

tne community.

       However, new buyers may well misperceive the financial position of the com-

munity. For exam:ie. buyers arc likely to take the property tax rate into

account, but may presume the taxes finance constant real exoenditures, wnereas

ceb: service involves corstan: nominal expendtures (ionorn: refinancing).

Tns consideration leacs to a oreferen:c fa tax finance.         Or the other hanc.
                                                     -10-•

keeping the current tax rate low through debt finance may lead buyers to
underestimate future tax bills.

        If the housing stock is not fixed, then use of debt finance allows more

of the cost of current expenditures to be pushed onto property used for new

construction. When a house is               built,   that property becomes a larger share of

the   property tax base of the comunity, and so pays a larger share of the
property taxes. When taxes are used to finance current expenditures, each
property pays based on its current share                 of the total property tax base. How-

ever,
         ..L_ UCU L
         WElCH
                   _L             s ueu, tøLlI prupr L pays ue oil               i      uai oi Lue
property tax base over the next twenty years or so. If a new house is built on
a property during that time, then that property pays a larger share of the
original expenditures if debt finance is used rather than tax finance.
        A corrinunity would not necessarily wart to increase the tax burden on newly

bui t houses, however. If this tax burden already exceeds the marginal cost of

public services to new residents,10 and if the amount of new construction is

sensitive to the property tax rate, then shifting taxes further onto new resi-

dents may not be desirable.

              3.     Heterooeneity   of the community.

        ln   the previous section, we         made the obviously unrealistic assumption that

tne community was         entirely   hornoceneous, iodeiiino the political decision makina

      a ne:eoereous community          is    comniicateo, nowever. Tn         median voter mode is

often used, ant we         wil   appeal to     it belo       in   the empirical worK,    but   its
characterization         of the deci si on—making process i s very nai ye. The more hetero—
Qeneous the community, the less we would expect                    our tax story, as     applied to the

mediar       income voter, to fit tne        data.    Similay, wnen reative orices of houses
within tne         community are cnancinç, there is a tlear conflict of interest                     about

  nan:a        cTicv, 'tn untertar ctcorne.
              4. Tansa:tions costs cf bond 'ssuas.
                                              —11—

        When municipal bonds are marketed, buyers seek information about the riski-

ness of the bonds. For large communities, rating services and brokerage houses

will collect and provide such information. For smaller communities, however,

available information would be much less reliable. As a result, buyers would

not be able to differentiate between safe and risky issues, and thus price them

the same, encouraging risky issues and discouraging safe ones, the classic

"lemons" problem. Whether or not the market breaks down completely, we would

expect our theory to apply much less well to smaller communities.

              5. Rental units.

        Renters favor debt finance if there is rent control with a property tax

pass through. If a project is financed by a property tax increase, then a

tenant under rent control must pay the full cost immediately. However, f debt

finance is used, rental payments each year would go up only slightly.           If the

tenant expects to move before the debt is fully repaid, then debt finance is

clearly preferable.

        If market rents arc unconstrained, however, then the ecuilibri urn     rent   is

affected by municipal financial policy only through the preferences of ]andlords

——   the demand curve for apartments is unaffected by how expenditures are

financed, but the supply curve would be affected. Landlords would normally be

in high tax brackets. so prefer that the community avoid debt and atternot to

bLiic    ua     reserve of   taxaie   securities. Rentcr-vote may not perceive these

incentives, however.


II. Characteristics of        the data set.
        in   order to investicate the importance of   the various   factors affectinç

munc1pal financial pcHcv, we have assernbea what we believe to be a unique Set

of data. Our data source or government financial pclicy was the Finance Summary

Statistics from the 197 Census of Governments. This tane provided information

for all state and local government units on their revenues and expenditures,
                                           —12-

plus the book value of various categories of financial assets and liabilities

that they held. Our data source on the characteristics of the residents of each

community was the 1980 Census of Population and Housing,11 Surrrnary Tape File 3C.

This tape reported a variety of characteristics of the population and the

housing stock for all "minor civil divisions" (MCD's) with at least 10,000 popu-

lation in eleven states, and all counties and RplacesI with at least 10,000

population.

        Unfortunately, the two data sets were not easily matched. To begin with,

the identification codes for each observation on the two tapes had no relation.

Fortunately, the Census kindly created for us a third tape which matched these

identification codes wherever possible.           In addition, however, many "places" are

not contiguous with any unit of government, while many units of government

(e.g., school districts) do not coincide with a "place" or an MCD, the unit of;

obs.rvation on the Census of Population and Housing tape. By necessity, our

study had to be confined either to MCD1s and those places which coincided with

units of government, or to counties. Our judoment was that the population of

each county would be very heterogeneous, and the variation in average charac-

teristics across counties would be too small to allow much to be learned from

county data. Our study therefore focusses on data for MOD's and places.

        In many states, however, school districts and special districts are very

-nortan:, an: triese districts can ssue oeb: 'n tneir own rioht. Residents

should no: :are whether debt is issued by their municipality or by their special

district —-       they are liable either way —-    SO   how much debt is issued by MOD's

versus seciai districts should be arbitrary. But matched data is available

only or MOD's.

        in oroer to avoid the problem of arbitrary division of financial respon-

ci   o Ii tv.   we focussed on fou states where OI\          Smil fracti or   of   the short-

term dab: and u-faith—arc—cedit lonc tern cab: was issued by units of
                                               —13—

government other than MCDs — Connecticut (5%), Maine (32%), Massachusetts

(20%), and Rhode Island (1%).12 Within these states there were 276 usable

observations 13

        For each community, we constructed a measure of its outstanding debt. This

figure was defined to equal the book value at the end of the year of short—term

debt plus long—term general obligation debt, minus any holdings of state and

local bonds. We made no attempt to estimate the market value of the outstanding

debt, given the reported book values. Our presumption was that since all data

came from the same calendar year, the ratio of market value to book value should

be very similar for all corrnunities.'4

        We did not include in our measure of debt the amount of revenue bonds or

other nonguaranteed bonds that each community had outstandtng. Such bonds are

not legal liabilities of the municipal government, and are not paid for out of

property tax revenues.

        We   next constructed a measure for each corrrnunity of the book value at the

en of the year of its holdinos of Federal securities and other bonds, notes,

mortgages, and financial assets, excluding state and local government securi-

ties.     A critical issue in constructino this measure was the proper treatment of

cash and deposits held in Hsinkinc funds, bond funds, or other nor-insurance

furos.' Such deposts could be held primarily for liquidity purposes soon after

o:r:s are isscd or           soor bsfoe bonas are retirec.      If :nev earr   less   tnar tne
interest     QUE   Or:   the bonds, as woulc checkinc accounts and perhaps savinas

accounts,     tnen there is no arbitraoe reason to borrow to put the proceeds in
casn and deposits, However, Oeposits might            also be held in money    market funds
or certificates of deposit, and earn a return           well abDve   that or municipal
oonds. in oroer to compare the tyicai rate of return earned on casn and
ceotsits with that earrec or. otner taxable secur ties, we reoressed total
ir:eres income divaec by the pa value of              all   security holdings (/S: ac.anst
a constant and the fraction of total security holdings held in cash and deposits

(CD/S). The results were as follows (standard errors are in parentheses):



                                 (uS) = .045 + .015 (CDIS).
                                      (.011)    (.013)




The estimated rate of return on cash and deposits is 6% per year, almost exactly

the interest rate of 5.94% earned in one year Treasury notes of 1977, and higher

than the estimated 4.5% earned on other taxable securities.15 In most of the

results reported below, we therefore included cash and deposits in our measure

of taxable security holdings.

       We also ignored any assets held in the various insurance and pension funds.

It is possible that comunities choose to borrow to overfurd their insurance and

pension funds, contributing more now and less later and earning a market return

tax free in the interim,16 Unfortunately, we had no information about the

extent of overfundirig in our data set, so did not pursue this.17

       From the Census of Population and Housing we attempted to construct a

measure of the median marginal personal income tax rate of residents in each

community. The tape reports the median          family   income in each corrrnunity. We

then assigned to each family income the average marginal personal income tax

rate   ooserved for toac income level in the N..E.P. TAXSIN file for 198C.ia

       e dic no: flave any data or average wel:h or          averae    property values   of
residents    in each communfty, as an indicator of the tax capacity of the com-

munity.     As   a proxy,   we used the total income of    all   resiaents in the coninunity.

       W also had no information or tne per:ertaoc of the residents in a cam-

mur, cv wro itemize:. By the theory. oormrni ties whae the mcdi an            voter itemizes
oc ar            cc sse j/(_, times      as   mrjc ce: as cormrjr      es nere the mec ar
vo:e did     no:   itemize.    in most of One resLl:s reportec or below, we made no

accemot cc control for d4fferenoes across :omuni:ies                 One probaiiitv   tna:
                                        —15—

 the median voter itemizes. As we present the results, we will discuss what

 biases are likely to be present, given this omission.

      Tables 1—4 present various summary characteristics of the financial policy

 of communities in our sample. In each table, we have divided our communities

 into six marginal tax rate categories, with the average marginal tax rates of

 the categories ranging from 23.4% to 35.0%. Table 1 reports the average of the

 ratios within each category of the book value of outstanding municipal bonds

divided by the total income of the corrniunity.   It reports these figures for the

entire sample, for large communities (population over 25,000). for small com-

munities (population under 25,000), for relatively homogeneous communities, and

for relatively heterogeneous communities.19 Based on the tax arbitrage argu-

ments of the previous section, we would expect the ratios to decline with the

marginal tax rate and to cecline more dramatically for arge communities. Both

of these expectations are borne out unambiguously in the data.    Higher tax rate

communities do still borrow, but much less so relative to their aggregate income

than do lower tax rate communities. In small communities, there is no clear

pattern to the figures. The theory has no clear predictions about the differen-

ces between homogenous and heterogeneous communities. Here we find that the

ratios tend to decline in both cases.

     The observed degree to which debt/income is lower in rich communities

srio: underestimate the resoonsiveness of de: poicy to ta incentives, since

the median voter wouic be likely to itemize only in the richer communities. in

such richer communities, we should observe 1/(1-t) times as much debt as they

would choose to accept if they did not itemize. Had we been able to control for

the effects of itemization, tne pattern observed in Table 1 should have been

muon stronger.

     Table 2 reports similar ficures for several otner measures of the financial

position of these communities. Tne first ano second lines report the average
ratio of debt to municipal tax revenues for the total sample and for large com-

munities. The theory suggested nothing directly about these ratios, though they

do show a similar but weaker pattern than the figures in Table 1. The next four

lines describe the average ratio of federal and other securities held, excluding

or including cash and deposits, divided by total income of the community. If

communities all prefer to borrow through the municipality rather than invest in

a tax free way, then these figures should all be a uniform fraction of the cor-

responding figures on the first two lines of Table 1. The average of the actual

fractions, calculated using the cash inclusive definition of Federal securities,

is reported on lines 7 and 8 for all and for large communities. For large com-

munities, we do find that security holdings increase with marginal tax rate, as

the theory forecasts.

        Table 3 is designed to provide information about the size of the tax

sangs achieved through tax arbitrage within each marginal tax rate category.

The simplest form of arbitrage is to borrow at the municipal rate and invest at

the taxable rate, gaining rtm per year per dollar borrowed. The first line

reports the average of min(D,S)/Y as a measure of how much of this arbitrage is

occurring, where D represents debt, S represents security holdings, inclusive of

cash and deposits, and Y represents total income of the community. The second

forrr   of arbitrace      is to borrow and use the Droceeds to lower taxes, saving resi-

cents maxtr—t0)r           per year.20 jr tne        second line      f    tne table    we report    the

averaoc value of max(D-S,0)/Y, as a measure of                 the extent       of   this second
arbitrage. Finally, communities might also raise property taxes and invest in

secu'ities      tax   free, SavinQ      rt   per collar   invested.       The   third   line of   the table

reports the average ratio          of   max(S—D,0)/i as a measure of             this   third form of

arbitrage. By the theory, we would expect wealthier communities to favor this

trrc form       o     arbitraae.
        :r   order    to acoroximate the aveaoc ta> savin: from municipal firanciaT
                                                  —17—

arbitrage within each marginal tax rate category, we require data on r and tm.

For r, we used .076, the average nominal rate on twenty year government bonds in

1977.21 There was no compelling reason for choosing this rate rather than many

alternatives, and all figures would simply change proportionately if another

rate were chosen. Choosing a value for tm is more important. If we simply com-

pare the interest rates on municipal and taxable bonds in 1977, we find an

implicit tax rate of 32% comparing 20 year prime municipals with 20 year new

issue Aa industrials, and 51% comparing one year prime municipals with one year

governments But none of these comparisons control for risk, call provisions,

etc. Gordon—Malkiel (1981) report a comparison of interest rates on taxable

bonds and tax exempt industrial revenue bonds issued simultaneously in 1978 by

the same firm with similar prQvisions.              In this sample, tm is estimated to be

only 22.5%. Given this dispersion of estjmates, we calculated the tax savins

for each marginal tax rate category for both tm=.225 and tm=.36. These

estimates equal:



                r/Y[max(tm—t,0)•max(D-S,0)+tm•min(D,S)+t•max(S—D,0)j



       The resulting figures fo' tm=.225 are reported or the fourth line and for

tm.35 or the fiftn line. Tax benefits are larger for poorer communities, par-

            wner t=.3E -- poor communities gain more from borroinc and oo more

of it tnan c rich communities, whereas non communities do little to take

advantage of the ooportunity to invest tax free through their community. The

reported ficures represent the tax savinos before takinc account of itemization.

Those communities where residents itemize, predominantly the ricner communities,

save only (i—t) times the reported fioures given that the payments would have

beer tax deductible, so trat tha reported ioues unoerstate the oeoree of which

00cr   communities   gain   '-eia:ive   tc rich    communities.   or ai communities,
                                           -18-

however, the tax savings are extremely small.

       One question raised by the figures in the tables is whether communities do

in practice borrow and establish substantial holdings of taxable securities, in

spite of IRS rules attempting to limit it. In order to examine this, we calcu-

lated the distribution of SID, and report this distribution in Table 4, defining

S to be either exclusive or inclusive of cash and deposits. Here we find that

with the exclusive definition of 5, over ten percent of the communities hold

taxable securities amounting to more than twenty per cent of the book value of

their debt, and six communities have invested more in taxable securities than

they have borrowed. This evidence is not necessarily inconsistent with strict

IRS enforcement of section 103(c) -- these outlier communities could recently

have had large issues f bonds, the proceeds from which had not yet been spent.

However, using the cash inclusive definition of securities, most communities

ha far more securities than the IRS rules would seem to allow. This phenome-

non is not restricted to the four states we focus on. In all municipalities in

the U.S., municipal security holdings were 37.5% o municipal debt.


III. Analysis of the data.

        In the previous section, we compared the financial policies of communities

with    residents   havino different marginal income tax rates. In doing so,

no'ever, we mace no attempt to control for other fa:tors which also rniaht        affect
fflflo.1      policy.   in this section, we construct measures of a few other factors

which ought to influence financial policy, anc tnen regress various measures of

munic-pai financial policy against these factors as well as the marginal tax

rate    of   the residents c the community. to see to. what decree the association

 cunc above betweer a commuritys marciral ta rate anc its financial policy

mioho. e caused by other factors.

        r    the discuss'or. of tax in:ertTves   r   section   we aroued that if indivi—

CUOlS    temize,    if they temize ir some veers but not in others, if they face
                                           -19-

different tax rates among the years in which they itemize, or if they intend to

sell their house in the near future and the likely buyer faces a different tax

rate or itemizes while the seller does not, then strong tax incentives exist to

change municipal financial policy. No information is available which directly

measures the frequency of occurrence of any of these circumstances. Instead, we

picked a variety of indicators from the Census of Population and Housing.

       The most direct indicator of the likelihood that the median voter of the

community itemizes is the median income of residents. From the N.B.E.R. TAXSIM

file, we know the per cent of taxpayers who itemize (P1) at each income level.

If communities segregate by itemization status as well as by income, then in

this per cent of the communities of a given income level the median resident

will itemize.       IF the median resident does itemize, then the corrrnunity ought to

be observed with 1/(1-t) times as much debt, everything else equal, or equiva-

lently be observed with the fraction t/(i-t) more debt. Therefore, if corn-

munities do segregate by itemization status, then, everything else equal, the

expected debt/income ratio for a community would be changed by the factor

(1 +   tPI/(1-t))   due to the effects of itemization.

       The simplest indicator of changinc itemization status over time is just the

age distribution of the residents. Younger residents are more likely to ite-

rnize. Since they are less likely to be itemizing when they are older, they

woulc wish to pay as much as they car ir, taxes while tney are young when

proerpty tax payments are tax deductible. Older residents are less liKely to

itemize and more likely to expect to sell shortly. As a result, they may either

want to borrow now, since a buyer will likely itemize to be able to deduct the

payment, or avoid borrowing now, since the buyer might misperceive a high pro-

perty tax as representinc a fixed real rather than a fixed nominal burden. The

particuia summary measures of the age distribution that we chose were: 1) the

per cent of the adult (over aoe 25) popLiation that was younger than aoe 45 (
                                      -20-

young), and 2) the per cent of the adult population over age 60 (% old).

     The Census also contained several direct indicators of the past mobility of

residents currently living in the town. High mobility among owners indicates

that residents are more likely to be itemizing, having recently acquired a

mortgage so prefer to pay for expenditures now while the tax payments are tax

deductible. It also indicates that an existing resident will more likely sell

his house in the near future, and prefer more debt if the buyer is itemizing and

in a higher tax bracket. The particular indiators that we used were: 1) the per

ent of housing units in which the current occupant moved in within the last five

years (1-U10VE), and 2) the per cent of residents who lived in a different county

five years earlier (CMOVE).

     In the first section, we also argued that renters would prefer debt finance

if they are covered-by rent control, but perhaps ought to prefer tax finance

otrwise. The Census did report the per cent of housing units which were

rented (% rent). Unfortunately we knew nothing about whether rent control

existed in any given community.

     If new housing units are being built in town, part of the burden of current

expenditures can be pushed onto new housing units with debt finance, but not

with tax finance. The particular measure of cormiunity growth we used was the

per cent of existing housing units built within the last five years (NNEW).

     Since state reaulations car; potentially limit (or at least influence) how

much debt municipalities within the state do issue, we included separate

constant terms ir the regression for each state. Based on the severity of the

state reguatons reported in footnote 5, we wuid expect municipalIties In

Connecticut to have the most debt, and those in Rriode island to have the least.

However, the direction of causation may not be clear —- the size of the stat&s

iirts may wail just reflect common practice am:or: the states municipalities.

     Finally, in some rearessions reportec oclo, we also induced as a
                                          —21—

regressor the ratio of municipal expenditures to aggregate income (ElY). Based

on the arguments in the first section, there would be no reason to expect any

causal relation between debt and expenditures. However, if the tax-exempt

status of interest on municipal bonds is serving as a subsidy to municipal

expenditures, then it must be true that communities which spend more are able as

a result to borrow more. Finding an association between debt and expenditures

in the data, after controlling for other factors, would at least suggest that

spending more allows a community to borrow more, implying that the ability to

issue tax—exempt bonds provides some subsidy to municipal expenditures. (Since

it is commonly argued that this tax—exemption specifically subsidizes capital

expenditures, it would have been preferable to try as an additional variable the

value of the municipal capital stock divided by income. No data were available

on the municipl capital stock, however.)

     Our basic measures of the financial position of a community were 1) total

debt outstanding divided by total income, (D/Y), and 2) debt net of security

holdings (measured inclusive of cash and deposits) divided by income (D—S)/Y).

We tried a variety of regression specifications, reported in Tables 5—7, in

order to test the robustness of the association we found previously between a

community's financial policy and the marginal income tax rate of its median

resident.    in, the first, we simoly reoressed each of our two measures o a corn-

rnrT:'s     inanca   oc:c acanst te       :st    ot 1n0caLors oescrec above

(igriarinc tne itemization factor), and the marQinai tax rate of the median resi-

dent of the community. Since the tax incentive to issue debt is proportional to

max(tm-t,O), however, we expected that the effects of the marginal tax rate

wauic be nonlinea-, with variation in t mattenina most wren t<t. We therefore

created two tax rate variables, tL   = mir(:,.27)    and tH =   max(t-.27,O),   thereby

aliowinc the marginal effect      changes r t to differ dependinc on wrether t            is
less than or greater than: 0.27.22   0n    expectation was that the effect of each
                                         -22-
tax rate variable on municipal debt holdings would be negative, but that tH
would be much less important.

     These regression results are reported in Tables 5 and 6, using either

dependent variable, and estimated over either all corrrnunities or only large com-

munities. In Table 5, we omit (ElY),     while   we include it in Table 6.

     In every case, the coefficients of the marginal tax rate variables have the

signs and patterns forecast from the theory —-      forecasted   gross and net debt

declines with marginal tax rate, and more quickly when the tax rate is low than

when it is high. The results show no clear difference in the degree to which

corrrnunities invest in securities. If all comunities invested in securities

just up to the allowed IRS limit, then the forecasted values of (D—S)/Y should

be proportional to those for D/Y, with a proportionality factor of about 0.80.

The coefficients on the tax rate variables in Table 5 do tend to be propor-

ticately smaller, thouch only by about 12, when (D—S)/Y is the dependent

variable. However, the tax coefficients in Table 6 tend to be larger when

(D—S)/Y is the dependent variable, suggesting some tendency for wealthier com-

munities to invest more in securities.

     The estimated magnitude of the effects of the tax rate are substantial,

particularly in Table 5. For example, if we forecast using the estimated coef-

ficients how much more debt relative to income a lance community would have if

:s tax rate equals 0.25 ratnen tnan 0.234. :ne :erence in tax races between

the hignest and the lowest of the six groups exanined previously, we forecast a

difference in D/Y of 0.126   usinc the coefficients in Table 5 and 0.069 usino        the

coeficients in Table 6.      in comparison, wnen we estimated this difference pre—

\nously in the second line c Table        no: controlling for anythinc else, we

found a difference o' 0.076. Tnis imniies tna: our previous results did not

anse from a failure to contrc cr ocher ooscrva:e factors.

     0omaninc tre results in Tasles 5 and 6, we nt that in:iudinc E/Y) makes
                                           -23-

a large difference.   It does appear that coriinunities are able to borrow more if

they spend more,23 even though the theory in section I suggested no clear reason

why additional' spending should cause the community to incur additional debt.

(In fact, one might argue that additional spending would make the community a

less attractive risk to a lender, since the extra spending would be a competing

demand on the tax base.)

     If this observed association between spending and debt is interpreted to be

causal, then we conclude that spending is made cheaper because of a community's

ability to issue taxexempt debt. How large a subsidy to spending is implied by

these estimates? The difficulty in answering this question is that in the data

we are comparing the stock of debt with an annual flow of expenditures. In

order to interpret the results, let us assume that half of new debt issues are

short term (one year), and half are long term (twenty years), and let us assume

that all debt is repaid when it matures.24 Assume also that d% of expenditures

each year are financed by debt, and assume expenditures have been growing in

nominal terms at g% each year. Between 1957 and 1977, nominal state and local

expenditures grew at 9.6% per year, so let us approximate g by .096. Then at

any point in time, the stock of debt outstanding would equal .5(dE +          dE—gsds)
                                                                          0
where E equals the current level of expenditures and s indexes years.         Our

regression coefficients imply that large communities which spend a dollar more

nave as a result $0.SE more debt outstanding, so tnat the total curren: debt

arising from past expenditures should equal (0.68)E. Equating the two
                                              =
expressions and solving for d, assuming           0.096, we find that d   0.1375;

that is, each extra dollar of spending allows a community to issue 0.1375

dollars of extra debt.

     When a community issues a dollar of tax exempt debt for twenty years, the

cost of making payments or tne Cet, assuming tnat t<t, equals

   rme_r(i_t)sds + e.20r(1t) .    If   t    0.234 (the value for the poorest of our
                                           -24-

six groups), if t =   0.35,   and if r =   0.076, then this expression equals 0.90 —-
the tax—exempt status lowers the cost of the long term debt by 10%. Similarly,
when debt is issued for one year, given the same procedure and parameter values,

the debt is cheaper by 0.86% (approximately r(l-t)-rm) because of its tax—exempt

status. Given our assumption that half of the debt issued is short term and

half is long term, the average savings from issuing debt are 5.43% of the value

of the debt issued. Since, by our calculations, a dollar of extra expenditures

results in only 0.1375 dollars of extra debt, the cost of this dollar expen-

diture is reduced by only 0.0543      0.1375 = 0.0075 dollars as a result of the

tax—exempt status of the debt, a trivial 0.75% subsidy rate for this low-income

community. For wealthy communities, for whom t>tm, there would be no reduction

in the cost of extra expenditures. Our results therefore suggest that this tax

exemption should have virtually no effect on the cost of municipal expenditures.

     Among the other coefficients reported in Tables 5 and 6, most tend to be

small and insignificant. In many cases, the forecasts from the theory were also

ambiguous. The coefficients do indicate the following: 1) Middle—aged com-

munities tend to have the most debt, while younger communities have slightly

less debt and older communities have much less debt. This pattern seems to be

more consistent with the life cycle pattern of spending on local public ser-

vices, some fraction of which is debt financed, than with the tax arbitrage

aroumen: : section     .   2   Mobile coraTurTtes tend to avoid debt, as expected.

3 Connecticut communities tend to have siiahtiy more debt, as expected, though

there are rio clear differences among the other states.

     The results reported in Tables 5 and 6 suffer from the problem that the

dependent variable is deflated by income, anc' in addition triree independent

variables, E/Y and the two tax rate variables, are constructed using income

information. If the renorted income fiaures cc not measure tne correct theore-

tical concect without error, as is inevitabe. trier the pre'ious coefficient
                                                    —25-

estimates are somewhat biased.

      We felt that the indirect correlation with the residual would be greatest

for (ElY), so we reran the previous regressions with instrumental variables,

using as instruments all the independent variables except for (ElY), plus

(E/population), CE/population)2, and the fraction of the population of school

age. The results were almost identical to those reported in Tables 5 and 6.

      Any bias due to correlation of the tax variables with the residuals should

be slight —— the tax variables are constructed using median family income, and

the correlation of this with total income of the                         should be smalL. To

attempt to control for any bias, however, instrumental variables did not seem

worthwhile —-      there      seemed to be no good instruments for marginal tax rates.

Instad, we tried deflating the dependent variable by tax revenues rather than

income. Tax revenues is probably less highly correlated than is income with

property values, the deflator argued for in section I, but the correlation

should still be high.            ifl addition, with this specification we test whether corn-

rnunties simply rely proportionately or debt finance vs. tax finance when

funding expenditures.

      The resultine coefficient estimates are reported in Table 725 We have

omitted (expenditures! revenues) from these rearessions, as its variation

reflects interoovernrnental transfers as well as interest payments on existino

se:, acto:              :r a e :rie' -e e\ar o enocoenos                Sirce me rnea a uc
of   the oependent varable is approximately ten times as large as tnat o flY,

the coefficient estimates are also much larger. However, all previous patterns

1:   tne coefficients remain present, particularly for large communities. For

exam: 'e       the orecastec d ferencc ir tne aepenoer variable beteer conrnt1n ties

           =    0.234   anc      =   0.3D0   15   0.30,, rorecasng usin trie coeficients o
tric fu1       sam:ie, arc 3.844, usin tnc samle c lance                    : comparison,   tne

diferences reporLe in Table 2 for                  trese tw: 'cases were 0.23 an 0.272,
                                        —26-

respectively. While the statistical fit is somewhat poorer when DIR    is   the

dependent variable, the qualitative results reported previously continue to be

present —-   our previous findings do note seem to arise from a simple statistical

bias.

        Another bias caused by the multiple roles of income arises from the fact

that residents in higher income comunities are more likely to itemize, and com-

munities where residents itemize, by our theory, should have 1/(1-t) times as

much debt. Since primarily rich communities itemize, had we controlled for the

effects of itemization, the estimated effects of taxes should have been yet

stronger. To estimate how sensitive our results are to the effects of itemiza-

tion, we reran the previous regressions for large communities after multiplying

all right—hand side variables, including the constant, by the factor

(1 +    tPI/(1-t)).   As expected, the coefficients on the tax variables were

ia ;er, though not dramatically so. The other coefficient estimates were simi-

lar to those reported previously. Since our proxy for whether a corrinunity ite-

mizes is far from perfect, these results should be interpreted with caution.


IV. Conclusions

        On theoretical grounds, we argued that poorer comunities face much

stronger incentives to issue municipal bonds than do wealthier comunities, and

our e:ricai work showed that poor comTuntes do in fact borrow a great dea

more.     Ir. contrast, wealthier cornunties shoid face ar incentive to   invest
through their community and so avoid tax on income frocr savings, yet we foundin

the data only limited evidence of such a pattern. Apparently municipal

ernoiovees are not trusted as investment manaocrs.

        Wna: then do we conclude about tn cstributional ano efficiency effects of

toese tax incentives faced by    murHciait'es?    In section :, we calculated the

tax sa''inas to resicents resu itinc fron municipal financial policy, anc found

tnat toe 200rest communities gained toe most relative to their income, thouo
                                      —27-

for all communities the tax savings, as a per cent of income, were extremely

small. Of course, the wealthy gain substantially as purchasers, rather than

issuers, of municipal bonds, and this gain to the wealthy, as purchasers of tax-

exempt bonds, should be the dominant distributional effect of the provision

making these bonds tax—exempt. Those in the middle of the income distribution

are left with little gain from either side of the market.

     Communities undertake only a limited amount of such tax arbitrage because

there are some offsetting costs, due perhaps to costs of risk bearing and agency

and bankruptcy costs. These offsetting costs, which are real costs, are one

component of the efficiency cost of the tax—exempt status of municipal bonds.

At the margin, in equilibrium, these costs must be as large as any extra tax

savings. In aggregate, these costs must be smaller, though, else no arbitrage

would occur. How much smaller is not clear. For a detailed simulation study of

the efficiency and distributional effects of the tax exempt status of interest

on municipal bonds, see Gordon-Siemrod (1983).

    One justification commonly given for the tax exempt status of interest

on municipal bonds is to subsidize municipal expenditures. Yet, according to

our estimates, any reduction in the cost of municipal expenditures arising from

the tax—exempt status of municipal bonds, is trivial. The justification for

tax-exempt bonds must be sought elsewhere.
                                                               Gordon & Slemrod




                                    FOOTNOTES




      *We would like to thank Harvey Brazer for extensive corrrnents on an earlier

draft, and William Shobe for very able assistance with the empirical work. The

work on this paper was begun while Gordon was employed at AT&T Bell

Laboratories, and completed while Slemrod was a National Fellow at the Hoover

Institution of Stanford University. The opinions expressed in this paper are

those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the N.B.E.R., AT&T Bell

Laboratories, or Hoover Institution.

 1. We implicitly assume that individuals can borrow and lend freely at a

      before tax interest rate of r, pay tax on any extra interest earnings

      (e.g., do not save at the margin in an IRA), and itemize if they borrow.

      If individuals face a higher opportunity cost of funds, due for example to

      binding borrowing constraints, then the discussion in the text would need

      to be modified in a straightforward way.

 2. See, for example, Poterba (1984).

 3.   if the individual itemizes, then the accounting of this cash flow is

      oen:ca to that far ar IRA. Giver itemization, a property tax increase
         $(i//I—t)) costs te indivicua I net of income taxes. After a year,

      the corrrnunity owns $(i+r)/(1-t) in assets, When it lowers property taxes

      by this amount, the individual saves (l±r) net of income taxes, given the

      deductibility of property tax payments. Since the dollar, if invested

      cirectly, would have been wortr (i+r(1-t)), the net oem     to   investinc a

      dollar in the community equals (ir)-(1±r(i-t)      rt.
                                                                     2




                              FOOTNOTES CONTINUED



4. These incentives have also been described in Adams (1977) and Gordon—

    Slemrod (1983).   If residents itemize, the story would be modified

    slightly, as in footnote 3. The coninunity would borrow S(1/(].—t)), saving

    residents 1, given the deductibility of property taxes, which they can

    then invest at an interest rate r(1-t). When the municipal debt is repaid,

    the individual must pay (i+rm)!(i—t) extra in property taxes, but at a cost

    net of income taxes of (l+rm). Arbitrage profits are still r(l—t)—rm, but

   now on municipal borrowing of (1/(1-t)).

5. For example, in the states we examine below the limits are asfollows.

    In Maine, each municipality may issue debt up to 7.5% of assessed value,

    school districts may borrow up to 12.5% of assessed value, and special

   districts and other government entities face their own debt ceilings.      In

   Massachusetts, cities can borrow up to 2.5% of assessed value, towns up to

   5, and fire, water, light, and improvement districts up to 5%; however the

   first tw limits can be doubled with permission from the state. In

   Rhode Island, municipalities can borrow up to 3% of assessed value, but

   excluded fror this limit are housing authority, public building authority,

   anc vaius ctner bards; tn state car authorize towns         exceed tnese

    limits. Connecticut, in contrast, restricts general ooiigation debt to

   2.25 times the latest tax receipts, though makes certain types of debt

   exempt from these limits. The limits car also be increased for certain

   purposes, such as school building projects or urban renewal. For further

   discussion, see Starner (1961), or A.C..R. (1974).
                                                                     3



                              FOOTNOTES CONTINUED



6. The problem was that the reported figures for long term debt issues in 1977

     in our sample included a sizable amount of revenue bonds, used to finance

     such activites as utilities, pollution control, hospitals, single family

     housing, industrial aid, etc.   In aggregate in 1977, Peterson (1978)

     reports that total debt issues, including revenue bonds, equalled 118.7% of

     local capital outlays, and the figures in our sample were not much

     different. Revenue bonds, however, are with rare exceptions not legal

     liabilities of the municipality, and are repaid out of mortgage payments,

     rental income, or other user fees. The municipality, ;when issuing revenue

     bonds, is merely acting as a conduit for funds for some other quasi —public

     or private organization, and not providing any tax arbitrage for residents.

     Unfortunately, we have no figures on issues of general obligation debt.

7.   For an overview of these various factors, see Gordon (1982).

E.   As in the discussion of corporate financial policy, further debt issues

     would raise the probability of default, leading to higher anticipated real

     exoenditures by both lenders and the comunity when negotiating a

     settlement.

     RS rLes cc not aiow interest or cab: to be oecucte if tnc funds are

     borrowed to buy tax exempt securities. However, Y an indiviauai borrows

     for another purpose, interest is deductible even if municipal bonds are

     simulaneouslv held. In most cases, an indivicual should be able to avoid
                                                                         4


                                FOOTNOTES CONTINUED




 9 (continued), this IRS rule. If the IRS rule is binding, however, then the

     risk adjusted value of rm would exceed r(1-t), and individuals in this

     situation would prefer to avoid municipal borrowing.

10. This could occur if the community has imposed tight zoning restrictions on

     new construction.

11. While the dates of the two censuses were three years apart, we felt that

     this gap was small enough to ignore.

12. With more time, we might have expanded the sample further to include

     New York (26%), New Hampshire (30%), and perhaps Wisconsin (40%).

13. Three towns were eliminated for which the reported figures were estimated

     by the Census rather than reported by the town.

14. Measurement error should be less, however, for growing corrkmunities, where

     debt   would have been issued more recently.

15. This figure is the return on book value rather than market value, so its

     low value probably just reflects the fact that the bonds tend to be old.

16. For a description of these incentives, focussing on corporate plans, see

     Black (1980) and Tepper (1981).

1. Inmar and Seidmar (198), however,      find   that local oovernment pensions
     tend   to be underfunoec
18. We would like to thank Daniel Feenberg for calculatinc these figures for
     us.

19. A community was defined to be homogeneous if at least 24% of its families
    had ar income witnin 20% of the median income.
                                                                        5




                               FOOTNOTES CONTINUED




20. Residents do presumably bear some offsetting costs, however, such as risk

    and agency costs. Unless state restrictions on borrowing are binding,

     in equilibrium the marginal increase in these costs as more debt is issued

    would just equal the extra taxes saved. Average costs would be

     substantially less than average tax savings, however.

21. The interest rate data used in this paragraph come from the Salomon

     Brothers Center, An Analytical Record of Yields and Yield Spreads.

22. The break point of 0.27 was chosen because it provided a reasonable

     estimate of trn, and because it divided the sample approximately in half.

23. Other explanations for the statistical association are possible, however.

     For example, comunities with large amounts of comercial and industrial

     property can both spend more and find it attractive to borrow more ——

     lenders   would have the commercial and industrial tax base as additional

     col lateral.

24. The results are very insensitive to these assumptions about the maturity

     structure of the debt.

2E. Asefa, Adams, and Starleaf (1981)    report   simiar regression results.

     Specfica)iy, on a sarnpft o 66C larac towns taKen from the 1972 and 1967

     Censuses, they regressed (change in the book value of nominal debt between

     1967 and 1972)/(estimated total expenditures) against median income,

     capital expenditures as a fraction of tctal expenditures, % old, HMOVE,

     percent growth rate in popu'ation, and a few other variables. They also
                                                                    6




                             FOOTNOTES CONTINUED




25 (continued), found a negative effect of median income, and in addition found

    that a dollar of extra capital expenditure was associated with 50.314 of

    extra debt issues. However, changes in debt, the focus of their work, need

    have only a very weak connection with the equilibrium level of debt

    holdings, the focus of our paper. Communities may mostly finance large

    capital expenditures initially with debt in order to avoid large fluc-

    tuations in their property tax rates, but may differ substantially in how

    quickly they pay back the debt or the degree to which they build up

    reserves in anticipation of upcoming expenditures. Their coefficient esti-

    mates also ought to be unstable across time periods, since the dependent

    variable, changes in nominal debt, is strongly affected by the inflation

    rate and the age distribution of the debt.
                                                              Gordon & Slemrod



                                    REFERENCES


A.C.I.R. Federal—State-Local Finances: Significant Features of Fiscal

    Federalism. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1974.

Adams, Roy D. "Individual Preferences as Supply Determinants in the Municipal

    and Federal Bond Markets.' Public Finance Quarterly 5 (April, 1977),

     17 5—202.

Asefa, Sally A., Adams, Roy D., and Dennis R. Starleaf. "Munici pal Borrowing:

     Some Empirical Results." Public Finance Quarterly 9 (         ,   1981),
     27 1—280.

Black, Fischer. "The Tax Coriequences of Long—Run Pension Policy.' Financial

    Analysts Journal 36 (July-August, 1980), 25—31.

Gc-don, Roger H.    "Interest Rates, Inflation, and Corporate Financial Policy.'

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2 (1982), 461-488.

Gordon, Roger H. and Burton G. Malkiel. "Corporation Finance.' In Henry 3.

     Aaron and Joseph A. Pechman, eds. Ho Taxes Affect Economic Behavior

     Washington, D.C.: Brookins Institution, 1981.

Gordon, Roger H. and Slemrod, Joel. A General Equilibrium Simulation Study of

     Subsidies to Municipal Expenditures.' Journal of Finance 38 (May, 1983),

     5E5-59.

inman, Robert, anc Seidman. Laurence. '?ublic Emioyee Pensions and U.S.

     Aggregate Savings Behavior,' N.B.E.R. Conference Paper No. 57, 1980.

Peterson, George. "Capital Spending and Capital Obsolescence: The Outlook for

     tne Cities.'   In Ro Earl, e. The FSçi Outlook fr         Cities:    irnclications

        a National Urbar, Policy.   Syracuse:    Syracuse University Press, 1978.
                                                                       2



                                   REFERENCES CONTINUED




Peterson, John. The Municipal Bond Market: Recent Changes and Future
     Prospects."       In Norman Waizer and David L. Chicoine,    eds. Financing
     State and Local Governments in the 1980's. Cambridge: Oelgeschlager,

     Gunn, and Ham, Inc., 1981.
                   "
Poterba, James.

     presented at the NBER Conference on State and Local Finance,
     June 15—16, 1984, New York.

Starner, Frances J. General Oblication Bond FinaricinQ by Local Governments: A

     Survey of State Controls. Berkeley: University of           California,   1961.

Tepper, Irwin. Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy." Journal of Finance

     36 (March, 1981), 1-13.
                                         TABLE 1

                   Municipal Debt as a Percent of Municipal Income




     Sample                            Range of Marginal Income Tax Rates

                             .210-       .245-     .257-   .275—    .293-   .325+
                             .245

1.   All                           9      7.3       6.9     6.7      6.3     4.0
                             .7.

2.   Large towns             10.7         8.7       6.8     7.2      3.7     3.1

3.   Small towns              5.2         6.1       7.0     6.4      6.8     4.3

4.   Homogeneous towns        4.5         7.8       6.9     6.4      7.0     5.4

5. Heterogeneous towns       10.2         6.6       7.0     7.4      4.8     3.0
                                        TABLE 2

                       Alternative Measures of Financial Position



Definition/Sample                     Range of Marginal Income Tax Rates

                              .210-      .245-    .257-    .275—    .293-   .325+
                              .245       .257     .275     .293     .325

Debt/Revenues
  1. All                      71.4      74.1      73.5     74.1     69.8    48.3
  2. Large towns              64.3      80.7      69.6     76.0     51.0    37.1

Securi ties/Income
without deposits
  3.   All                    0.54       0.46     0.87      0.45     0.28    0.35
  4. Large towns              0.88       0.96      1.07     0.41     0.26    0.41

with deposits
  5.   All                     2.8        2.5      2.8      1.9      2.3     2.0
  6. Large     towns          3.0         3.4     2.9       2.0      2.1     1.7

Securities/Debt
 with deposits
  7.   All                   65.8       60.6      49.1    40.7      54.2    64.7
  8.   Large                 32.4       43.9      42.6    46.2      79.2    87.5


Note: All figures are reported as percentages rather than as fractions.
                                        TABLE 3

                      Extent of Various Forms of Tax Arbitrage



     Definition                     Range of Marginal Income Tax Rates

                            .210-       .245-     .257-    .275-    .293-    .325+
                            .245        .257      .275     .293     .325

1.    rnin(D,S)/Y            2.7         2.3       2.3      1.8      2.2      1.7

2.    rnax(D—S,0)/Y          5.2         5.1       4.6      4.9      4.1      2.3

3.    rnax(S—D,O)/Y          0.14        0.26      0.48     0.12     0.08     0.27

Tax savings/Y

4.    tm =                   0.049       0.044     0.049    0.033    0.039    0.036
             :225
5.    t = .35                0.120       0.105     0.101    0.075    0.074    0.052



Fote: The definition of    securities   includes cash and deposits. All figures

         are reported as per cents, rather than as fractions.
                                      TABLE 4

               Taxable Securities Held as a Percent of Municipal Debt:
                          Distribution Across Communities




                                                Percentile Range


  Definition                   0      0—.1       .1-.2   .2-.3     .3-.4   .4-.5    >.5

Securities/Debt

  1. Without deposits        60.9     23.6       4.7      2.2       0.4    2.9      5.4

 2. ith deposits              0.4      8.3       22.8    18.5      11.2    8.3     30.4
                                      TABLE 5

                              Regression Results
                        (Expenditures/Income Omi tted)

                          Dependent Variable/Sample


                                DIV       (D-S)/Y        DIV    (D-S)IV
        I ndependent
        Variable                   All towns             Large towns

   1.    Constant           0.43           0.42       0.84       0.87
                           (0.13)         (0.13)      (0.20)    (0.25)

                           —0.93          —0.80       —2.32     —2.12
   2. tL                   IA   A\        IA          (A A\     Hi

   3.     t                —0.26
                           (0.14)
                                          —0.23
                                          (0.15)
                                                      —0.53
                                                      (0.27)
                                                                —0.45
                                                                (0.36)

   4.     %   young        -0.04          -0.12       —0.07     —0.21
                           (0.13)         (0.14)      (0.23)    (0.31)

   5.     %   old          -0.28          -0.35       —0.42     —0.56
                           (0.13)         (0.14)      (0.22)    (0.29)

   6. CMOVE                —0.07          -0.07       -0.02     —0.01
                           (0.04)         (0.04)      (0.08)    (0.10)

   7.     F0VE             —0.11          -0.05       —0.06     —0.03
                           (0.10)         (0.11)      (0.19)    (0.25)

   8. % rent                0.09           0.06       -0.02     —0.02
                           (0.05)          (0.05)     (0.08)    (0.11)

   9.     HNEW              0.02            0.00      -0.04     -0.05
                           (0.10)          (0.10)     (0.20)    (0.25)

  10. Conn.                 0.02           0.01        0.04      0.02
                           (0.01)          (0.01)     (0.02)    (0.02)
  11.     Maine            —0.02          -0.02       —0.00      0.00
                           (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.03)     (0.04)

  12. Mass.                -0.00           -0.01       0.03      0.02
                           (0.01)          (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)

  Standard Error
  o  the ReQression         0.041           0.043      0.038     0.050

                            0.205           0.145      0.422      0.241


No:e: Standard Errors are in parentheses under the coefficients.
                                    TABLE 6

                           Regression Results
                    (Expenditures/Incomes Included)

                                        Dependent Variable/Sample

                             D/Y         (D-S)/Y       D/Y    (D-S)/Y
      Independent
       Variable                    All towns           Large towns

 1. Constant             0.18             0.24        0.38      0.56
                        (0.12)           (0.13)      (0.19)    (0.27)

 2. tL                  -0.35            —0.39       -0.86     -1.16
                        (0.28)           (0.32)      (0.47)    (0.69)

 3. t                   -0.15            —0.15       —0.47     —0.41
                        (0.13)           (0.15)      (0.24)    (0.35)

 4. % young             0.02             —0.08       -0.05     -0.20
                        (0.12)           (0.14)      (0.20)    (0.30)

 5. % old               —0.15            —0.25       -0.33     —0.50
                        (0.12)           (0.14)      (0.19)    (0.28)

 6.    CMOVE            -0.02            -0.03        0.03      0.03
                        (0.04)           (0.04)      (0.07)    (0.10)
 7.     F1DVE           —0.17            —0.09       —0.17     —0.10
                        (0.09)           (0.11)      (0.17)    (0.25)

 8. % rent               0.08             0.06        0.03      0.07
                        (0.04)           (0.05)      (0.07)    (0.11)

 9.     HNEW             0.12             0.08        0.15      0.07
                        (0.09)           (0.10)      (0.17)    (0.25)

10.     Corin.           0.02             0.01        0.03      0.01
                        (0.D9)           (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.02)
                         r
                                         (r r'(                t(
12.     Mass.           -0.02            -0.02        0.00      0.00
                        (0.01)           (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.02)
13. E/                   0.57             0.40        0.68      0.45
                        (0.07)           (0.08)      (0.12)    (0.18)
Stancac Error
of tne Recressior        0.037            0.042       0.033     0.049

P.2                                       C.51        0.2i      0.290
                               TABLE 7

                      Debt/Revenue Regressions

     Independent
      Variables                             Dependent Variable/Sample

                         DIR        (D-S)/R         DIR     (D-S)IR

                               All towns             Large towns

1. Constant            2.6           2.9            4.5         5.9
                      (1.6)         (1.5)          (1.7)        (2.5)

2. tL                 —1.2          -2.3           -8.1      -10.5
                      (3.8)         (3.6)          (3.9)      (5.7)
2                     _2 2          _2             —F Q         -2
                      (1.8)         (1.7)          (2.3)        (3.4)

4. % young            —1.4          —1.7           -1.0         -2.2
                      (1.7)         (1.6)          (2.0)        (3.0)
5. % old              -3.1          -3.5           -3.4     '   —4.7
                      (1.7)         (1.6)          (1.9)        (2.8)
6. CMOVE              —0.4          -0.4            0.1          0.5
                      (0.5)         (0.5)          (0.7)        (1.0)
7.     HMOVE          —0.9          —0.5           -0.6         —0.7
                      (1.3)         (1.2)          (1.6)        (2.4)

8.     % rent          1.0           0.7           —0.4         —0.4
                      (0.6)         (0.5)          (0.7)        (1.1)
9. HNEW                1.7           1.3            0.4         -0.0
                      (1.2)         (1.1)          (1.7)        (2.5)

10. Conn.              0.2           0.1            0.3          0.1
                      (0.2)         (0.1)          (0.1)        (0.2)
1.                    —0.2          —0.1
                      (0.2)         (0.2)                       (0.4)
12. Mass.             —0.2          —0.2            0.1          0.0
                      (0.1)         (0.1)          (0.1)        (0.2)
5tandard   Error
c    tr}e ReQressor    0.512         0.78           0.324        0.482

                       C.15          C.i44          0.276        0.120
