NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEXT-BASED NETWORK INDUSTRIES AND ENDOGENOUS PRODUCT DI˙FFERENTIATION
Gerard Hoberg
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 15991
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15991
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

This paper was previously circulated as "Dynamic Text-Based Industry Classifications and Endogenous
Product Differentiation." We especially thank Dan Kovenock, Steve Martin, John Sutton and seminar
participants at Aalto (Helsinki) School of Economics, HEC, IFN (Stockholm), Insead, ISTCE (Lisbon),
London Business School, Notre Dame, Northwestern, Stanford, Stockholm School of Economics,
University of Amsterdam, University of Southern California, University of Vienna and the Academy
of Management meetings for helpful comments. All errors are the authors alone. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Text-Based Network Industries and Endogenous Product Di˙fferentiation
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 15991
May 2010, Revised February 2012
JEL No. D21,D23,L12,L13,L16,L22,L23
ABSTRACT
We study how firms differ from their competitors using new time-varying measures of product differentiation
based on text-based analysis of product descriptions from 50,673 firm 10-K statements filed yearly
with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This year-by-year set of product differentiation measures
allows us to generate a new set of industries and corresponding new measures of industry competition
where firms can have their own distinct set of competitors. Our new sets of industry competitors better
explain specific discussion of high competition by management, rivals identified by managers as peer
firms and firm characteristics such as profitability and leverage than do existing classifications. We
also find evidence that firm R&D and advertising are associated with subsequent differentiation from
competitors, consistent with theories of endogenous product differentiation.
Gerard Hoberg
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
4423 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu
Gordon M. Phillips
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Citigroup Center
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu

Defining industry boundaries and industry competitiveness is central to the study
of industrial organization. It is also central to broader disciplines in Economics and
Finance, where the study of industries, or the need to control for industry, is pervasive. Our paper is based on the premise that product similarity is core to classifying
industries, and that empirical work can benefit from the ability to measure industry memberships and product differentiation in every year. Using new time-varying
industry classifications, we find that firm R&D and advertising are associated with
subsequent differentiation from competitors and increased profitability. These results
are consistent with Sutton’s (1991) theory of endogenous product differentiation.
Our starting point to form new industries is to gather business descriptions from
50,673 firm annual 10-Ks filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission using
web crawling algorithms. The vector representations of the text in each firm’s product description generate a Hotelling-like product location space for U.S. firms.1 We
process the text in these product descriptions to calculate new industry classifications based on the strong tendency of product market vocabulary to cluster among
firms operating in the same markets. Because they are a function of 10-K business
descriptions, our classifications are based on the products that firms supply to the
market, rather than production processes (as is the case for some existing industry
classification schemes).2
These tools enable us to examine how industry structure changes over time, and
how firms react to such changes within and around their product markets. A key
advantage of our analysis is that firms must file a 10-K in each year, allowing us to
build classifications that change over time. The framework also provides a continuous measure of product similarity between firms both within and across industries,
allowing us to create general network representations of industry competition, with
each firm having its own distinct set of competitors. Although numerous studies
use industry classifications as control variables, only a few studies examine the clas1

Chamberlin (1933) and Hotelling (1929) famously show that product differentiation is fundamental to profitability and theories of industrial organization, and also that product markets can be
viewed as having a spatial representation that accounts for product differentiation. Empirically, the
spatial characteristics of our measures can also be viewed as analogous to the patent technologybased space of Jaffe (1986), although Jaffe’s space is applicable for patent filing firms and is not
generated using product description text.
2
See http://www.naics.com/info.htm.

1

sification schemes themselves and these do not consider the possibility of industry
classifications that change materially over time.3
We create new industry classification systems based on 10K product similarities
using two methods: one historically motivated, and one that allows industry competition to be firm centric and change over time. The first, which we name “fixed
industry classifications” (FIC), is analogous to SIC and NAICS industries.4 Here,
firms are grouped together either over fixed periods of time and membership in an
industry is required to be transitive. Thus this method requires that if firms B and C
are in firm A’s industry, then firms B and C are also in the same industry. We assign
firms to industries using clustering algorithms that maximize total within-industry
similarity where similarity is based on word usage in 10-K product descriptions.
Our second classification system is more general. In this classification, we allow
firm competitors to change every year and we relax the membership transitivity requirements of FIC industries and view industries like flexible networks. We name
these new generalized network industries “text-based network industry classifications” (TNIC). In this classification system, each firm can have its own set of distinct
competitors analogous to a social network, where each individual has a distinct set
of friends, with friends of one individual not necessarily being friends of each other.
To illustrate why transitivity is restrictive, suppose firms A and B both view firm
C as a rival. If A and B have each have products with different distinct features or
enhancements that C does not have, then A and B may not compete against each
other as they may serve different product segments.
Relative to existing industry classifications, these new text-based classifications
offer economically large improvements in their ability to explain managerial discussion of high competition, the specific firms mentioned by managers as being com3

Kahle and Walkling (1996) compare the informativeness of SIC codes obtained from the CRSP
and COMPUSTAT databases, and Fama and French (1997) create new industry classifications
based on a new way of grouping existing four digit SIC codes. Krishnan and Press (2003) compare
SIC codes to NAICS codes, and Bhojraj, Lee, and Oler (2003) also compare various fixed industry
classifications. Although these studies are informative, and suggest that existing static classifications can be used in better ways, they do not explore whether the core methodology underlying
static classifications can be improved upon.
4
We make these industry classifications and corresponding firm memberships available to researchers via the internet.

2

petitors, and how advertising and R&D create future product differentiation. Our
new industry measures also offer econometric gains in explaining the cross section
of firm characteristics. Our empirical tests further benefit from information about
the degree to which specific firms are similar to their competitors, which cannot be
derived from zero-one membership classifications such as SIC or NAICS.
Although it is convenient to use existing industry classifications such as SIC or
NAICS for research purposes, these measures have limitations. Neither adjusts significantly over time as product markets evolve, and neither can easily accommodate
innovations that create entirely new product markets. In the late 1990s, hundreds
of new technology and web-based firms were grouped into a large and nondescript
SIC-based “business services” industry. More generally, fixed classifications like SIC
and NAICS have at least four shortcomings: they only rarely re-classify firms that
move into different industries, they do not allow for the industries themselves to
evolve over time, and they impose transitivity even though two firms that are rivals
to a third firm may not compete against each other. Lastly, they do not provide
continuous measures of similarity both within and across industries.
Our results are robust to the treatment of firms that report producing in more
than one industry (conglomerate firms). When forming fixed classifications, we only
use firms that report just one segment to identify which industries exist in the economy. Thereafter, we assign conglomerates and non-conglomerates alike to the resulting classifications. Detailed robustness tests show that assigning conglomerates
to more than one industry does not generate material improvements in explanatory
power, suggesting that multiple industry conglomerate characteristics are strongly
in-line with the single industry to which they are most similar.
In our analysis of text-based industry classifications, our ability to update both
the product location of a firm and the identity of a firm’s competitors over time also
allows us to examine whether advertising and research and development are correlated with increasing product differentiation. We find that firms spending more on
either advertising or R&D experience significant reductions in measures of ex-post
competition and gains in ex-post profitability, consistent with the hypothesis of Sutton (1991) that firms spend on advertising and R&D to create endogenous barriers to
3

entry. Our results provide evidence across a broad range of industries complementing
Ellickson (2007), who analyzes endogenous barriers to entry in the supermarket industry. We note that while our new measures are interesting for research or scientific
purposes to examine topics including innovation and the industry life-cycle, they are
less useful for policy and antitrust purposes as they could be manipulated by firms
fairly easily if firms believed they were being used by policy makers.
Our research contributes to existing strands of literature using text analysis to
address economic and financial theories, product markets, and mergers and acquisitions. Hoberg and Phillips (2010) show that merging firms with more similar product
descriptions in their 10-Ks experience more successful outcomes. Hanley and Hoberg
(2010) use document similarity measures to examine prospectus disclosures from the
SEC Edgar website to address theories of IPO pricing. In other contexts, papers such
as Antweiler and Frank (2004), Tetlock (2007), Tetlock, Saar-Tsechanksy, and Macskassy (2008), Loughran and McDonald (2010), Li (2006) and Boukus and Rosenberg
(2006) examine the relation between the types of words in news stories and bulletin
boards and stock price movements.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss characteristics and
give examples of our new industry classifications in Section I. We describe the data
and similarity calculations in Section II. We give methodological details for our new
industry classifications in Section III. In Section IV we compare the informativeness
of our new industry classifications to existing SIC and NAICS industry groupings.
We construct measures of industry competitiveness in Section V, and Section VI
examines how industry structure changes over time and examines how these changes
relate to theories of product differentiation and endogenous barriers to entry. Section
VII concludes.

I

Industry Classifications as a Network

In this section we discuss the features of our “unrestricted” text-based network industry classification that are not available using classifications such as SIC and NAICS.
We illustrate these new features using examples based on our new industry group4

ings, while postponing the methodological details to Section III. We define our new
industry classifications as an unrestricted network as they have features similar to a
network where firms are located distinctly in a product space, each surrounded by
its own distinct set of competitors, and each having continuous relatedness scores
vis-a-vis all other firms.
Unrestricted networks also have a spatial representation, where same-industry
firms appear as clusters, akin to cities on a map. Distances from firm to firm within a
cluster indicate within-industry product differentiation, and distances across clusters
indicate cross-industry similarity. In contrast, existing industry classifications such
as SIC or NAICS are restricted in that, while they have a spatial representation,
all firms in the same cluster have the same zero distance from each other, all share
membership within the cluster, imposing transitivity, and there is no known distance
across industry clusters. We now discuss these features in depth and give examples
of industries in which the new text-based industries give improvements.

A

Ability to Capture Within-Industry Heterogeneity

The concept of product differentiation within industries dates back to Chamberlin
(1933), who famously showed that the notion of product differentiation is fundamental to theories of industrial organization, with product differentiation reducing
competition between firms. An ideal classification system should not only identify product markets, but also provide measures of differentiation within industries.
Beginning with Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1997), the approach of the product
differentiation literature has been to estimate demand and cost parameters in welldefined product markets. For example, Nevo (2000), estimates own- and cross-price
elasticities of demand and their effect on post-merger prices in the ready-to-eat cereal market. This approach has been highly informative, especially in understanding
the dynamics of industry pricing, competition and substitution in these well-defined
industries. However, many theories, especially those related to endogenous barriers
to entry and why firms produce across multiple industries, are difficult to test in a
single industry setting.

5

In addition, accurately specifying industry composition is especially difficult in industries where firms offer highly differentiated products or services. This difficulty is
readily apparent in the business services industry, SIC code 737. There were over 600
public firms in this industry in 1997 according to Compustat. Using a classification
that matches the coarseness of three-digit SIC industries, we find that the markets
faced by these firms are quite different. Table I displays sample classifications using
our methodology for selected firms in this product area.
[Insert Table I Here]
Table I shows 6 major sub markets within the broad business services industry. They are Entertainment, Medical Services, Information Transmission, Software,
Corporate Data Management and Computing Solutions, and Online Retailing and
Publishing. Each displayed industry is the TNIC industry surrounding the focal
firm listed in each example’s header. While SIC codes were not used to make these
groupings, we report the codes for illustrative purposes. The SIC codes of rival firms
in each market load heavily on 737, but each sub-market also spans firms in other
SIC-industries including the three-digit codes 357, 366 and 382. A key theme is that
many firms address these markets using the internet and technology, and they often
also compete with rivals that have a more traditional brick and mortar presence.
Beyond simply identifying industry clusters, our approach also generates firm-byfirm pairwise relatedness scores. Therefore, our framework can order rivals in terms
of their importance to a focal firm, analogous to a network, while also providing
simple measures of the overall product differentiation surrounding each firm. Our
method can also be used to construct a firm-specific concentration index that can
capture the competition that surrounds each firm.

B

Ability to Capture Product and Industry Change

The industry classification system should also capture changes to industry groupings
over time. Firms often change, introduce and discontinue products over time, and
thus enter and exit various industry spaces. This flexibility is directly related to
Sutton (1991) and Shaked and Sutton (1987), who suggest that barriers to entry
6

are endogenous. In particular, advertising and research and development allow firms
to differentiate their products and enter into related industries.5 These theories
motivate our examination of advertising and research and development, and their
links to future changes in industry membership and competition.
Only industry classifications that frequently recompute product market relatedness can address the changing nature of the product market. Some product areas
disappear or change, such as overhead projection systems with vinyl acetates. More
common, due to innovation, new product markets like solar power or internet-based
products can appear. Our industry classifications are updated annually and can capture rapidly changing product markets. Table II provides examples of two industries
that changed dramatically over time.
[Insert Table II Here]
Panel A of Table II displays the TNIC industry surrounding Real Goods Trading
Corp, which provides solar technology. In 1997, this market was nascent, and Real
Goods had just one rival, Photocomm. By 2008, Real Goods was part of a 9-firm
industry group, having a product vocabulary rooted in solar and environmental terminology. Panel B displays the product market surrounding L-1 Identity Solutions
in 2008, which provides technological intelligence solutions related to Homeland Security. This entire product market was not in our sample in 1997, and likely emerged
after the events of September 11, 2001. The only related firm that was in our sample in 1997, CACI International, migrated from the database management product
market to this security-oriented market, as shown in the table.

C

Ability to Capture Cross-Industry Relatedness

The industry classification system should also be able to capture cross-industry relatedness. If two product markets are very similar, firms in each product market likely
hold a credible threat of entry into the other at low cost. This notion of economies of
scope is developed by Hay (1976) and Panzar and Willig (1981). In particular, firms
5

Lin and Saggi (2002) show that tradeoffs related to product differentiation can affect process
innovation and product innovation.

7

facing this form of cross industry threat might keep prices low to deter entry. Currently, existing research can examine cross-industry relatedness using coarser levels
of SIC or NAICS codes or through the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s input-output
matrix (used to measure vertical relationships). Our methodology uncovers numerous links entirely missed using other classifications. Because our classifications are
based on actual product text, we are thus able to detect potential rival firms that
offer related products even if they are not direct suppliers or rivals (for example,
through economies of scope).
Hoberg and Phillips (2011) is an example of a recent study that explores crossindustry relations using 10-K text-based relatedness scores. The study examines
why conglomerates span some industry combinations more frequently than others,
and finds that they are most likely to span industry pairs that are closer together in
the product space and that surround other highly valued industries. These findings
are robust to controls for vertical relatedness and are consistent with conglomerates
using industry relatedness to potentially enter nearby high value industries that
might otherwise be costly to enter.

D

Benefits of Unrestricted Industry Classifications

One of the largest benefits of our approach is that it allows both within-industry
and cross-industry relations to be examined. Many empirical studies examining
product differentiation focus on single industries.6 An older literature summarized by
Schmalensee (1989) focused on cross-industry relations. Our industry classifications
allow for both types of studies. Our classifications are also updated in each year as
firms must refile 10-Ks annually, and our industry boundaries can be redrawn using
any desired level of coarseness. We are also able to identify a unique set of industry
rivals surrounding each firm, which relaxes the restrictive transitivity property of
existing classifications. We also define industry competition relative to each firm as
in the circular city model of Chamberlin. Analogous to a Facebook circle of friends
or a geographic distance, each firm has its own direct competitors identified using a
text-based distance from the firm itself on a spatial grid.
6

For recent examples see Nevo (2000), Mazzeo (2002) and Seim (2006).

8

Our new classifications can also be used in conjunction with, not in lieu of other
data. Although not part of the current study, looking forward, word-by-word mappings can be used to create firm-specific aggregations of BLS price series, BEA inputoutput data, and patent data. For example, patent filings have a textual description,
and this can be used to map how patents are related to each other and across firms
- independent of the patent examiner classification. Analogously, if price data is
available for verbal product lists, firm-wide price aggregations can also be estimated
using various weighting methods based on firm 10-K text.
There are also econometric benefits. For example, many studies examine whether
firm actions (such as equity issuance) are related to firm characteristics (such as firm
age). Here, the researcher may wish to ensure that any relationship found is due
to firm-specific age, and not to a broad industry attribute related to age such as
industry life cycle. A solution is to control for industry effects, and it follows that
superior industry classifications can improve estimation accuracy. We find that our
classifications are able to explain a larger fraction of firm characteristics in cross
section than existing classifications, and hence they likely provide better industry
controls. Finally, more informative industry classifications can also improve the
accuracy of standard errors, as numerous studies use adjusted standard errors to
account for clustering at the industry level.
We note that other methods of identifying competitors can also be used in conjunction with our data. In a contemporaneous paper, Rauh and Sufi (2010) use firm
self-reported competitors from Capital IQ and show that firm capital structure better reflects that of these competitors than that of firms in the same SIC code. Using
our text methods, we obtain similar improvements in predicting capital structure
and much larger improvements in predicting operating cash flow. However, Capital
IQ peers are currently available only for the most recent year while our classifications are available over many years and offer the flexibility to measure within and
across industry similarity using any granularity. Although they are distinct from our
measures, self-reported competitors are also useful. For example, we use them as
a validation tool to examine whether our industries better overlap with Capital IQ
peers relative to other classifications including SIC and NAICS.
9

II

Data and Methodology

Using web crawling and text parsing algorithms, we obtain and construct a database
of word business descriptions from 10-K annual filings on the SEC Edgar website
from 1997 to 2006. These descriptions are found in a separate section of each 10K
filed by each firm. These business descriptions are legally required to be accurate,
as Item 101 of Regulation S-K legally requires that firms describe the significant
products they offer to the market, and these descriptions must also be updated and
representative of the current fiscal year of the 10-K. This recency requirement is
important, as our goal is to measure how industry structure changes over time.

A

Product Similarity

We calculate our firm-by-firm similarity measures by parsing the product descriptions
from the firm 10Ks and forming word vectors for each firm to compute continuous
measures of product similarity for every pair of firms in our sample in each year (a
pairwise similarity matrix). In our main specification, we restrict attention to words
that can be used as a noun (as defined by Webster.com) and proper nouns. We define
proper nouns as words that appear with the first letter capitalized at least 90% of
the time in our sample of 10-Ks. We also omit common words that are used by more
than 25% of all firms, and we omit geographical words including country and state
names, as well as the names of the top fifty cities in the US and in the world. As
we show later, we choose the word-exclusion method that gives us high explanatory
power in some key tests. Our overall results are robust to different word-exclusion /
stop-wording screens.
There are many automated processes used in research to evaluate text (see Sebastiani (2002) for a detailed review). However, there is little consensus regarding which
method is uniformly best, and hence researchers must often choose a method upon
reviewing the unique features of their application. We use the “cosine similarity”
method for many reasons. First, its properties are well-understood given its wide usage in studies of information processing, and it is also intuitive given its network and
spatial representations. This method is also easy to program and only moderately
10

computationally burdensome, making it practical for other researchers to replicate.
Finally, this method’s normalization builds in a natural control for document length.
It is called the cosine similarity method because it measures the angle between two
word vectors on a unit sphere.
Full details regarding our implementation of the cosine similarity calculation are
in Appendix 1. We give a basic description here. Suppose there are N unique words
used in the union of the documents used by all firms in our sample. A given firm i’s
vocabulary can then be represented by an N -vector Pi , each element being populated
by the number one if firm i uses the given word, and zero if it does not. The cosine
similarity is simply the dot product of normalized vectors for firms i and j as follows.

where Vi = √

P roduct Cosine Similarityi,j = (Vi · Vj ),

Pi
Pi · Pi

∀i, j (1)

Intuitively, this dot product is higher when firms i and j use more of the same
words, as both vectors have positive values in the same elements. This measure is also
bounded in [0,1] and has a spatial representation, as each vector Vi has unit length
and thus resides on an N -dimensional unit sphere. Because we populate Pi with
binary values, our baseline method assigns uniform importance weights to words
regardless of their frequency. Following Loughran and McDonald (2010), we also
consider an alternative weighting scheme called “total frequency/inverse document
frequency” (TF-IDF) in which the Pi vector is instead populated with higher weights
for more frequently used words in firm i’s own document, and lower weights for words
used by a larger fraction of all firms in the economy. Our results later show that
uniform weights outperform TF-IDF weights for our application, indicating that a
firm’s decision to use a given word to describe its products is more important than
how frequently the word is used.

B

The Sample of 10-Ks

We electronically gather 10-Ks by searching the Edgar database for filings that appear as “10-K”, “10-K405”, “10KSB”, “10KSB40”. Our primary sample includes
filings associated with firm fiscal years ending in calendar years 1997 to 2006. Our
11

sample begins in 1997 as this is when electronic filing with Edgar first became required. Of the 56,540 firm-year observations with fiscal years ending in 1997 to 2006
that are present in both CRSP and COMPUSTAT (domestic firms traded on either
NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ), we are are able to match (using CIK) 55,326 (97.9%
of the CRSP/COMPUSTAT sample).7 We can also report that our database is well
balanced over time, as we capture 97.6% of the eligible data in 1997, and 97.4% in
2006, and this annual percentage varies only slightly in the range of 97.4% in 2006 to
98.3% in 2001. Because we do not observe much time variation in our data coverage,
and because database selection can be determined using ex-ante information (ie, the
10-K itself), we do not believe that our data requirements induce any bias. Our final
sample size is 50,673 rather than 55,326 because we additionally require that lagged
COMPUSTAT data items (assets, sales and operating cash flow) are available before
observations can be included in our analysis.
From each linked 10-K, our goal is to extract its business description. This section of the document appears as Item 1 or Item 1A in most 10-Ks. We utilize a
combination of PERL web crawling scripts, APL programming, and human intervention (when documents are non-standard) to extract and summarize this section.
The web crawling algorithm scans the Edgar website and collects the entire text of
each 10-K annual report, and the APL text reading algorithms then process each
document and extract each one’s product description and its CIK. This latter process is extensively supported by human intervention when non-standard document
formats are encountered. This method is highly reliable and we encountered only a
very small number of firms (roughly 100) that we were not able to process because
they did not contain a valid product description or because the product description
had fewer than 1000 characters. These firms are excluded from our analysis.
7

We thank the Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS) for providing us with an expanded
historical mapping of SEC CIK to COMPUSTAT gvkey. We also compute similarities for 1996
(93.5% coverage, electronic filing was optional) and 2007 (98.1% coverage), but only use the 1996
data to compute the starting value of lagged variables, and we only use the 2007 data to compute
the values of ex-post outcomes. Also, although we use data for fiscal year endings through 2007, we
extract documents filed through December 2008, as many of the filings in 2008 are associated with
fiscal years ending in 2007. This is because 10-Ks are generally filed during the 3 month window
after the fiscal year ends.

12

III

Industry Classification Methodology

We first note that industry classifications have a simple network representation. A
classification is a complete mapping from any firm-pair (firms i and j) to a real
number in the interval [0, 1] describing relatedness. Because the mapping is complete,
an industry classification can be succinctly described by an N xN square matrix M
(i.e., a network), where N is the number of firms. If the classification is updated
yearly, it can further be represented as a time series of such matrices Mt .
We construct classifications using textual pairwise cosine similarity scores as the
basis for this mapping, and hence the matrix Mt is populated by applying the
aforementioned cosine similarity method to each permutation of firm pairs. The
large number of words used in business descriptions, along with the continuous and
bounded properties of the cosine similarity method, ensure that the matrix Mt is
not sparse, and that its entries are unrestricted real numbers in the interval [0, 1].
In contrast, the corresponding network Mt underlying SIC and NAICS industries is
heavily “restricted” and must satisfy the following two properties:
Definition: A classification is said to satisfy the binary membership transitivity property if MT has binary banded diagonal form (“1” on all banded diagonals
and “0” elsewhere). This form satisfies membership transitivity, and hence for any
two firms A and B in the same industry, a firm C that is in A’s industry, is also
be in B’s industry. This form also requires that all firms are homogeneous within
industries, and that all industries are entirely unrelated to one another.
Definition: A classification is said to have the fixed location property if Mt is
not updated each year. Intuitively, such industries have a time-fixed product market
(they are fixed until the codes are changed or updated).
We use 10-K text to classify firms into industries using two methods. The first
method, described in Section A below, is analogous to SIC and NAICS classifications
and requires the binary membership transitivity and the fixed location property to
hold. We henceforth refer to classifications requiring these two restrictive properties
as “Fixed Industry Classifications” (FIC).

13

Our second method, described in Section B below, relaxes both properties, and
we refer to this second class of industries as “Text-Based Network Industry Classifications” (TNIC). A firm’s TNIC industry can move across the product space over time
as technologies and product tastes evolve. New firms can also appear in the sample,
and each firm can have its own distinct set of competitors that may or may not
overlap with other firms’ competitors. Finally, TNIC industries are sufficiently rich
to permit within and across industry similarities to be computed. We now discuss
both methods in detail.

A

Fixed Industries Classifications Based on 10-Ks

To maintain consistency with other FIC industry classifications including SIC and
NAICS, in our main FIC specification, we form fixed groups of industries by running
a clustering algorithm only once using the earliest year of our sample (1997) and
we then hold these industries fixed throughout our sample. We then assign firms
to these industries in later years based on their 10-K text similarity relative to the
frequency-weighted list of words used in the 1997 10-K product descriptions that
were initially assigned to each industry.
We also consider a variation where we rerun the clustering algorithm in each year,
as this variation imposes the binary membership transitivity property, but relaxes
the fixed location property. This allows us to examine the relative economic impact
of the two properties separately, and we report later that both properties are about
equally important in explaining the difference in explanatory power between FIC
industries and TNIC industries.
We provide a detailed description of the text clustering algorithm used to create
our FIC classifications in Appendix 2. The main idea is that the clustering algorithm
starts by assuming that each of the roughly 5000 firms in 1997 is a separate industry,
and then it groups the most similar firms into industries one at a time. The algorithm
stops when the desired number of industries remains.
A key virtue of the industry clustering algorithm is that it can generate a classification with any number of industries. We consider industry classifications comprised

14

of 50 to 800 industries in increments of 50. However, we focus most on the 300 industries classification as it is most analogous to popular alternatives including three digit
SIC codes and four digit NAICS codes, which have 274 and 328 industries, respectively, in our sample. Although the clustering algorithm’s flexibility to pre-specify
the number of industries is a virtue, the algorithm is not capable of determining
the “optimal” number of industries. In Appendix 3, we explore this question using
Akaike information criterion tests. These tests use likelihood analysis to compare
models even when they use varying numbers of parameters (in our case industries).
The results suggest that roughly 300 industries best explain firm-level data.
[Insert Figure 1 Here]
Our industry classifications are based on the notion that firms in the same industry use many common words to describe their products. Figure 1 displays a histogram
showing the number of unique words in firm product descriptions. As noted earlier,
we limit attention to non-geographical nouns and proper nouns that appear in no
more than 25% of all product descriptions in order to avoid common words. Typical
firms use roughly 200 unique words. The tail is also somewhat skewed, as some firms
use as many as 500 to 1000 words, although a few use fewer than 50. Because they
are not likely to be informative, we exclude firms having fewer than 20 unique words
from our classification algorithm.
[Insert Figure 2 Here]
Figure 2 displays a histogram showing the distribution of the number of firms in
each industry for 10K-300, SIC-3, and NAICS-4 industries. 10K-300 industries (top
graph) have firm counts that are similar to those based on SIC-3 (second graph) and
to NAICS-4 industries (bottom graph), as most industries have fewer than ten firms.
However, they are somewhat different in two ways. First, 10-K groupings have more
single-firm industries, and hence some firms have highly unique descriptions. Second,
10-K classifications have more very large industries and are more spread out.
Industry memberships are similar but also quite different. For example (not
displayed), the likelihood that two firms in the same SIC-3 industry will also be in
15

the same NAICS-4 industry is 61.3%. The likelihood that they will be in the same
10K-300 industry is a more modest 46.2%. In contrast, when two firms are in the
same 10K-300 industry, the likelihood that they will appear in the same SIC-3 and
NAICS-4 industry is 44.1% and 54.2%, respectively. We conclude that, 10K-300
industries are quite distinct from both NAICS-4 than SIC-3. However there is also
some agreement among all three classifications.

B

Network Industry Classifications Based on 10-Ks

We next relax the fixed location and transitivity requirements and construct generalized text-based network industry classifications (TNIC). In addition to offering
substantially higher explanatory power (see Section IV), TNIC industries offer many
additional advantages. First, the full knowledge of firm pairwise similarities permits
calculations of across and within industry similarities. Second, TNIC industries are
necessary to test theories predicting dynamic firm and industry movements in the
product space over time (see Section VI). Third, industry competitors are defined
relative to each firm in the product space - like a geographic radius around each firm
- thus each firm will have its own distinct set of closest competitor firms.
We construct TNIC classifications using a simple minimum similarity threshold.
That is, we simply define each firm i’s industry to include all firms j with pairwise
similarities relative to i above a pre-specified minimum similarity threshold. A high
threshold will result in industries having very few rival firms, and a low threshold
results in very large industries.
For two randomly selected firms i and j, we label them as an “industry pair” if, for
a given classification, they are in the same industry. Where N denotes the number
of firms in the economy, there are

N 2 −N
2

permutations of unique pairs.8 In practice,

however, only a small fraction of pairs are actually industry pairs. Although one
can use any minimum similarity threshold to construct TNIC-industries, we focus
on thresholds generating industries with the same fraction of industry pairs as SIC-3
industries, allowing us to compare SIC and TNIC industries in an unbiased fashion.
8

For a sample of 5000 firms, this is 12.4975 million unique pairs.

16

For three digit SIC codes, 2.05% of all possible firm pairs are industry pairs. A
21.32% minimum similarity threshold generates 10-K based TNIC industries with
2.05% industry pairs (same as SIC-3). We consider one further refinement to further
mitigate the impact of document length. For a firm i we compute its median score as
the median similarity between firm i and all other firms in the economy in the given
year. Intuitively, because no industry is large enough to span the entire economy,
this quantity should be calibrated to be near zero. We thus adjust all scores by the
median scores of firms comprising the given pair.9
Indeed the transitivity property might not hold for these industries. For example,
consider firms A and B, which are 25% similar. Because this is higher than 21.32%,
A and B are in each other’s TNIC industry. Now consider a firm C that is 27%
similar to firm A, and 17% similar to firm B. C is in firm A’s industry, but not in
firm B’s industry, and thus transitivity does not hold. If, alternatively, firm C was
22% similar to firm B, then transitivity would hold. Thus, TNIC classifications do
not rule out transitivity, but rather transitivity might hold case by case.
We also take into account vertical integration in defining our variable industry
classifications. We examine the extent to which firm pairings are vertically related
using the methodology described in Fan and Goyal (2006). Based on the fourdigit SIC codes of two firms, we use the Use Table of the Benchmark Input-Output
Accounts of the US Economy to compute, for each firm pairing, the fraction of
inputs that flow between the industries of each pair. If this fraction exceeds 1% of
all inputs, we exclude the pairing from TNIC industries regardless of the similarity
score. Because just 4% of all pairs are excluded using this screen, and because our
results are fully robust to including or excluding this screen, we conclude that firm
business descriptions in firm 10-Ks indeed describe firm product offerings, and not
firm production inputs.
9

Our results are robust, though roughly 2% weaker if we omit this step.

17

IV

Comparing Industry Classifications

Our next objective is to examine which industry classifications best explain firm
characteristics in cross section, while holding fixed the degree of granularity of the
industries we compare. In Section A, we compare the ability of FIC and TNIC
industry classifications to explain firm characteristics such as profitability, leverage
and stock market Betas. In Section B, we examine which classification systems best
explain managerial discussion of high competition, firm self-identified rivals, and
which firms are most likely to form product market alliances.

A

Econometric Performance of Industry Controls

In this section, we explore industry controls in a panel data setting. As discussed in
Section I, more powerful classifications can improve the accuracy of inferences, especially inferences regarding firm characteristics when the researcher needs to control
for industry characteristics. From an econometric perspective, improved classifications should explain a larger fraction of total firm heterogeneity (as firms are more
similar within industries than they are across industries). We compare explanatory
power across many firm characteristics and across our new classification systems as
well as existing SIC and NAICS industry classifications.
For FIC classifications, industry fixed effects are the most widely used method of
industry control. This approach has two limitations. First, it uses a potentially large
number of degrees of freedom equal to the number of industries in the classification,
leaving fewer for hypothesis testing. Second, industry fixed effects do not account
for industry variables that might change over time. To address this second issue,
researchers can use industry x year fixed effects. However, this further exacerbates
the usage of degrees of freedom given the large number of fixed effects.
Both issues can be addressed using simple industry-averaging methods. Rather
than using fixed effects, the researcher can average the given characteristic (the
dependent variable) within each industry in each year, and use this average as a
single additional control variable. This approach uses only one degree of freedom,
and because this average can be computed separately in each year, this approach
18

also accounts for industry characteristics that might vary over time. This averaging
method is also called a kernel method, with equal weights across industry members.
This method is general and can be used for both FIC and TNIC classifications.
The averaging method also offers the flexibility to examine the impact of multiple
industry firms (conglomerates firms), as weighted averages can positively weight
more than one industry when computing a given firm’s fixed effect. We consider a
conglomerate-adjusted averaging method using FIC classifications as follows. First,
we use the COMPUSTAT segment tapes to identify how many segments each firm
has. For firms with one segment, we use the simple single-industry average. For
a firm with N > 1 segments, we assign the firm to the N 10K-300 industries that
it is most similar to, and then follow two steps. First, we compute the average
characteristic for each 10K-300 industry. Then, for the conglomerate firm spanning
N > 1 such industries, we assign its industry average variable to be the average
of the N corresponding industry-specific values. Our results discussed below show
that conglomerate adjusted averages do not offer material improvements relative to
unadjusted averages.
The last method we consider is a similarity-weighted average rather than an equal
weighted average.10 This method can only be used for TNIC industries, as only TNIC
industries provide firm-pairwise similarity weights. Table III displays the results.
[Insert Table III Here]
Table III shows that 10-K based industries outperform both SIC and NAICS,
especially TNIC industries, which relax both the binary membership transitivity
property and the fixed location property. When limiting attention to fixed effects
based on FIC industries, the adjusted R-squared for profitability scaled by sales
increases by 15.1% from 0.284 to 0.327 when the 10-K based classifications are used
rather than the SIC-3 classifications. The improvement is a similar 13.9% when
10K-300 industries are used rather than NAICS-4 industries. The improvement in
10
Technically, we use adjusted similarity weights, where we subtract the similarity threshold used
to define the industry from the similarity weights. This way, the weights have the nice property
of being bounded below by zero (a firm that just barely gets assigned to the industry will have a
weight near zero), allowing similarities to be more informative.

19

explanatory power relative to SIC-3 is even larger at 22.0% for operating income
scaled by assets rather than sales.
For other firm characteristics, all except for leverage ratios have stronger results
for 10-K based FIC industries. One explanation is that leverage is a managerial
policy, and policies might be chosen to target the most readily available industry
averages. For example, managers might target SIC or NAICS benchmarks because
these targets are easy to obtain.
By comparing the averaging method results in columns 2, 4, and 6 to standard
fixed effects in columns 1, 3, and 5, we conclude that the averaging method offers
significantly higher explanatory power despite its usage of a single degree of freedom.
The main reason is that the averaging method allows the industry controls to vary
over time (the average is computed separately in each industry in each year). It
is thus more analogous to controlling for industry x year fixed effects than it is to
controlling for separate industry and year fixed effects. Its improvement in power
can be large, for example its adjusted R-squared is nearly 3x higher for sales growth.
This likely reflects the fact that sales growth changes over time more than other
characteristics do. In general, the averaging method dominates fixed effects, and its
gains range from a 10% improvement, to much more dramatic gains. Finally, the
table also shows that the conglomerate adjusted 10K-300 averaging method performs
roughly as well as the unadjusted 10K-300 averaging method. We conclude that these
simple conglomerate adjustments do not offer material benefits.
The last four columns display results for TNIC industries: the first two consider
raw TNIC industries, and the last two are purged of firm pairs having at least
1% vertical relationships as discussed in Section III.B. Rows one and two show that
TNIC industries offer substantial improvements in explaining profitability, especially
relative to SIC and NAICS codes. For example, the operating income/sales adjusted
R-squared of roughly 43% for the four TNIC specifications is 51.4% higher than the
28.4% adjusted R-squared for standard SIC-3 fixed effects, and 37.8% higher than
the SIC-3 averaging method. Perhaps even more striking, the similarity weighted
averaging method (third to last column and the last column) performs at this high
level even though we exclude the firm itself from the weighted average. This is a
20

mechanistic disadvantage, as both fixed effects and equal weighted averaging methods
include the firm itself in their averages.11
As discussed previously, TNIC industries offer two advantages relative to FIC
industries: relaxing the fixed location property and relaxing the membership transitivity property. We find that both properties are individually important. Regarding
the time fixed location property, comparing the fifth column (time-fixed FIC) to the
sixth column (annually-recalculated FIC) shows substantial improvement in explanatory power. For example, the oi/sales R-squared increases from 0.327 to 0.372 when
one relaxes just this fixed location property. To assess the impact of the membership
transitivity property, the time varying FIC averaging method in the sixth column can
be compared to the analogous TNIC averaging method in the eighth column. Here,
for example, the oi/sales R-squared increases from 0.372 to 0.458. Because both
improvements are similar in magnitude, we conclude that relaxing both properties is
important to maximizing explanatory power.
The results also show that controlling for vertical integration has some, but not a
large effect on our results, as the last two columns are very similar to the two columns
preceding them. We conclude that TNIC industries offer substantial improvements
over existing methods used in the literature, and that their focus is mainly on horizontal product scope rather than vertical relationships. For all analysis that follows,
we will focus exclusively on the TNIC industry designations that are purged of vertical relatedness (our results are affected little if we instead use raw TNIC industries).
Our approach is also conservative because TNIC averaging methods exclude the
reference firm.
When comparing industry classifications, it is natural to ask if an optimal level
of granularity exists. Because our classifications can be calibrated to an arbitrary
level of granularity, we are in a good position to explore this question. To conserve
space, we explore this issue in Appendix 3. Using Akaike information criterion tests,
we find that roughly 300 industries best describe firm characteristic data in cross
11

If the reference firm is included using the similarity-weighted average, and it is given a similarity
weight of 1, the adjusted R-squared increases to near 70% (not reported). Because this likely overweights the reference firm, we do not recommend using similarity averages that include the reference
firm.

21

section. Hence, our TNIC industries that are calibrated to match SIC-3 industries
on granularity are likely to be a good fit for empirical applications. Going further,
the fact that SIC-3 and TNIC overlap only partially implies that researchers can
absorb even more industry variation using empirical models that control for both
TNIC and SIC-3 effects.

B

Industry Classifications and Competition

In Section I, we discussed the ideal properties that industry classifications should
have. A common theme relates to identifying sources of competition or competitive
threat. For example, the concepts of product differentiation, economies of scope,
and endogenous barriers to entry all generate implications related to the effects of
competition on economic outcomes. We use two data sources to compare industry
classifications in terms of their ability to explain competitive pressures. Our approach
in this section is to assess competitive pressure directly. This approach may be more
accurate than indirect tests such as those based on profitability.
Our first approach follows Ball, Hoberg, and Maksimovic (2011) and we examine
the Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of each firm’s 10-K. A primary
source of content in this section is the manager’s discussion of his or her firm’s
performance, and the firm’s outlook going forward. For each firm year, we thus define
the high competition dummy to be one if the manager cites “high competition”, or
one of its synonyms, in this section.12
[Insert Table IV Here]
Table IV displays the results of logit regressions in which the dependent variable is
the high competition dummy. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm
level. We include as independent variables, the sales-based Herfindahl index (sum
of squared market shares) based on our TNIC classification - where the competitors
vary in each row based on the word exclusion screens as noted - and the salesbased Herfindahl index based on three digit SIC codes. We also standardize all
12

Synonyms for the word “high” include intense, significant, substantial, significant, vigorous,
strong, aggressive, fierce, stiff, extensive, or severe. Synonyms for the word “competition” include
compete, competition, or competing.

22

independent variables to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one so that
both economic magnitudes and statistical significance levels can be compared across
the measures. We conclude that an industry classification more directly measures
competitiveness if the HHI implied by the classification is more negatively related to
the high competition dummy.
To provide additional information regarding our textual screens, we compare the
performance across Herfindahl indices computed using all 10-K words (rows 1 to
4), and those that use non-geographical nouns and proper nouns only (rows 5 to
12). We also explore the role of the common word threshold (i.e., the threshold at
which words are discarded if they are used in at least the threshold percentage of all
10-Ks indicated in column 2), and we consider thresholds of 10%, 25% and 100%.
Discarding common words and non-nouns changes the sets of words used to compute
cosine similarities and thus can change the firms that are identified as competitors.
Using each new set of competitors for each firm, we then recalculate the TNIC
Herfindahl used in column 3. Lastly, we also consider the total frequency/inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF) weighting scheme used in Loughran and McDonald
(2010). This method uses a logarithmic ratio to more heavily weight words that are
used more frequently in a firm’s own-document, and to less heavily weight words
that are used by more firms in the overall sample in each year.
Table IV shows that HHIs based on both TNIC classifications and SIC-3 classifications are informative regarding the level of competition perceived by the manager.
At a minimum, we conclude that our measures provide new information about measuring competitiveness that is at least as important as information contained in
SIC-3 classifications. Going further, the table shows that restricting attention to
nouns and proper nouns (also excluding geographical terms) in rows five and later
further enhances our results. Finally, we find that the stop word threshold of 25%
performs best. The coefficient for this specification (-0.241) is 37.7% larger than
the coefficient (-0.175) for the SIC-3 HHI. Hence we conclude that the 10-K based
classifications are more informative about competitive pressures than are three digit
SIC code classifications.
At the bottom of Table IV, we explore the robustness of this conclusion to various
23

control variables that might also be related to competitive pressures including firm
size, age, profitability, and Tobin’s Q. Because it is well known that document size can
influence text-based variables, we also control for the size of the firm’s Management’s
Discussion section. In all, we find that both HHI variables weaken somewhat as the
new controls are added, however, both variables remain highly significant and the
relative importance of the TNIC classification relative to SIC-3 coefficient becomes
even larger. The coefficient of -0.170 for the TNIC-based HHI with all controls in
row 12 is 97.7% larger than the SIC-3 HHI coefficient of -0.086.
We next consider the approach used by Rauh and Sufi (2010), who gather data
from Capital IQ identifying the firms listed by each firm as being rivals. We also
note one important limitation in this analysis, as Capital IQ data is not available
on a historic basis. Hence, we extract peers using 2011 data, and examine whether
industries computed using the last year of our data can better explain the links
identified by Capital IQ relative to SIC-3 or NAICS-4 industries.
[Insert Table V Here]
Panel A of Table V displays summary statistics regarding the fraction of Capital
IQ competitors that are in the same TNIC industry, as well as the fraction of overlap
between our industries and the SIC3 and NAICS classifications. As an additional
validation test, we view higher overlap ratios as being superior, as they suggest that
the given industry classification better explains the peers that managers themselves
identify as being rivals. To ensure a fair comparison, we use TNIC industries that
are calibrated to be exactly as coarse as SIC-3 and NAICS-4 industries.
Table V shows that SIC-3 industries have a 47.1% overlap with Capital IQ competitors. TNIC industries reach a maximum overlap with Capital IQ for specifications based on nouns and proper nouns and a 10% stop word threshold, where
62.0% of Capital IQ peers overlap with our TNIC industries. Overall, the table also
shows that virtually all TNIC industries, with the sole exception of those using a
100% threshold, outperform SIC-3 and NAICS-4 industries in their ability to explain
Capital IQ self-reported peers.
Panel B of Table V repeats this exercise using Capital IQ strategic alliances
24

rather than Capital IQ competitors. This test is particularly interesting because
strategic alliances are likely related to economies of scope, as firms with similar but
different technologies can combine their comparative advantages and earn greater
profits using alliances. The results show that TNIC industries strongly dominate
SIC-3 and NAICS-4 industries along this dimension. The overlap with Capital IQ
alliances is just 28.2% for SIC-3, but is in the range of 40.6% to 48.6% for all TNIC
industries with the only exception being those with a 100% stop word threshold.
To further inform the calibration of TNIC industries, we also examine the extent
to which they overlap with SIC-3 and NAICS-4 industries. The table suggests that
this overlap is highest for a 25% common word threshold based on nouns and proper
nouns, where overlap reaches a maximum of 52.2% in Panel A. The strong performance of this 25% threshold fits in well with our findings from Table IV. Henceforth,
we will focus attention on this TNIC threshold alone to conserve space. However,
our key inferences are robust to using other thresholds.

V

Market Structure

In this section, we explain how we construct measures of industry market structure
(also sometimes viewed as measures of industry competitiveness) and present summary statistics. We consider existing measures based on firm market shares (HHI
and C4 indices) and measures based on similarity (summed and average similarity).

A

Measuring Market Structure

Consider an industry with N firms, and let SLi denote firm i’s sales. We use the
COMPUSTAT database to identify each firm’s sales in each year. However, we
winsorize firm sales at the 5%/95% level in each year to reduce the impact of outliers,
as some firms have substantially higher sales than other firms in our sample.13 The
Herfindahl (HHI) index and the C4 index are defined as follows:
13

Results are similar, but somewhat weaker for HHI and C4 indices if we use non-winsorized
sales. Using logged sales rather than winsorized sales also generates similar results.

25

N



2

SLi

HHI = Σ

(2)

N

i=1

Σ SLi

i=1
4largest

C4 =

Σ

i=1

SLi

(3)

N

Σ SLi

i=1

HHI indices and C4 indices can be computed for both FIC and TNIC industries.
Our remaining indices are only defined for TNIC industries, as they require the
existence of a reference firm. Consider a TNIC industry with N+1 firms, and let
one of the firms be the reference firm, and the other N firms are its rivals. Let Si
denote firm i’s “net” similarity relative to the reference firm (i ∈ 1, ..., N ).14 Our
next two measures are more closely measures of competitiveness rather than market
structure, and are functions of similarities alone as follows (Seim (2006) constructs
a similar Total Similarity Index):

N

T otalSimilarity = Σ Si
i=1

AverageSimilarity =

T otalSimilarity
N

(4)
(5)

We compute the sales-based Herfindahl (HHI) and C4 indices for each of the three
industry classifications we consider: SIC-3, NAICS-4, and our 10-K-based TNIC
industries. The average TNIC HHI is 0.191, and the average TNIC C4 is 55.8%. HHI
and C4 indices based on SIC-3 and NAICS-4 have means that are similar to each
other, and only modestly different from TNIC industries. For example, the average
SIC-3 based C4 is 61.3%, which is close to the 61.6% for NAICS-4, but somewhat
larger than the 55.8% for TNIC. We also compute total and average similarity for
TNIC industries (SIC AND NAICS do not provide analogous measures of product
differentiation).
Table VI displays Pearson correlation coefficients for our measures of market
structure. The table shows two key findings: (1) 10-K based measures are strongly
14

Net similarity is the raw pairwise similarity minus the minimum similarity threshold used to
form the given TNIC industry. We use net similarities because they have the intuitive property that
firms just barely gaining access to the industry would have nearly zero impact on the competitiveness
index.

26

correlated with each other, and (2) SIC-3 and NAICS-4 measures are strongly correlated with each other, but not with 10K-based variables.
[Insert Table VI Here]
Table VI shows that the 10K-based HHI index is -31.9% correlated with the total
similarity variable, suggesting an intuitive link between concentration and product
differentiation measures. Furthermore, this correlation is quite far from unity indicating that both measures contain much distinct information. Because analogous
similarity measures are not available for SIC or NAICS industries, this fact further
illustrates the unique benefits of having network based classifications with known
pairwise similarities for all firm pairs.

VI

Changes in Industry Market Structure and Competitiveness

In this section, we examine how measures of market structure and competitiveness
change over time, and we focus on Sutton (1991), who predicts that advertising and
research and development (R&D) can create endogenous barriers to entry. An example from ‘An Illustration of Dual Structure’ in Sutton’s, “Sunk Costs and Market
Structure”, Section 3.4, illustrates the logic behind our empirical design. In Sutton’s
example, we observe a firm moving between two industries, as it, and possibly some
rivals increase their advertising spending in order to become a small group of leading
brands that sell to brand sensitive buyers, thus escaping the large number of nonadvertising firms that ‘sell on price’. The firm thus uses advertising to move away
from non-advertising (or non-R&D) firms.
The main idea is R&D and advertising can create more unique products that
appeal to quality-sensitive consumers and make it more expensive for rivals to enter. A key assumption is that advertising and R&D (which might be geared toward
improving product appeal), are actually effective in reducing ex-post competition.
We test this assumption by regressing ex-post changes in our market structure and
competitiveness measures on ex-ante advertising and R&D. We recognize that these
27

tests examine association, as it is difficult to establish causality in this setting. This
analysis complements Ellickson (2007) who analyzes the supermarket industry, and
further illustrates the challenges that Ellickson notes on providing evidence on endogenous fixed costs.
Importantly, we restrict attention to TNIC industries, as variable membership
and variable locations are critical to testing Sutton’s theory, which is primarily about
trying to prevent entry across industry boundaries. TNIC industry definitions are
flexible enough to identify these time-varying effects. SIC-3 and NAICS-4 lack this
flexibility because their industry locations are close to fixed, as memberships rarely
change.
[Insert Table VII Here]
Table VII displays the results. The dependent variable for each row is noted in
the first column, and all variables are ex-post changes in the given competitiveness
measure. We find overwhelming support for Sutton’s predictions across all of our
competitiveness measures. For example, rows three and four show that firms spending on advertising and R&D experience substantial improvements in their HHI Index
and C4 Index respectively (results significant at the 1% level).
Rows (1) to (6) show that all measures of changes to market structure generate
similar results. The C4 index is the most robust variable, and firms spending more
on advertising and R&D generate improvements in their ex-post C4 indices. The
high relevance of the C4 index is consistent with the larger firms in a given firm’s
product market playing an important role. Rows (5) and (6) show that advertising
and R&D are also positively related to ex-post changes in observed profitability.15
Our results are also consistent with Hoberg and Phillips (2010), who show that
mergers and acquisitions can also be used to differentiate products from close rivals,
and that this is especially relevant when firms face more competition.
[Insert Table VIII Here]
15

Not reported, the results in Table VII are very similar if we use SIC-3 or NAICS-4 industry
controls instead of text-based industry controls.

28

Table VIII displays the results of tests analogous to those in Table VII, but focuses
on measures of market structure constructed from SIC and NAICS codes. As noted
earlier, the location and memberships of these industries are fixed over time. This
limitation makes it very difficult to examine how market structure changes over time,
as firms rarely change their SIC or NAICS classifications. Hence, we expect far less
power to test Sutton’s predictions. The table confirms this conjecture, and we find
little support using these less powerful measures. Comparing these results to those in
Table VII based on dynamic 10K-based TNIC industries, leads us to conclude that
time varying network industries are essential in providing the empirical flexibility
needed to test the role of endogenous barriers to entry.

VII

Conclusions

We use web crawling and text parsing algorithms to examine product descriptions
from annual firm 10-Ks filed with the SEC. The word usage vectors from each firm
generate an empirical Hotelling-like product market space on which all firms reside.
We use these word usage vectors to calculate how firms are related to each other and
to create new industry classifications. Using these new industry classifications, we
calculate new measures of market structure and competition. These new measures
enable us to test theories of product differentiation and whether firms advertise and
conduct R&D to create product differentiation, consistent with Sutton (1991)’s work
on endogenous barriers to entry.
Our new text-based network industry classifications are based on how firms describe themselves in each year in the product description section of their 10Ks. Because our classifications are formed in each year, they do not have the staleness and
time-fixed location properties associated with SIC and NAICS. In addition, our main
classification method is based on relaxing the transitivity requirement of existing SIC
and NAICS industries, and thus allows each firm to have its own potentially unique
set of competitors. This new method that we term text-based network industry classifications (TNIC) is analogous to social networks, where each individual can have a
distinct set of friends, or to geographic networks where the distance between firms

29

determines whether or not it is a competitor.
Measures of competitiveness based on our new classifications better explain specific discussion of high competition by management, and better explain rivals mentioned by managers as peer firms than do existing classifications. Using our relatedness measures, we create new measures of market structure that capture withinindustry competitiveness and better explain firm characteristics.
Our classifications allow us to examine how industry market structure and competitiveness change over time, and whether advertising and research and development
serve as endogenous barriers to entry. We find support for Sutton (1991)’s hypothesis that firms spend on advertising and R&D, at least in part, to increase product
differentiation and profitability.

30

References
Antweiler, Werner, and Murray Frank, 2004, Is all that talk just noise? the information content of
internet stock message boards, Journal of Finance 52, 1259–1294.
Ball, Christopher, Gerard Hoberg, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 2011, Redefining financial constraints:
a text-based analysis, Working Paper, University of Maryland.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, 1997, Automobile prices in market equilibrium,
Econometrica 63, 841–890.
Bhojraj, Sanjeev, Charles Lee, and Derek Oler, 2003, What’s my line? a comparison of industry
classifications for capital market research, Journal of Accounting Research 41, 745–774.
Boukus, Ellyn, and Joshua Rosenberg, 2006, The information content of fomc minutes, Yale University working paper.
Chamberlin, EH, 1933, The Theory of Monopolistic Competition (Harvard University Press: Cambridge).
Ellickson, Paul, 2007, Does sutton apply to supermarkets?, Rand Journal of Economics 38, 43–59.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial Economics
43, 153–193.
Fan, Joseph, and Vidhan Goyal, 2006, On the patterns and wealth effects of vertical mergers,
Journal of Business 79, 877–902.
Hanley, Kathleen, and Gerard Hoberg, 2010, The information content of ipo prospectuses, Review
of Financial Studies 23, 2821–2864.
Hay, D.A., 1976, Sequential entry and entry-deterring strategies in spatial competition, Oxford
Economic Papers 28, 240–257.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2010, Competition and product market synergies in mergers
and acquisitions: A text based analysis, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
Hotelling, H., 1929, Stability in competition, Economic Journal pp. 41–57.
Jaffe, Adam, 1986, Technological opportunities and spillovers of r&d: Evidence from firms’ patents,
profits and market value, American Economic Review 76, 984–1001.
Kahle, Kathleen, and Ralph Walkling, 1996, The impact of industry classifications on financial
research, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31, 309–335.
Krishnan, Jayanthi, and Eric Press, 2003, The north american industry classification system and
its implications for accounting research, Contemporary Accounting Research 20, 685–717.
Li, Feng, 2006, Do stock market investors understand the risk sentiment of corporate annual reports?, University of Michigan Working Paper.
Lin, Ping, and Kamal Saggi, 2002, Product differentiation, process r&d, and the nature of market
competition, European Economic Review 46, 201–211.
Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2010, When is a liability not a liability? textual analysis,
dictionaries, and 10-ks, forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Mazzeo, Michael, 2002, An empirical model of firm entry with endogenous product choices, Rand
Journal of Economics 33, 221–42.
Nevo, Aviv, 2000, Mergers with differentiated products: the case of the ready to eat cereal industry,
Rand Journal of Economics 31, 395–421.
Panzar, J., and R. Willig, 1981, Economies of scope, American Economic Review 71, 268–272.
Rauh, Joshua, and Amir Sufi, 2010, Explaining corporate capital structure: Product markets,
leases, and asset similarity, Northwestern University Working Paper.
Sebastiani, Fabrizio, 2002, Machine learning in automated text categorization, ACMCS 34, 1–47.

31

Seim, Katja, 2006, An empirical model of firm entry with endogenous product choices, Rand Journal
of Economics 37, 619–40.
Shaked, Avner, and John Sutton, 1987, Product differentiation and industrial structure, Journal of
Industrial Economics 26, 131–146.
Sutton, John, 1991, Sunk Costs and Market Structure (MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass).
Tetlock, Paul, Maytal Saar-Tsechanksy, and Sofus Macskassy, 2008, More than words: Quantifying
language to measure firms’ fundamentals, Journal of Finance 63, 1437–1467.
Tetlock, Paul C., 2007, Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market,
Journal of Finance 62, 1139–1168.

32

Table I: 10K-based Classifications of firms in Business Services (SIC3=737)
SubMarket 1 Entertainment (Sample Focal Firm: WANDERLUST INTERACTIVE)
43 Rivals: MAXIS, PIRANHA INTERACTIVE PUBLISHING, BRILLIANT DIGITAL ENTERTAINMENT, MIDWAY GAMES, TAKE TWO INTERACTIVE
SOFTWARE, THQ, 3DO, NEW FRONTIER MEDIA INC, ...
SIC CODES OF RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, DATA PROCESSING, AND OTHER COMPUTER RELATED [SIC3=737] (24 RIVALS), MOTION
PICTURE PRODUCTION AND ALLIED SERVICES [SIC3=781] (4 RIVALS), MISC OTHER (13 RIVALS)
Core Words: ENTERTAINMENT (42), VIDEO (42), TELEVISION (38), ROYALTIES (35), INTERNET (34), CONTENT (33), CREATIVE (31),
PROMOTIONAL (31), COPYRIGHT (31), GAME (30), SOUND (29), PUBLISHING (29), MUSIC (29), PROGRAMMING (29), CABLE (28), FORMAT (28),
DEVELOPERS (28), CHANNEL (27), MASS (27), AUDIO (26), FUNCTIONALITY (26), FEATURE (25), FILM (25), TITLE (25), ANIMATION (25), ...
SubMarket 2: Medical Services (Sample Focal Firm: QUADRAMED CORP)
66 Rivals: IDX SYSTEMS, MEDICUS SYSTEMS, HPR, SIMIONE CENTRAL HOLDINGS, NATIONAL WIRELESS HOLDINGS, HCIA, APACHE MEDICAL
SYSTEMS, ...
SIC CODES OF RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, DATA PROCESSING, AND OTHER COMPUTER RELATED [SIC3=737] (45 RIVALS),
INSURANCE AGENTS, BROKERS, AND SERVICE [SIC3=641] (5 RIVALS), MISCELLANEOUS HEALTH AND ALLIED SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE
CLASSIFIED [SIC3=809] (4 RIVALS), MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC RELATIONS SERVICES [SIC3=874] (3 RIVALS), MISC OTHER (9 RIVALS)
Core Words: CLIENT (59), DATABASE (54), SOLUTION (49), PATIENT (47), COPYRIGHT (47), SECRET (47), PHYSICIAN (47), HOSPITAL (46),
HEALTHCARE (46), SERVER (45), RESOURCE (44), FUNCTIONALITY (44), BILLING (44), CLIENTS (42), INTERFACE (41), EDUCATION (41),
ARCHITECTURE (41), PRODUCTIVITY (41), ENTERPRISE (40), WINDOWS (40), DATABASES (40), REFORM (38), PROFESSIONALS (38),
INFRINGEMENT (37), BACKGROUND (36), ...
SubMarket 3: Information Transmission (Sample Focal Firm: FAXSAV)
259 Rivals: OMTOOL LTD, CONCENTRIC NETWORK, PREMIERE TECHNOLOGIES, INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION DATA SYSTEMS, IDT
CORP, AXENT TECHNOLOGIES, SOLOPOINT, PRECISION SYSTEMS, NETRIX CORP, ...
SIC CODES OF RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, DATA PROCESSING, AND OTHER COMPUTER RELATED [SIC3=737] (112 RIVALS),
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT [SIC3=366] (45 RIVALS), TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS [SIC3=481] (38 RIVALS), COMPUTER AND OFFICE
EQUIPMENT [SIC3=357] (29 RIVALS), COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED [SIC3=489] (7 RIVALS), MISCELLANEOUS
BUSINESS SERVICES [SIC3=738] (7 RIVALS), MISC OTHER (15 RIVALS)
Core Words: INTERNET (236), TELECOMMUNICATIONS (211), INTERFACE (194), COMMUNICATION (188), SOLUTION (187), PLATFORM (184),
ARCHITECTURE (182), CALL (177), INFRASTRUCTURE (173), VOICE (173), FUNCTIONALITY (173), SERVER (173), COPYRIGHT (166),
TRANSMISSION (164), REMOTE (163), WINDOWS (161), CHANNEL (160), CLIENT (160), DATABASE (158), TRAFFIC (156), MICROSOFT (156),
INFRINGEMENT (153), CONNECTIVITY (146), EASE (145), USAGE (142), ...
SubMarket 4: Software (Sample Focal Firm: INTUIT)
52 Rivals: NETSCAPE COMMUNICATIONS, MYSOFTWARE, QUARTERDECK, SOFTWARE PUBLISHING CORP, GO2NET, MERIDIAN DATA,
MACROMEDIA, MICROSOFT, CE SOFTWARE HOLDINGS, ...
SIC CODES OF RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, DATA PROCESSING, AND OTHER COMPUTER RELATED [SIC3=737] (48 RIVALS), MISC
OTHER (4 RIVALS)
Core Words: INTERNET (52), FUNCTIONALITY (48), COPYRIGHT (48), MICROSOFT (48), WINDOWS (46), SOLUTION (45), EASE (44), SECRET (43),
DIFFICULTIES (41), VERSION (41), INFRINGEMENT (41), DATABASE (41), CHANNEL (40), COPY (40), PLATFORM (39), SERVER (39),
ENVIRONMENTS (38), PROBLEM (37), BACKGROUND (36), INTERFACE (36), DESPITE (36), DEVELOPERS (36), INTRODUCTIONS (36), DESKTOP
(36), ENTERPRISE (35), DOCUMENTATION (34), ...
SubMarket 5: Corporate Data Management and Computing Solutions (Sample Focal Firm: HYPERION SOFTWARE)
207 Rivals: ORACLE CORP, FOURTH SHIFT CORP, APPLIX, TIMELINE, PLATINUM TECHNOLOGY, HARBINGER CORP, SANTA CRUZ
OPERATION, EDIFY CORP, BANYAN SYSTEMS, ...
SIC CODES OF RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, DATA PROCESSING, AND OTHER COMPUTER RELATED [SIC3=737] (174 RIVALS),
COMPUTER AND OFFICE EQUIPMENT [SIC3=357] (22 RIVALS), COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT [SIC3=366] (2 RIVALS), MISC OTHER (15
RIVALS)
Core Words: SERVER (196), CLIENT (194), SOLUTION (193), ENTERPRISE (186), FUNCTIONALITY (185), WINDOWS (183), INTERNET (182),
COPYRIGHT (180), MICROSOFT (177), DATABASE (174), ARCHITECTURE (171), INTERFACE (168), ENVIRONMENTS (164), SECRET (159), EASE
(152), PLATFORM (151), DATABASES (150), UNIX (143), VENDOR (137), SUITE (134), INFRINGEMENT (131), ORACLE (127), TOOL (127),
DESKTOP (127), COMMUNICATION (123), PROGRAMMING (123), ...
SubMarket 6: Retail (Sample Focal Firm: AMAZON.COM INC)
87 Rivals: PREVIEW TRAVEL, YAHOO, DATAMARK HOLDING, NETSCAPE COMMUNICATIONS CORP, WALL DATA, ONSALE, INFOSEEK CORP,
IVI PUBLISHING, CASTELLE, CONNECT, NEW ERA OF NETWORKS, V ONE CORP, ...
SIC CODES OF RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, DATA PROCESSING, AND OTHER COMPUTER RELATED [SIC3=737] (66 RIVALS),
COMPUTER AND OFFICE EQUIPMENT [SIC3=357] (5 RIVALS), NONSTORE RETAILERS [SIC3=596] (5 RIVALS), COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
[SIC3=366] (4 RIVALS), MISC OTHER (14 RIVALS)
Core Words: INTERNET (84), FUNCTIONALITY (79), COPYRIGHT (78), DATABASE (77), INABILITY (74), SERVER (74), CLIENT (73), INFRINGEMENT
(73), SECRET (72), SOLUTION (70), INTRODUCTIONS (70), MICROSOFT (70), ARCHITECTURE (69), DIFFICULTIES (68), DEPENDENCE (68),
TELECOMMUNICATIONS (67), DESPITE (67), INFRASTRUCTURE (66), INTERFACE (66), WINDOWS (64), ENTERPRISE (62), COPY (62), EASE (62),
CHANNEL (61), PLATFORM (60), VERSION (59), TRAIN (58), ENVIRONMENTS (57), DEVELOPERS (57), VENDOR (56), ALLIANCES (55), ...

Sample TNIC industries centered around firms residing in three digit SIC
code 737 in the year 1997.

33

Table II: Sample Industries that Underwent Changes (TNIC Classifications)
**** Industry Surrounding Real Goods Solar in 1997 ***
Focal Firm: REAL GOODS TRADING CORP (SIC3=596)
1 Rival: PHOTOCOMM INC (SIC=362)
Core Words: ARRAY (2), FUEL (2), BACKUP (2), ELECTRIC (2), NORTHERN (2), REMOTE (2), VOLTAGE (2), UTILITY (2), CONSUMPTION (2), GRID (2), CONVERT (2),
WEATHER (2), WIND (2), APPLIANCES (2), SIEMENS (2), AUDIT (2), ELECTRICITY (2), BATTERY (2), CATALOG (2), SPECIALISTS (2), EARTH (2), FOSSIL (2), GREEN (2),
SIZING (2), INVERTERS (2), PHOTOCOMM (2)
**** Industry Surrounding Real Goods Solar in 2008 ***
Focal Firm: REAL GOODS SOLAR, INC.(gvkey=179417)(SIC3=362)
9 Rivals: DAYSTAR TECHNOLOGIES INC, AKEENA SOLAR, INC., EVERGREEN SOLAR INC, ASCENT SOLAR TECHNOLOGIES, INC., ENERGY CONVERSION DEVICES
INC, SUNPOWER CORP, POWER ONE INC, FIRST SOLAR, INC.
SIC CODES OF RIVALS: ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS [SIC3=367] (6 RIVALS), ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIAL APPARATUS [SIC3=362] (1 RIVAL), RESEARCH AND TESTING
SVCS [SIC3=873] (1 RIVAL)
Core Words: ELECTRIC (9), SILICON (9), ELECTRICITY (9), ROOF (9), INTEGRATORS (8), GRID (8), UTILITY (8), FILM (8), OUTPUT (8), SEMICONDUCTOR (8), WATT (8),
SUNLIGHT (8), FUEL (7), INSTALLATIONS (7), METAL (7), CELL (7), INCENTIVES (7), FOOT (6), INITIATIVE (6), CONSUMPTION (6), GLASS (6), KYOCERA (6), SURFACE
(6), SHARP (6), PEAK (6), TEMPERATURE (6), SUBSIDIES (6), VOLTAGE (6), FOSSIL (6), CADMIUM (6), SUNTECH (6), ...
**** Industry Surrounding L-1 Identity Solutions in 2008 ***
Focal Firm: L-1 IDENTITY SOLUTIONS INC (SIC3=737)
5 Rivals: COGENT, INC., WIDEPOINT CORP, SRA INTERNATIONAL, CACI INTERNATIONAL, ACTIVIDENTITY (All in SIC3=737)
* None of these firms existed as publicly traded firms in 1997 except for CACI International. Although CACI existed in 1997, it was in a different line of business (see below).
Core Words: DEFENSE (6), ARCHITECTURE (6), HOMELAND (6), CAPTURE (6), CLIENT (6), MILITARY (5), ENVIRONMENTS (5), INTEGRATORS (5), MOBILE (5),
PROCUREMENT (5), PRIME (5), TRADITIONALLY (5), COPYRIGHT (5), COMBINE (5), DATABASE (5), INTELLIGENCE (5), BUDGET (5), INSTITUTE (5), MISSION (5),
IDENTITY (5), INTEGRITY (5), GRUMMAN (5), NORTHROP (5), CONTRACTOR (4), WIRELESS (4), SURVEILLANCE (4), PRIVACY (4), PROCUREMENTS (4), CYBER (4), ...
**** Industry Surrounding CACI International in 1997 ***
SIC CODES OF 60 RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING AND DATA PROCESSING [SIC3=737] (48 RIVALS), ENGINEERING AND ARCHITECTURAL [SIC3=871] (2 RIVALS),
PERSONNEL SUPPLY SERVICES [SIC3=736] (2 RIVALS), PROFESSIONAL AND COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT [SIC3=504] (2 RIVALS), MISC OTHER (6 RIVALS)
Core Words: CLIENT (56), SERVER (54), INTERNET (53), SOLUTION (51), ARCHITECTURE (51), DATABASE (51), ENTERPRISE (50), CLIENTS (48), DATABASES (48),
PROGRAMMING (47), MICROSOFT (47), ENVIRONMENTS (46), PRODUCTIVITY (43), COPYRIGHT (43), SECRET (43), INTERFACE (42), WINDOWS (42), FUNCTIONALITY
(40), TOOL (40), BACKGROUND (39), DOCUMENTATION (39), INTRANET (39), TELECOMMUNICATIONS (38), OBJECT (38), CYCLE (36), LEGACY (36), SUITE (36),
VENDOR (36), ...
**** Industry Surrounding CACI International in 2008 ***
SIC CODES OF 18 RIVALS: COMPUTER PROGRAMMING AND DATA PROCESSING [SIC3=737] (8 RIVALS), SEARCH, DETECTION, NAVIGATION, GUIDANCE, AND
AERONAUTICAL [SIC3=381] (5 RIVALS), COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT [SIC3=366] (2 RIVALS), MISC OTHER (3 RIVALS)
Core Words: DEFENSE (19), MILITARY (18), MISSION (18), CONTRACTOR (17), HOMELAND (17), PROCUREMENT (17), PRIME (17), QUANTITY (16), INTELLIGENCE (16),
ENVIRONMENTS (15), AWARD (15), BUDGET (14), COMMAND (14), ARCHITECTURE (13), SPECTRUM (13), UNDERSTANDING (13), WARFARE (13), SURVEILLANCE (13),
TASK (12), LOCKHEED (12), MARTIN (12), SUBCONTRACTOR (12), PROPOSAL (12), PROCUREMENTS (12), RECONNAISSANCE (12), ARMY (11), ...

Sample TNIC industries that changed dramatically between 1997 and 2008.

34

Table III: Firm Characteristics and Industry Classifications

35

Row Variable

Adj R2
SIC-3
Fixed
Effects

Adj R2
SIC-3
Equal
Weighted
Average

Adj R2
NAICS-3
Fixed
Effects

Adj R2
NAICS-4
Equal
Weighted
Average

Adj R2
10-K 300
Fixed
Effects

Adj R2
10-K 300
Equal
Weighted
Average
(Annual)

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

0.284
0.177
0.023
0.138
0.041
0.221
0.277
0.096

0.312
0.208
0.070
0.169
0.084
0.245
0.311
0.153

0.287
0.184
0.025
0.137
0.061
0.238
0.302
0.097

0.314
0.216
0.082
0.170
0.110
0.263
0.337
0.160

0.327
0.216
0.026
0.191
0.071
0.209
0.262
0.104

0.372
0.272
0.096
0.250
0.169
0.181
0.220
0.157

OI/Sales
OI/Assets
Sales Growth
R+D/Sales
Adver./Sales
Book Leverage
Market Leverage
Market Beta

Adj R2
Conglom.
Adjusted
10-K 300
Average
0.355
0.252
0.088
0.220
0.149
0.222
0.280
0.160

Adj R2
TNIC
Equal
Weighted
Average

Adj R2
TNIC
Simil.
Weighted
Average
(Ex Self)

Adj R2
TNIC
Equal
Weighted
Average
(Ex Vert)

Adj R2
TNIC
Simil.
Weighted
Average
(Ex Self)
(Ex Vert)

0.458
0.375
0.172
0.203
0.272
0.327
0.392
0.245

0.414
0.290
0.038
0.206
0.159
0.225
0.303
0.118

0.458
0.375
0.172
0.203
0.272
0.327
0.392
0.245

0.414
0.290
0.038
0.206
0.159
0.225
0.303
0.118

Firm characteristics are regressed on various industry industry controls, including fixed-effect-based and industry-averaging method-based controls. All regressions are based on our
entire sample from 1997 to 2006, and also include yearly fixed effects. All TNIC industries are based on a 25% stop word threshold.

Table IV: Managerial Indications of High Competition and Industry Competitiveness Measures

Words Used for
Row TNIC Industries

Stop
Word
Threshold

36

(1)

All Words

100%

(2)

All Words

25%

(3)

All Words

10%

(4)

All Words

TF-IDF

(5)

Nouns and Proper Nouns

100%

(6)

Nouns and Proper Nouns

25%

(7)

Nouns and Proper Nouns

10%

(8)

Nouns and Proper Nouns

TF-IDF

(9)

Nouns and Proper Nouns

25%

(10) Nouns and Proper Nouns

25%

(11) Nouns and Proper Nouns

25%

(12) Nouns and Proper Nouns

25%

TNIC
HHI

SIC-3
HHI

-0.157
(-6.06)
-0.218
(-7.09)
-0.159
(-5.33)
-0.103
(-3.76)
-0.173
(-6.52)
-0.241
(-7.74)
-0.158
(-5.18)
-0.117
(-4.35)
-0.276
(-8.65)
-0.241
(-7.74)
-0.244
(-7.88)
-0.170
(-5.18)

-0.202
(-5.10)
-0.177
(-4.54)
-0.205
(-5.14)
-0.212
(-5.29)
-0.199
(-5.04)
-0.175
(-4.45)
-0.205
(-5.14)
-0.211
(-5.26)

-0.175
(-4.45)
-0.131
(-3.43)
-0.086
(-2.26)

OI/
Assets

-0.109
(-5.46)
0.032
(1.26)

Log
Firm
Age

-0.121
(-4.58)
-0.094
(-2.98)

Tobin’s
Q

0.036
(1.66)
0.099
(4.68)

Log
Sales

-0.292
(-7.23)

# Words
Bus.
Desc.

-0.335
(-10.29)

# Words
MD&A

#
Obs./
R2

1.205
(30.26)

34,412
0.026
34,412
0.028
34,412
0.026
34,412
0.024
34,412
0.026
34,411
0.029
34,409
0.026
34,412
0.025
34,411
0.026
34,411
0.029
34,411
0.034
34,411
0.156

The table reports the results of logistic regressions where the dependent variable is one if the firm’s management mentions high competition (or a synonym thereof) in its Management
and Discussion Section of its 10-K in the given year. Independent variables include measures of competitiveness based on TNIC and SIC based classifications (of equal granularity) and
additional control variables including sales, age, profitability, Tobin’s Q, and document size variables including the number of words in the business description and the MD&A sections
of the firm’s 10-K. The “Stop Word Threshold” column indicates whether we discard common words defined as those used in at least 10%, 25% or 100% of all documents, or if we
instead use TF-IDF to weight common words less heavily as an alternative to discarding them.

Table V: Self Reported Capital IQ Peers and Industry Classifications
TNIC (set to SIC-3 Granularity)

Words Used
for TNIC Industry

Stop Word
Threshold

TNIC
Overlap
with
Cap IQ

TNIC
Overlap
with
SIC-3

TNIC (set to NAICS-4 Granularity)
TNIC
Overlap
with
Cap IQ

TNIC
Overlap
with
NAICS-4

43.1%
53.0%
62.3%
61.9%
46.2%
55.1%
63.5%
61.0%

61.8%
65.8%
61.5%
65.6%
62.5%
65.6%
54.4%
64.6%

Panel A: Capital IQ Competitors
All Words
All Words
All Words
All Words
Nouns and
Nouns and
Nouns and
Nouns and

Proper
Proper
Proper
Proper

Nouns
Nouns
Nouns
Nouns

100%
25%
10%
TF-IDF
100%
25%
10%
TF-IDF

40.9%
50.6%
60.1%
59.3%
43.7%
52.5%
62.0%
58.5%

46.6%
50.2%
49.1%
49.0%
47.3%
50.2%
45.8%
48.1%

*Note: The overlap between SIC-3 and Capital IQ Competitors is 47.1%. The overlap between NAICS-4 and Capital IQ Competitors is 44.0%.

37

Panel B: Capital IQ Alliances
All Words
All Words
All Words
All Words
Nouns and
Nouns and
Nouns and
Nouns and

Proper
Proper
Proper
Proper

Nouns
Nouns
Nouns
Nouns

100%
25%
10%
TF-IDF
100%
25%
10%
TF-IDF

35.4%
40.6%
43.3%
48.3%
36.6%
42.2%
44.3%
48.6%

40.8%
44.2%
43.1%
42.1%
40.7%
43.4%
42.3%
40.2%

28.4%
33.6%
36.5%
40.8%
29.9%
34.7%
36.1%
40.2%

41.7%
47.1%
47.0%
44.5%
42.7%
46.9%
46.3%
42.6%

*Note: The overlap between SIC-3 and Capital IQ Alliances is 28.2%. The overlap between NAICS-4 and Capital IQ Alliances is 22.9%.
The table reports the fraction of Capital IQ 2011 peers that are also peers as identified by various other industry classifications, including SIC-3, NAICS-4, and TNIC-based
classifications constructed to have identical levels of granularity as SIC-3 and NAICS-4. The table also reports the fraction of overlap between SIC-3 and TNIC, and also between
NAICS-4 and TNIC. Although Capital IQ data is from 2011 (historical peer data is not available), all SIC, NAICS and TNIC data is from 2008. The “Stop Word Threshold” column
indicates whether we discard common words defined as those used in at least 10%, 25% or 100% of all documents, or if we instead use TF-IDF to weight common words less heavily as
an alternative to discarding them.

Table VI: Pearson Correlation Coefficients

Row Variable

Total
Summed
Similarity
(10-K based)

Average
Similarity
(10-K based)

Sales
Herfindahl
Index
(10-K based)

Sales
C4
Index
(10-K based)

Sales
Herfindahl
Index
(SIC-3 based)

Sales
C4
Index
(SIC-3 based)

0.795
0.232
0.243
0.238
0.279

0.284
0.328
0.310
0.414

0.831
0.566
0.524

0.553
0.647

Sales
Herfindahl
Index
(NAICS-4
based)

Correlation Coefficients

38

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Average Similarity (10-K based)
Sales Herfindahl (10-K based)
Sales C4 Index (10-K based)
Sales Herfindahl (SIC-3 based)
Sales C4 Index (SIC-3 based)
Sales Herfindahl (NAICS-4 based)
Sales C4 Index (NAICS-4 based)

0.812
-0.319
-0.553
-0.217
-0.300
-0.289
-0.437

-0.370
-0.520
-0.202
-0.239
-0.227
-0.343

0.827

Pearson Correlation Coefficients are reported for our sample of 51,657 observations based on 1997 to 2006. The 10-K based market structure measures are based on 10K-TNIC
industries (uses the same number of pairings as three digit SIC codes). All TNIC industries are based on a 25% stop word threshold.

Table VII: Ex-ante investment versus future product differentiation

Dependent Variable
(1) ∆ Log Total Summed Similarity
(2) ∆ Average Similarity
(3) ∆ Sales 10-K Based HHI

39

(4) ∆ Sales 10-K Based C4 Index
(5) ∆ Observed Lerner Index
(6) ∆ Observed Firm Profitability

Positive
Adver.
Dummy

Positive
R&D
Dummy

Log
Industry
Adver.
/ Sales

Log
Industry
R&D
/ Sales

Ind
Past
Stock
Return

Log
Assets

Ind.
Log
B/M
Ratio

-0.326
(-3.56)
-0.000
(-1.12)
0.038
(6.25)
0.046
(12.69)
0.011
(2.03)
0.010
(1.75)

0.065
(0.55)
0.000
(0.39)
0.016
(3.90)
0.014
(4.69)
0.024
(4.50)
0.025
(4.44)

-0.026
(-2.24)
-0.000
(-2.49)
0.001
(1.38)
0.003
(7.28)
0.002
(3.07)
0.001
(2.57)

0.019
(0.81)
-0.000
(-0.36)
0.000
(0.37)
0.000
(1.05)
0.003
(5.00)
0.003
(4.92)

0.181
(1.51)
0.000
(0.70)
-0.001
(-0.74)
-0.003
(-2.66)
-0.013
(-5.30)
-0.015
(-5.46)

0.059
(3.71)
0.000
(1.78)
-0.002
(-2.66)
0.000
(0.25)
-0.001
(-0.76)
-0.000
(-0.33)

-0.131
(-2.60)
-0.000
(-1.59)
0.004
(2.43)
0.002
(1.92)
0.003
(1.91)
0.004
(2.12)

Adj
R2
0.091
0.015
0.020
0.036
0.041
0.019

OLS regressions with ex post product changes in market structure (based on 10K-TNIC industries) as the dependent variables. All specifications include industry and yearly fixed
effects, and standard errors account for clustering by year and industry (industry controls are based on 10K-300 FIC industries, although results are very similar if we instead use
three-digit SIC industries (not reported). The sample has 49,246 observations and is from 1997 to 2006.

Table VIII: Ex-ante investment versus future product differentiation (SIC-3 and NAICS-4 Industry Definitions)

Dependent Variable

Positive
Adver.
Dummy

Positive
R&D
Dummy

Log
Industry
Adver.
/ Sales

Log
Industry
R&D
/ Sales

Ind
Past
Stock
Return

Log
Assets

Ind.
Log
B/M
Ratio

0.008
(1.22)
-0.001
(-0.63)
-0.003
(-0.87)

0.005
(0.67)
0.002
(0.68)
0.010
(1.87)

0.007
(1.19)
-0.002
(-0.93)
0.004
(0.52)

0.023
(2.83)
0.007
(2.48)
0.007
(0.97)

Adj
R2

Panel A: SIC-3 Based Market Structure Measures and Industry Controls
(1) ∆ Sales SIC-3 HHI
(2) ∆ Sales SIC-3 C4 Index
(3) ∆ Observed Firm Profitability

0.007
(0.39)
0.009
(1.13)
0.006
(0.52)

-0.020
(-1.35)
0.005
(0.65)
0.021
(1.64)

0.001
(0.59)
0.002
(1.37)
0.001
(0.49)

-0.000
(-0.12)
0.000
(0.22)
0.003
(1.40)

-0.010
(-2.16)
-0.003
(-1.64)
-0.006
(-1.06)

0.103
0.109
0.094

40

Panel B: NAICS-4 Based Market Structure Measures and Industry Controls
(4) ∆ Sales NAICS-4 HHI
(5) ∆ Sales NAICS-4 C4 Index
(6) ∆ Observed Firm Profitability

-0.006
(-0.35)
-0.003
(-0.29)
0.028
(1.19)

-0.052
(-3.32)
-0.012
(-1.64)
0.025
(1.43)

0.000
(0.02)
0.001
(0.41)
0.003
(1.17)

-0.005
(-2.49)
-0.002
(-1.41)
0.004
(1.60)

-0.011
(-2.32)
-0.008
(-3.55)
-0.006
(-1.06)

0.128
0.116
0.175

OLS regressions with ex post product changes in market structure (based on three-digit SIC in Panel A, and four-digit NAICS in Panel B) as the dependent variables. All
specifications include industry and yearly fixed effects, and standard errors account for clustering by year and industry (industry controls are based on three-digit SIC in Panel A, and
four-digit NAICS in Panel B). The sample has 49,246 observations and is from 1997 to 2006.

Figure 1:

Frequency Distribution (Number of Words in Description)
0.12

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

Number of words

Frequency distribution of unique non-common noun and proper noun words in 10-K product descriptions.

975

925

875

825

775

725

675

625

575

525

475

425

375

325

275

225

175

125

75

0
25

41

Fraction of Firms

0.1

Figure 2:

97

93

89

85

81

77

73

69

65

57

53

49

45

41

37

33

29

25

21

17

13

9

5

61

* Industries with more than 100 firms grouped
into last bin

0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
1

Frequency

Product Description 300 Industry Classification:
Distribution of the Number of firms in each industry

Number of firms in Industry

0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

97

93

89

85

81

77

73

69

65

61

57

53

49

45

41

37

33

29

25

21

17

13

9

5

* Industries with more than 100 firms grouped
into last bin

1

Frequency

SIC-3 Classification:
Distribution of the Number of firms in each industry

Number of firms in Industry

0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

97

93

89

85

81

77

73

69

65

61

57

53

49

45

41

37

33

29

25

21

17

13

9

5

* Industries with more than 100 firms grouped
into last bin

1

Frequency

NAICS-4 Classification:
Distribution of the Number of firms in each industry

Number of firms in Industry

Frequency distribution of the number of firms in each industry based on three FIC industry
classification methods: 10K-300 industries, three digit SIC industries, and four digit NAICS
industries. All three classifications have close to 300 industries in our sample.

42

Appendix 1
This Appendix explains how we compute the “product similarity” and “product
differentiation” between two firms i and j. We first take the text in each firm’s
product description and construct a binary vector summarizing its usage of English
words. The vector has a length equal to the number of unique words used in the set of
all product descriptions. For a given firm, a given element of this vector is one if the
word associated with the given element is in the given firm’s product description. To
focus on products, we restrict the words in this vector to less commonly used words.
Very common words include articles, conjunctions, personal pronouns, abbreviations,
and legal jargon, for example. Specifically, we restrict attention to words that are
either nouns or proper nouns, and that also appear in fewer than 25% of all business
descriptions in the given year. For each firm i, we thus have a binary vector Pi , with
each element taking a value of one if the associated word is used in the given firm’s
product description and zero otherwise.
We define the frequency vector Vi to be normalized to unit length.
Vi = √

Pi
Pi · Pi

(6)

To measure how similar the products of firms i and j are, we take the dot product
of their normalized vectors, which is their “product similarity”.
P roduct Similarityi,j = (Vi · Vj )

(7)

We define product differentiation as one minus similarity.
P roduct Dif f erentiationi,j = 1 − (Vi · Vj )

(8)

Because all normalized vectors Vi have a length of one, product similarity and product differentiation both have the nice property of being bounded in the interval (0,1).
This normalization ensures that product descriptions with fewer words are not penalized excessively. This method is known as the “cosine similarity” method, as it
measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors on a unit sphere. The underlying unit sphere also represents an“empirical product market space” on which all
firms in the sample have a unique location.
A-1

Appendix 2
This appendix describes our FIC industry classification methodology based on
10-K text similarities. Our classification goal is to maximize total within-industry
product similarity subject to two constraints. First, in order to be comparable to
existing methods, a common set of industries must be created and held fixed for all
years in our time series. Hence we form a fixed set of industries based on our first full
year of data (1997). Second, our algorithm should be sufficiently flexible to generate
industry classifications for any number of degrees of freedom. This latter requirement
is important because, in order to compare the quality of our new classifications
relative to alternatives like three or four digit SIC codes, our classifications should
generate a similar number of industries. We achieve these goals using a two stage
process: (1) an industry formation stage, which is based on the first full year of our
sample; and (2) an industry assignment stage, which assigns firms in all years of our
sample to the fixed industries determined in stage one.
We begin the first stage by taking the subsample of N single segment firms in 1997
(multiple segment firms are identified using the COMPUSTAT segment database).
We then initialize our industry classifications to have N industries, with each of the
N firms residing within its own one-firm industry. We then compute the pairwise
similarity for each unique pair of industries j and k, which we denote as Ij,k .
To reduce the industry count to N − 1 industries, we take the maximum pairwise
industry similarity as follows
M AX

Ij,k

j,k, j6=k

(9)

The two industries with the highest similarity are then combined, reducing the industry count by one. This process is repeated until the number of industries reaches
the desired number. Importantly, when two industries with mj and mk firms are
combined, all industry similarities relative to the new industry must be recomputed.
For a newly created industry l, for example, its similarity with respect to all other
industries q is computed as the average firm pairwise similarity for all firm pairs in
which one firm is in industry l and one in industry q as follows:
ml

mq

Il,q = Σ

Σ

x=1 y=1

Sx,y
ml mq
A-2

(10)

Here, Sx,y is the firm-level pairwise similarity between firm x in industry l and firm
y in industry q.
Although this method guarantees maximization of within-industry similarity after
one iteration, it does not guarantee this property after more than one iteration. For
example, a firm that initially fits best with industry j after one iteration might fit
better with another industry k after several iterations because industry k was not
an option at the time the initial classification to industry j was made. Thus, we
recompute similarities ex-post to determine whether within industry similarity can
be improved by moving firms to alternative industries. If similarity can be improved,
we reclassify suboptimally matched firms to their industry of best fit.
Once this process is complete, the set of industries generated by the algorithm
will have the desired industry count, and will have the property that within industry
similarity cannot be maximized further by moving any one firm to another industry.
It is important to note, however, that industry classifications fitting this description
are not necessarily unique. It is plausible that multiple simultaneous firm reassignments can further improve within-industry similarity. We do not take further steps
to ensure uniqueness due to computational limitations. Also, any departure from
the true optimal set of industries would bias our study away from finding significant
results, and hence our approach is conservative and might understate the true power
of 10-K business descriptions.
The industry assignment stage takes the industries formed in the first stage as
given, and assigns any given firm in any year to the industry it is most similar to. We
begin by computing an aggregate word usage vector for each industry. Each vector
is based on the universe of words appearing in fewer than 25% of all firms in 1997 as
before. The vector is populated by the count of firms in the given industry using the
given word, and this vector is then normalized to have unit length (similar to how
we compute firm pairwise similarities in Appendix 1). This normalization ensures
that industries using more words are not rewarded on the basis of size, but rather are
only rewarded on the basis of similarity. For a given firm that we wish to classify, we
simply compute its similarity to all of the candidate industries, and assign the firm
to the industry it is most similar to. A firm’s similarity to an industry is simply the
A-3

dot product of the firm’s normalized word vector to the industry’s normalized word
vector.
Although we use the first full year of our sample, 1997, to form industries, we do
not believe that this procedure generates any look ahead bias. The industry formation itself is purely a function of the text in product descriptions and the definition
of a multiple segment firm obtained from COMPUSTAT. We use multiple segment
identifiers from 1996, which precedes our sample, and our results are virtually unchanged if we further omit 1997 from our sample.

A-4

Appendix 3
In this appendix, we further assess the performance of 10K-FIC industries versus
SIC and NAICS industries by exploring various levels of granularity. A key advantage of our approach is the ability to set granularity to any arbitrary level. We
use the Akaike information criterion to examine which level of granularity is most
likely to explain firm characteristic data. Understanding granularity is relevant to
understanding the role and breadth of economies of scope.
[Insert Table A3 Here]
Table A3 presents the results of the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) tests. For
all four levels of SIC granularity (Panel A), all six levels of NAICS granularity (Panel
B), and for product description based industries ranging from 50 to 800 industries
(Panel C), we compute the AIC statistic and the adjusted R-squared from regressions
in which the dependent variable is profitability scaled by sales or assets, and the
independent variable is a set of industry fixed effects based on the given classification.
To avoid clustering of firm observations over time, which could bias AIC tests, we
run separate cross sectional regressions in each year and we then report the average
AIC scores and the average adjusted R-squared calculations based on ten regressions
from 1997 to 2006. Classifications with lower AIC scores are more likely to explain
the data.
Panel A shows that three and four digit SIC classifications are most informative,
and dominate two digit SIC codes. This suggests that the wide usage of three digit
SIC codes in existing studies is reasonable. Panel B suggests that four digit NAICS
dominate other resolutions, suggesting that NAICS-4 might be a substitute for SIC3. Because AIC scores are designed to permit comparisons across industries using
different information sources and industry counts, we can also broadly compare SIC
to NAICS. Panels A and B show that SIC and NAICS are reasonable substitutes
for each other. NAICS is marginally better when explaining profitability scaled by
assets, and SIC is marginally better when explaining profitability scaled by sales.
Our results do not support the conclusion that NAICS dominates SIC, which is
perhaps surprising given the more recent establishment of NAICS.
A-5

Panel C shows that 10K-based industries dominate both SIC and NAICS, as AIC
scores in Panel C are broadly lower than those in either Panel A or Panel B. This
result is robust to scaling profitability by sales or assets. The AIC score of 2603.1
(10K-300 industries) is broadly lower than the 3091.4 for three digit SIC codes, and
the 3097.7 for four digit NAICS codes, even though all three groupings have similar
granularity levels.
Although we can conclude that 10K-based industries are more informative than
SIC or NAICS industries, Panel C draws only a moderately decisive conclusion that
the AIC scores reach a minimum at 300 industries. This minimum is surrounded
by only a gradual slope. We conclude that the degree of granularity (roughly 300
industries) used by SIC and NAICS is reasonable, and is also a good benchmark for
10-K based industries.

A-6

Table A3: Industry classifications and industry granularity

Row

Industry Definition

oi/sales
Akaike
Information Adj
Criterion
R2

oi/assets
Akaike
Information Adj
Criterion
R2

# of
Industries

Avg #
Firms per
Industry

10
72
274
434

561.0
77.9
20.5
12.9

Panel A: SIC-code based industry definitions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

SIC-1-digit
SIC-2-digit
SIC-3-digit
SIC-4-digit

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

NAICS-1-digit
NAICS-2-digit
NAICS-3-digit
NAICS-4-digit
NAICS-5-digit
NAICS-6-digit

(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)

10K-based-50
10K-based-100
10K-based-200
10K-based-250
10K-based-300
10K-based-400
10K-based-500
10K-based-800

3783.2
0.146
-35.7
-0.000
3277.7
0.228
-269.3
0.043
3091.4
0.277
-685.2
0.120
3039.2
0.301
-808.6
0.167
Panel B: NAICS based industry definitions

4281.5
0.066
-192.0
0.029
9
3549.2
0.182
-475.9
0.079
23
3219.1
0.238
-750.6
0.133
96
3097.7
0.278
-830.6
0.173
328
3400.1
0.270
-512.5
0.162
672
3602.1
0.271
-299.1
0.161
983
Panel C: 10-K product description based industry definitions
2855.8
2684.5
2666.6
2678.7
2603.1
2590.9
2682.0
2851.5

0.280
0.308
0.318
0.322
0.334
0.342
0.339
0.337

-1109.2
-1190.0
-1178.3
-1166.4
-1203.1
-1184.9
-1127.9
-1003.7

0.181
0.200
0.208
0.212
0.220
0.225
0.227
0.229

50
100
200
250
300
400
500
800

623.3
243.9
58.4
17.1
8.3
5.7
112.1
56.0
28.0
22.4
18.7
14.0
11.2
7.0

The table reports average Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) for cross sectional regressions in which profitability
is regressed on a specified set of industry fixed effects. To avoid clustering over time (which would bias AIC tests),
we run separate regressions in each year from 1997 to 2006 and report average AIC scores.

A-7

