NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSET LIQUIDITY AND THE COST OF CAPITAL
Hernán Ortiz-Molina
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 15992
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15992

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

We thank Heitor Almeida, Murray Carlson, Jason Chen, Lorenzo Garlappi, Itay Goldstein (WFA discussant),
N. R. Prabhala, Avri Ravid, Jason Schloetzer, as well as seminar participants at Georgetown University,
the Pacific NorthWest Finance Conference 2008, and the Western Finance Association Meetings 2009
for their helpful comments. Ortiz-Molina acknowledges the financial support from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada. All errors are the authors alone. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Hernán Ortiz-Molina and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Asset Liquidity and the Cost of Capital
Hernán Ortiz-Molina and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 15992
May 2010
JEL No. G12,G32
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of real asset liquidity on a firm’s cost of capital. We find an aggregate asset-liquidity
discount in firms’ cost of capital that is strongly counter-cyclical. At the firm-level we find that asset
liquidity affects firms’ cost of capital both in the cross section and in the time series: Firms in industries
with more liquid assets and during periods of high asset liquidity have lower cost of capital. This effect
is stronger when the asset liquidity is provided by firms operating within the industry. We also find
that higher asset liquidity reduces the cost of capital by more for firms that face more competitive
risk in product markets, have less access to external capital or are closer to default, and for those facing
negative demand shocks. Our results suggest that asset liquidity is valuable to firms and, more generally,
that operating inflexibility is an economically important source of risk.

Hernán Ortiz-Molina
Sauder School of Business
The University of British Columbia
2053 Main Hall
Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T 1Z2
ortizmolina@sauder.ubc.ca
Gordon M. Phillips
R.H. Smith School of Management
Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu

I.

Introduction

Understanding what are the underlying sources of risk that drive the cross-sectional
and time-series variation in firms’ cost of capital is of fundamental interest in financial economics. Previous work, including recent studies by Pástor, Sinha, and
Swaminathan (2008) and Chava and Purnanandam (2009) which highlight the importance of using ex-ante measures of the cost of capital, shed light on this question.
However, very little is known about how the cost of capital may be aﬀected by the
liquidity of a firm’s physical assets. Yet, asset liquidity directly aﬀects a firm’s ability
to redeploy its real assets to alternative uses and thus its flexibility in responding to
a changing business environment. For example, Diamond and Rajan (2009) argue
that during the recent financial crisis firms may have been unwilling to sell assets at
the prevailing fire-sale prices.
The importance of the constraints that illiquid asset markets impose on a firm’s
ability to restructure its operations are illustrated in a recent article in the Wall
Street Journal.1 In early June 2009 Quest Communications was soliciting bids for its
long-distance business, with the objectives of exiting an unprofitable business and
raising cash to pay down some of its debt. Naturally, the potential buyers for this
highly industry-specific asset were other telecom firms (e.g., Level 3 Communications,
XO Communications, and TW Telecom). However, the potential bids were coming
at a 50% discount from the target price set by Quest. At that time, Quest faced the
choice of calling oﬀ the auction or accepting a significant discount.
In this paper we examine whether more liquid asset markets reduce a firm’s cost
of capital by increasing its operating flexibility. Our study is motivated by recent
studies in both corporate finance and asset pricing. The corporate finance literature
emphasizes the significant frictions firms face in redeploying their real assets to their
best alternative use. The problem is that, because assets are often industry or firm
specific, it is diﬃcult to find a suitable buyer (Shleifer and Vishny (1992)). This
issue is the focus of a recent study by Almeida, Campello and Hackbarth (2009) who
show that, when assets are industry specific but transferable to other firms in the
industry, solvent firms can provide liquidity to distressed firms by buying their assets
1

See Amol Sharma, “Quest’s Long-Distance Arm Draws Bids Below Targets”, Wall Street Journal, dateMonth6Day5Year2009June 5, 2009.

1

even in the absence of operational synergies. Furthermore, other studies have shown
that asset sales in illiquid markets are associated with a significant price discount
(Pulvino (1998), Ramey and Shapiro (2001), and Gavazza (2008)). This implies that
the cost a firm faces in reversing an investment and its ability to raise cash in an
asset sale when distressed depend on the liquidity of the market for its real assets.
In sum, this literature suggests that asset liquidity is a main determinant of a firm’s
operating flexibility and that as a result asset liquidity should aﬀect a firm’s cost of
capital ex-ante.
In asset pricing, a growing theoretical literature directly links a firm’s cost of
reversing its real investment to its cost of capital (e.g., Kogan (2004), Gomes, Kogan,
and Zhang (2003), Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004), Zhang (2005), and
Cooper (2006)). The argument is that firms with significant costs of reversing their
real investments will be unable to scale down their operations during times of low
demand for their products. As a result, they will be unable to cut their fixed costs
and will remain burdened with unproductive capital. This, in turn, increases the
covariance of a firm’s performance with macroeconomic conditions, especially during
economic downturns, and thus it leads investors to require higher returns for the
capital they provide.
For the purposes of our study it is important that we measure asset liquidity for
firms in a broad number of industries and over a long period of time. Throughout the
paper, we use three diﬀerent measures of asset liquidity: the number of industry rivals
with access to debt markets, the average leverage net of cash of industry rivals, and
the value of M&A activity in a firm’s industry. The first two measures capture the
presence of potential buyers from within the industry and are motivated by Shleifer
and Vishny (1992) and recently by Almeida, Campello and Hackbarth (2009). The
intuition behind these measures is that a firm’s assets are more valuable to other
firms in the industry, which are better able to redeploy them to alternative uses.
As a result, industry insiders with financial slack are the most likely buyers of the
assets. The third measure follows Schlingemann, Stulz and Walkling (2002), who
argue that a high volume of M&A activity in an industry is evidence of high asset
liquidity because price discounts are smaller in more active resale markets.
We measure a firm’s expected return using two alternative methods. The primary
2

measure we use in our analyses is the implied cost of capital (ICC ), which Pástor,
Sinha, and Swaminathan (2008) show is a good proxy for a stock’s conditional expected return under plausible conditions. An advantage of using ICC is that it does
not rely on noisy realized returns or on specific asset pricing models. Specifically, Elton (1999) forcefully argues against using realized returns in asset pricing tests, and
Fama and French (1997) show that measures based on standard models are imprecise. Moreover, unlike tests based on returns, the ICC detects a positive risk-return
tradeoﬀ (Pástor, Sinha, and Swaminathan (2008)) and a positive relation between
distress risk and expected returns (Chava and Purnanandam (2009)).2 For robustness, in our main tests we also measure expected returns using Fama and French’s
(1993) three-factor model (FFCC ).
Using a large-scale dataset containing firms in 304 diﬀerent three-digit SIC industries during the period 1984-2006, we show that asset liquidity is a major determinant
of a firm’s operating flexibility, and that it has an economically significant impact on
a firm’s cost of capital. In our initial univariate tests using both the implied cost of
capital and the Fama-French cost of capital as well as alternative measures of asset
liquidity, we find an asset-liquidity discount, that is, the cost of capital is lower for
firms in the highest versus the lowest asset-liquidity quintiles. Our estimates range
from 2.72 to 6.52 percentage points lower depending on the measure of asset liquidity. Moreover, consistent with the theoretical argument that operating inflexibility
causes time-varying equity risk, in time-series tests we find that the asset-liquidity
discount is strongly counter-cyclical. Thus, our initial evidence shows that there
is an asset-liquidity discount which is likely to be driven by costly reversibility of
investment.
Consequently, in firm-level tests we further examine the relation between asset
liquidity and the cost of capital by exploiting the rich panel structure of our data.
Our cross-sectional multivariate tests show that firms with higher asset liquidity have
a lower implied cost of capital and a lower Fama-French cost of capital than firms
with lower asset liquidity. Our within-industry time-series tests show that during
periods of high asset liquidity in the industry a firm’s implied cost of capital is lower
2

While the ICC uses analysts’ forecasts, Campello, Chen, and Zhang (2009) derive a measure
of ex-ante expected returns based on bond yields, but its empirical execution is constrained by the
limited availability of bond yield data.

3

than it is during periods of low asset liquidity. These tests imply that a one-standard
deviation increase in asset liquidity across firms decreases the implied cost of capital
by 1.4 to 1.9 percentage points and a similar increase in an industry’s asset liquidity
over time decreases the implied cost of capital by 0.5 to 1.5 percentage points.
Our measure of asset liquidity based on M&A activity allows us to further distinguish between inside asset liquidity, the value of M&A activity involving acquirers
that operate within the industry, and outside asset liquidity, the value of M&A activity involving acquirers that operate outside the industry. As argued by Shleifer
and Vishny (1992), buyers from inside the industry can better redeploy the asset to a
productive use and are willing to pay higher prices. In contrast, buyers from outside
the industry are willing to pay lower prices due to a lack of synergies and of experience in operating the asset. Suggesting that inside buyers provide more liquidity in
asset markets than outside buyers, we find that inside liquidity reduces firms’ implied
cost of capital by more than outside liquidity. These findings are consistent with the
recent results for mergers in Almeida, Campello and Hackbarth (2009), who show
that when industry-level asset specificity is high financially distressed firms are often
able to sell their assets to more financially flexible firms in their industries instead
of selling them to industry outsiders.
We also explore which competitive factors aﬀect the importance of asset liquidity
in explaining firms’ cost of capital. We first study the role of the competitive risk
a firm faces in product markets. Asset liquidity should be more valuable for firms
in more competitive industries, where competition is fiercer due to lower barriers to
entry. It should also be more valuable for the smallest firms in an industry, since
these firms are more exposed to competitive threats from larger rivals and have a
higher likelihood of exit in industry restructurings. Supporting these predictions,
we find that asset liquidity decreases the implied cost of capital mostly for firms in
competitive industries and for firms with smaller market shares.
Our arguments suggest that asset liquidity is valuable because it allows firms
to scale down their operations and to raise cash with asset sales. This suggests
that the eﬀect of asset liquidity on the cost of capital should depend on a firm’s
access to external financing, its financial situation, its investment opportunities, and
its economic environment. Supporting this view, we find that the negative eﬀect of
4

asset liquidity on the implied cost of capital is stronger for firms with no debt ratings,
with higher probability of default, with lower market-to-book value of assets, and for
those operating during industry downturns.
In further robustness tests we show that the eﬀect of asset liquidity on the implied
cost of capital holds in pure cross-sectional tests, as well as in cross-sectional and
time-series tests controlling for the industry’s valuation. This suggests that our
findings are not biased by a correlation between our measures of asset liquidity and
changes in industry valuation or the supply of capital. Moreover, our main results
hold in industry-level tests, they are robust to measuring expected returns using the
unlevered implied cost of capital, and are not driven by biases in analysts’ forecasts.
They also hold if we measure asset liquidity using the average acquisition premium
in the industry, when we use segment-weighted measures of asset liquidity, and if we
control for stock liquidity or cash holdings.
Our paper is closely related to the literature which suggests that a firm’s ability to sell assets enhances its operating and financial flexibility. Maksimovic and
Phillips (1998) show that asset sales are at the core of firms’ restructuring processes,
and Schlingemann, Stulz, and Walkling (2002) show that asset liquidity determines
firms’ ability to restructure. Moreover, Lang, Poulsen, and Stulz (1995) find that
sellers of assets are usually poor performers and Weiss and Wruck (1998) show that
asset liquidity helps managers maneuver in financial distress.3 Similarly, Almeida,
Campello, and Hackbarth (2009) show that when assets are transferrable within the
industry inside-industry buyers purchase distressed assets purely due to liquidity
reasons. Last, Benmelech and Bergman (2009) find that debt tranches of airlines
secured with more redeployable collateral have higher credit ratings and lower credit
spreads. We add to this literature by showing that the flexibility provided by asset
liquidity significantly reduces a firm’s cost of equity capital.
The article is structured as follows. Section 2 develops our main hypothesis and
related empirical predictions. Section 3 describes our data and variables. Section 4
reports the main empirical results. Section 5 presents additional robustness tests.
Section 6 concludes.
3

In addition, DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Wruck (2002) find that LA Gear’s ability to liquidate
working capital to fund operations allowed the firm to implement various business strategies and
delay distress.

5

II.

The Value of Asset Liquidity and the Cost of Capital

Our framework is based on the recent corporate finance and asset pricing literatures
that emphasize the significant frictions firms face in redeploying their real assets to
their best alternative uses, and in recovering the undepreciated value of their original
investments. The central idea is that the liquidity of the market for a firm’s real
assets determines the diﬀerence between the market price for those assets and their
fundamental value, and thus it determines the firm’s cost of unwinding its capital
stock as well as its ability to raise cash with asset sales. Highlighting the role of asset
liquidity, Pulvino (1998) and Ramey and Shapiro (2001) document significant price
discounts for asset sales in illiquid markets.
The corporate finance literature suggests that asset liquidity enhances a firm’s
operating flexibility and thus it may reduce the cost of capital by facilitating firms’
restructuring processes (e.g., Maksimovic and Phillips (1998), and Schlingemann,
Stulz, and Walkling (2002)), which is especially valuable to firms facing economic adversity (e.g., Lang, Poulsen, and Stulz (1995), Weiss and Wruck (1998), and Almeida,
Campello, and Hackbarth (2009)). Moreover, the asset pricing literature (e.g., Kogan (2004), Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003), Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino
(2004), Zhang (2005), and Cooper (2006)) also suggests that firms facing illiquid
asset markets are unable to sell unproductive assets to cut their fixed costs in times
of low demand, and thus the higher operating risk leads investors to require higher
returns for the capital they provide. These arguments lead to our central hypothesis:
Main Hypothesis: Asset liquidity reduces firms’ cost of capital by increasing their
operating flexibility.
To guide our analysis we develop several testable predictions that follow from our
main hypothesis. First, note that our hypothesis has two broad implications that
should hold at the aggregate level. Specifically, there should be a negative spread
in cost of capital between the high and low asset-liquidity firms, that is, an assetliquidity discount. Moreover, the growing theoretical literature which directly links
a firm’s operating inflexibility to its cost of capital provides a rationale for countercyclical time-series variation in equity risk. The argument is that asset liquidity
is more valuable when economic conditions worsen and firms are more likely to

6

need to sell assets, either to reduce fixed costs and thus operating risk or to raise
the cash necessary to fund operations and avoid default. This suggests that the
aggregate asset-liquidity discount should be counter-cyclical. These implications are
summarized below:
Prediction 1: At the aggregate level, there should be an asset-liquidity discount in the
cost of capital that exhibits a counter-cyclical time-series variation.
We now derive several predictions that can be tested in multivariate analyses at
the firm level by exploiting the rich panel structure of our data. The first prediction relates asset liquidity to the cost of capital and follows directly from our main
hypothesis:
Prediction 2: Firms with a more liquid market for their assets should have a lower
cost of capital.
As noted by Shleifer and Vishny (1992), inside buyers (who operate in the same
industry as the target) can better redeploy the asset to a productive use and thus are
willing to pay higher prices. In contrast, outside buyers (who do not operate in the
industry) are willing to pay lower prices due to reduced synergies and inexperience in
operating the asset. Supporting this view, Pulvino (1998) and Ramey and Shapiro
(2001) show that financially constrained firms that are forced to sell their assets to
industry outsiders obtain prices that are substantially below the prices they would
have obtained had they been able to sell them to industry insiders. This suggests
that the presence of inside buyers provides more liquidity in the market for corporate
assets than does the presence of outside buyers, and thus should have a stronger eﬀect
on firms’ cost of capital. This intuition leads to our third prediction:
Prediction 3: Inside asset liquidity should decrease a firm’s cost of capital more than
outside asset liquidity.
Our remaining predictions deal with the question of what may drive the crosssectional variation in the strength of the eﬀect of asset liquidity on the cost of
capital. We first focus on the roles of competition in product markets and a firm’s
competitive position. Previous research in industrial organization shows that product
market competition is more intense in more competitive industries. At the one
extreme, in highly concentrated markets barriers to entry entrench incumbent firms
7

in their market positions. At the other extreme, the free entry of firms in competitive
industries makes markets highly contestable, and firms that fail to quickly adapt to
a changing environment are drawn out of business. Consistent with this view, Hou
and Robinson (2006) empirically show that the stocks of firms operating in more
competitive industries earn higher average returns. This logic suggests that the
operating flexibility provided by a more liquid market for assets is more valuable to
firms in more competitive industries because they face higher competitive risk.
In addition, a firm’s relative position in the industry is also an important determinant of its competitive risk. Unlike the largest firms in the industry (the “industry
leaders”), who have well-established industry positions, the smallest firms in an industry (the “followers”) have a higher competitive risk due to their weaker industry
positions in terms of market share, customer and supplier loyalty, and ability to endure economic hardship. Moreover, previous work shows that small firms are more
exposed to competitive threats from larger rivals, and that they account for the majority of exits in industry restructurings.4 Thus, higher asset liquidity should also be
more valuable for the smallest firms in the industry. The arguments above give rise
to the following two predictions:
Prediction 4.a: Asset liquidity should reduce the cost of capital more for firms in
more competitive industries.
Prediction 4.b: Asset liquidity should reduce the cost of capital more for the smallest
firms in each industry.
Our remaining predictions focus on the roles of a firm’s access to financing, its
financial situation, and its business environment. First, asset liquidity should be
more valuable for firms with less access to external capital and for firms that are
closer to financial distress. The reason is that such firms may be forced to raise
cash with asset sales, for example, to fund new investment in the case of financially
constrained firms or to fund existing operations and avert bankruptcy in the case of
distressed firms. Supporting the view, Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2009) report
that during the recent financial crisis financially constrained firms have engaged in
significantly more asset sales than have unconstrained firms. Second, as discussed
4

Moreover, the empirical evidence suggests that one reason smaller stocks are more risky is
because they are associated with higher distress risk (e.g., Chan and Chen (1991)).

8

before asset pricing theory suggests that a firm’s ability to sell its assets is more
valuable in bad times, such as when firms have low market-to-book ratios or during
industry-wide recessions (e.g., Kogan (2001) and Zhang (2005)). The reason is that
it is in bad times when firms may want to sell assets to reduce their fixed costs and
operating risk or to raise cash. These predictions are summarized as follows:
Prediction 5.a: Asset liquidity should reduce the cost of capital more for firms with
less access to capital and for firms that are closer to default.
Prediction 5.b: Asset liquidity should reduce the cost of capital more for firms with
lower valuations and for firms facing negative demand shocks.

III.

Data and Variables

A. Data Sources and Sample Selection
Our data come from the Merged CRSP-Compustat Database, the Compustat Segment Database, the Institutional Broker Estimates System (IBES), the Securities
Data Corporation (SDC), the St. Louis Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED),
and the Census of Manufactures. We start with the Merged CRSP-Compustat Database and exclude companies in the financial (SIC codes 6000 to 6999) and utilities
(SIC codes 4900 to 4999) industries. We also drop companies not covered in IBES
because we require analyst forecasts data to calculate the implied cost of capital,
as well as observations for which we are unable to compute asset liquidity or our
main control variables. Our final sample includes 6,260 firms operating in 304 different three-digit SIC industries and 33,788 firm-year observations during the period
1984-2006.5

B. Measures of Asset Liquidity
Previous work on how asset liquidity aﬀects resale values relies on small samples and
on specific industries where specific attributes of the assets can be identified precisely
(e.g., Pulvino (1998), Ramey and Shapiro (2001), and Gavazza (2008)). Given that
we aim to study whether asset liquidity aﬀects firms’ cost of capital it is important
5

We did not impose restrictions on the number of firms in each three-digit SIC industry for
inclusion in our sample. However, our results are robust to excluding firms in industries with less
than three or five firms.

9

that we measure asset liquidity for firms in a broad number of industries and over a
long sample period.
Throughout the paper we use three main measures of asset liquidity. The first
two capture the presence of potential future buyers from within the industry and are
motivated by Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Almeida, Campello, and Hackbarth
(2009). The intuition behind these measures is that a firm’s assets are more valuable
to other firms in the industry, which are better able to redeploy them to alternative
uses. As a result, financially-flexible industry insiders are the most likely buyers of
a firm’s assets in the event the firm wishes to sell them in the near future. It then
follows that a firm’s assets are more liquid when there is a larger number of potential
inside-industry buyers with financial slack.
Specifically, our first measure of asset liquidity is similar to those used in Benmelech and Bergman (2009) and Gavazza (2008) for the airline industry. This measure
is the number of potential buyers for a firm’s assets, NoPotBuy, defined as the number of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings. In a similar
vein, our second measure, denoted MNLPotBuy, directly captures the financial slack
of potential buyers, and is defined as minus the average book leverage net of cash of
rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the last 5 years to minimize
the impact of temporary changes in firms’ financial situations. Given the definition
of these variables, a firm’s assets are more liquid for higher values of both NoPotBuy
and MNLPotBuy.
Our third measure of asset liquidity follows Schlingemann, Stulz, and Walkling
(2002) and it captures the historical liquidity of a firm’s assets using the value of
past M&A activity in the firm’s industry. Shleifer and Vishny (1992) argue that a
high volume of transactions in an industry is evidence of high liquidity because the
discounts that sellers must oﬀer to attract buyers are smaller in more active resale
markets. Consequently, we obtain the value of all M&A activity involving publicly
traded targets in each three-digit SIC industry and in each year from the Securities
Data Corporation (SDC).6 We include both mergers and acquisitions of assets. Ac6

We focus on transactions involving publicly traded targets because the Compustat firms for
which we wish to measure asset liquidity are publicly traded. Moreover, transactions involving
private targets are likely to be reported with noise due to the weaker disclosure requirements for
these transactions.

10

quisitions of assets are particularly important as they comprise approximately 75%
of the total deals. If SDC does not report corporate transactions in an industry-year,
we set the value of transactions equal to zero. We then scale the value of transactions in the industry by the total book value of assets in the industry, and further
average this ratio over the past five years. To compute the value of the assets in each
industry, we sum the assets in the industry reported by single-segment firms and
the segment level assets reported by multiple-segment firms in the Compustat Segment data, breaking up the multiple-segment firms into their component industries.
Averaging over past years smooths the temporary ups and downs in M&A activity
and allows us to better capture the intrinsic salability of an industry’s assets. The
resulting asset-liquidity measure is denoted TotM&A.7
We further decompose our third measure of asset liquidity to distinguish between
inside buyers of assets — those who operate in the same three-digit SIC industry as
the target — and outside buyers — those who do not currently operate in the industry.
Again we use the Compustat Segment tapes to further refine this calculation. We
classify a purchase as an inside purchase if the buyer has any segments with the
same there-digit SIC code as the assets purchased — checking over each reported SIC
code of the target if the target reports multiple SIC codes. InsM&A is the value of
M&A activity in the industry involving acquirers that operate within the industry,
scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry. OutM&A is the value of M&A
activity in the industry involving acquirers that operate outside the industry, scaled
by the book value of the assets in the industry. Both of these variables are averaged
over the past five years.
To facilitate the comparison of the eﬀect of NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, TotM&MA,
InsM&A, and OutM&A on the cost of capital, we standardize all original asset liquidity variables by subtracting their sample mean and dividing by their sample standard
deviation. With this transformation all measures of asset liquidity have mean zero
and standard deviation of one. Hence, in regressions of the cost of capital on asset liquidity the coeﬃcient of any asset liquidity variable can be interpreted as the
change in the cost of capital for a one-standard-deviation increase in the measure of
7

Our analyses based on this and related M&A measures are unaﬀected if we exclude from the
sample firms that are undergoing M&A activity in a particular year.

11

asset liquidity.

C. Measures of Cost of Capital
We construct two diﬀerent measures of a firm’s cost of equity capital. Our main measure is the implied cost of capital (ICC ) developed by Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) and our second measure, which we use to assess the robustness of the
results based on ICC, is the cost of capital that arises from the three-factor model of
Fama and French (1993). While we report results for both measures, we focus mainly
on the ICC as a proxy for expected returns for several reasons. Its main advantage
is that it does not rely on potentially noisy realized asset returns or on specific asset
pricing models. Moreover, in a recent study Pástor, Sinha, and Swaminathan (2008)
show that if both dividend growth and conditional expected returns follow AR(??)
processes, then ICC is a perfect proxy for expected returns. They also show that,
unlike tests based on market returns, those based on ICC can identify a positive
risk-return tradeoﬀ. In addition, Chava and Purnanandam (2009) show that the
ICC detects a positive relation between distress risk and expected returns instead of
the puzzling negative relation that is obtained using realized returns.8 Due to these
attractive features, ex-ante measures of expected returns, such as ICC, are used in
various other recent studies of the cost of capital (e.g., Kaplan and Ruback (1995),
Claus and Thomas (2001), Fama and French (2002), Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan
(2003), Brav, Lehavy, and Michaely (2005), Chen, Petkova, and Zhang (2008), and
Chen, Kacperczyk, and Ortiz-Molina (2009)).
Following Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001), the implied cost of capital
is defined as the discount rate that equates the present value of all expected future
cash flows to shareholders to the current stock price. Specifically, the calculation of
a firm’s ICC for year t starts with the dividend-discount model:

Pt =

∞
X
Et (Dt+i )
i=1

(1 + re )i

(1)

where P is the stock price, D is dividends, r e is the discount rate, and E(.) is the
8

Earlier studies have discussed in some detail the noisy nature of average realized returns in a
number of diﬀerent contexts (see, e.g., Blume and Friend (1973), Sharpe (1978), and Miller and
Scholes (1982)).

12

expectation operator. Using equation (1) and assuming clean surplus accounting
(change in book equity equals net income minus dividends), we get the discounted
residual income equity valuation model:

Pt = Bt +

∞
X
Et [(ROEt+i − re )Bt+i−1 ]
i=1

(1 + re )i

Pt

(2)

where ROE is the return on equity and B is the book value of equity. We then
numerically solve for the implied cost of equity, r e , from equation (2) using the
current stock price, current book value of equity, and forecasts of future ROE and
future book value of equity.
To implement the method, we require forecasts of future earnings and equity
values. As in Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001), we forecast earnings explicitly
for the next three years using the analysts’ forecasts of EPS and EPS growth which
we obtain from IBES. We forecast earnings beyond year 3 implicitly by assuming
that the ROE at period t+3 mean reverts to the industry median ROE by period
t+T, and estimate a terminal value as the present value of period T residual income
as a perpetuity. We set T equal to 12 years. The forecasts are obtained through
simple linear interpolation between ROE at period t+3 and the industry median
ROE at time t. The industry median ROE is a moving median of the past ten year
ROEs from all firms in the same 48 Fama and French industry. Last, by assuming
a clean-surplus accounting system and a constant dividend payout ratio, we forecast
the future book value of equity using the forecasted future earnings. We refer the
reader to Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) for more detail on the calculation
of ICC.
We follow recent research in finance (e.g., Pástor, Sinha, and Swaminathan (2008)
and Chava and Purnanandam (2009)) and calculate the ICC using the approach in
Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001), but other approaches are also used in
the literature. These approaches are also consistent with the discounted dividend
valuation model, and also obtain the ICC as the discount rate that equates the
current stock price to the present value of expected future cash flows derived from
analyst forecasts. However, they diﬀer in how they use the analyst forecast data (e.g.,
residual income or abnormal earnings) and in their assumptions (e.g., on growth
13

rates and forecasting horizons). Nevertheless, the various implementations give rise
to measures of the implied cost of capital that are highly correlated. Moreover,
previous work shows that the results of empirical tests based on alternative measures
or indices that aggregate them are qualitatively similar (e.g., Hail and Leuz (2009)).
While the ICC has its merits as noted above, some recent papers (e.g., Easton
and Monahan (2005)) have raised the concern that analysts make biased earnings
forecasts. In Section 5 we show that biases in analysts’ forecasts do not drive the
results in our tests based on the ICC. In addition, we assess the robustness of our
results using the Fama-French Cost of Capital (FFCC ) as an alternative measure
of expected returns. This measure derives from the Fama and French (1993) threefactor model and thus it does not rely on analysts’ earnings forecasts.
Specifically, we calculate the FFCC as a linear projection of returns based on the
market, size, and value factors which we obtain from Kenneth French’s website. To
estimate the factor loadings, for each stock j in year t (between 1984 and 2006), we
estimate the following time-series regression using monthly data from year t-4 to t
(we require a minimum of 36 months of data):
rj − rf = αj + β MKT
(rM − rf ) + β HML
HML + β SMB
SMB + εj ,
j
j
j

(3)

where the (r j — r f ) is the monthly return on stock j minus the risk-free rate, r M
— r f denotes the excess return of the market portfolio over the risk-free rate, HML
is the return diﬀerence between high and low book-to-market stocks, and SMB is
the return diﬀerence between small and large capitalization stocks (month and year
subscripts omitted for brevity). We then construct the Fama-French cost of capital
of firm j in year t as follows:
MKT

F F CCj,t = rf + β̂ j,t

HML

(rM − rf ) + β̂ j,t

SMB

HML + β̂ j,t

(4)

SMB,

where (rM − rf ), HML, and SMBare the average annualized returns of the
0

Fama-French factors calculated over the period 1926-2008 and the β̂ s are the OLS
estimates of theβ 0 sfrom equation (3) above using monthly stock price data for the
past three to five years.

14

D. Control Variables
In addition to asset liquidity, in our analyses we include control variables that capture
well-known determinants of a firm’s cost of capital. LogAssets is the logarithm of
total assets (AT); M/B is the market-to-book assets ratio ((CSHO * PRCC_F +
DLTT + DLC + PSTKL — TXDITC) / AT)); DRP is a firm’s percentile ranking
based on the yearly distribution of its default risk computed using the distance-todefault model 9 ; Blev is book leverage ((DLTT + DLC) / AT); ROE is return on
equity (NI / (AT — DLTT — DLC)); VolRoe is the standard deviation of ROE over the
past five years; FA/TA is fixed assets (PPENT) scaled by total assets (AT); R&DExp
is R&D expenditures (XRD) scaled by sales (SALE); LogAge is the logarithm of one
plus the number of years since the company was first listed in CRSP; DivPay equals
one if the firm pays dividends (DVC is positive) and zero otherwise; SalGrow is the
annual change in the logarithm of sales (SALE); LogInvPrice is the logarithm of one
divided by the stock price as of the estimation date of ICC ; and RetPM is the stock
return over the past month.

E. Summary Statistics for Main Variables
Table 1 shows summary statistics of the variables we use in our analyses. With the
exception of FFCC, the statistics are calculated on the sample of firms we use in our
main tests based on ICC. We calculate the summary statistics for FFCC using the
larger sample of firms for which we are able to calculate it and have non-missing values
on the test and control variables. The mean and median ICC for the firms in our
sample is close to 10%, with a standard deviation of 5.7%. For FFCC, the mean and
median are about 14%, with a standard deviation of 9.1%.10 All standardized asset
liquidity variables (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, TotM&MA, InsM&A, and OutM&A)
have by construction mean zero and standard deviation of one. Using the original
(non standardized) asset liquidity variables, the mean value of NoPotBuy is 13.4
firms, the mean value of MNLPotBuy is -0.068, and the mean value of TotM&A
9

We rely on the Merton distance to default model, which is based on Merton’s (1974) bond pricing
model. Specifically, we estimate the likelihood of default using the simple approach suggested by
Bharath and Shumway (2008).
10
The summary statistics for FFCC are similar if we focus on the smaller sample for which we
can calculate ICC.

15

is 4.2%. We split TotM&A into inside liquidity (InsM&A) and outside liquidity
(OutM&A), which each roughly account for half of the total asset liquidity in the
industry. Since we focus on the firms with analyst-forecast data, the firms in our
sample have average book assets of $580 million and thus are larger than those in the
Compustat universe. Moreover, although not tabulated, our asset liquidity measures
exhibit low correlation with the control variables.
We further inspect the sources of variation in our asset liquidity measures by
estimating a regression of each measure on three-digit SIC industry dummies. This
approach allows us to decompose the total variation in each asset liquidity variable
into the variation due to time-invariant diﬀerences across industries and withinindustry time-series variation. We find that 76.5% of the total variation in NoPotBuy
is across industries and 23.5% is time-series variation; 78.2% of the total variation in
MNLPotBuy is across industries and 21.8% is time-series variation; and 40.4% of the
total variation in TotM&A is across industries while 59.6% is time-series variation.
Hence, industry asset liquidity measures exhibit substantial variation both in the
cross section and in the time series. We use both of these sources of variation to
identify our results in the subsequent sections.

IV.

Main Empirical Results

A. The Aggregate Asset-Liquidity Discount and its Business-Cycle
Variation
Our hypothesis suggests that firms with more liquid markets for their real assets
should have a lower cost of capital. In Table 2 we start our investigation of this
issue by relating our three alternative measures of asset liquidity to a firm’s cost of
capital using a univariate approach. For this purpose, in each year we sort firms into
quintiles according to the asset liquidity of their industries, where Q1 denotes the low
and Q5 denotes the high asset-liquidity quintiles. We then calculate the average asset
liquidity and the average cost of capital for each quintile across all years. The last two
columns report the diﬀerence in asset liquidity and cost of capital between the highest
and lowest asset-liquidity quintiles, and the corresponding p-value, respectively.
In Panels A, B, and C we measure a firm’s expected return using the implied cost

16

of capital (ICC ) and asset liquidity using NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A,
respectively. For all three measures of asset liquidity, we observe a monotonically
decreasing pattern in the implied cost of capital as we move from the lowest assetliquidity quintile to the highest asset-liquidity quintile. This relation is economically
significant: Using the equal-weighted portfolios, the negative spread in the cost of
capital between asset-liquidity quintiles 5 and 1 is 4.29 percentage points per year
when asset liquidity is measured with NoPotBuy, 5.08 percentage points per year
when it is measured with MNLPotBuy, and 3.96 percentage points when it is measured with TotM&A. All of these diﬀerences are statistically significant at the 1%
level. The value-weighted portfolios provide similar results. Thus, consistent with
our first prediction, the univariate evidence suggests that there is an economically
important asset-liquidity discount in firms’ cost of capital.
Albeit the evidence in Fama and French (1997) showing that measures of expected
returns based on standard asset pricing models are noisy and imprecise, in Panel D
we repeat our portfolio-sort analysis using the Fama-French cost of capital (FFCC ).
The advantages of using FFCC are that it does not rely on the earnings forecasts of
analysts, which have been shown to contain biases, and that we are able to calculate
it for a larger sample of stocks (including those not covered in IBES). For all three
measures of asset liquidity, we find a monotonically decreasing pattern in the valueweighted Fama-French cost of capital as we move from the lowest asset-liquidity
quintile to the highest asset-liquidity quintile. The diﬀerences in the FFCC between
the top and bottom quintiles are both statistically and economically significant, but
slightly smaller in magnitude than those reported in Panels A-C which are based on
the ICC. In sum, tests based on the Fama-French cost of capital provide results that
are qualitatively similar to those based on the implied cost of capital and provide
further evidence of an asset-liquidity discount.
Since the literature on operating flexibility provides a rationale for countercyclical
time-series variation in equity risk (e.g., Zhang (2005), and Cooper (2006)), our first
prediction also relates the aggregate asset-liquidity discount to the business cycle. If
asset liquidity decreases firms’ cost of capital because it increases firms’ operating
flexibility, we should expect the asset-liquidity discount to be larger in periods of
low economic activity. Thus, we also study the time-series variation in the aggregate
17

asset-liquidity discount, that is, in the spread between the cost of capital for firms
in the top and bottom asset-liquidity quintiles.
In Table 3 we report the results of univariate time-series regressions of the aggregate asset-liquidity discount on alternative business-cycle indicators. For both the
implied cost of capital and the Fama-French cost of capital we conduct our tests
using the three diﬀerent measures of the asset-liquidity discount, which are based
on NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A, respectively. Following the asset pricing
literature, we proxy for macroeconomic conditions using GDP growth, capacity utilization, inflation rate, T-bill rate, stock market returns, and default spread on corporate bonds. GDP Growth is the year-over-year growth in the fourth quarter’s GDP;
Capacity Utilization is the utilization rate of installed capacity during the fourth
quarter of the year; Inflation is the year-to-year change in the December’s Consumer
Price Index; T-Bill Rate is the average three-month Treasury Bill Rate during the
year; Default Spread is the average diﬀerence between the yield on Moody’s Baa
corporate bonds and the yield of ten-year government bonds during the year; and
Market Return is the annual return on the market index. The regressions with the
asset-liquidity discount based on NoPotBuy use the 22 annual observations in the period 1985-2006 and those with discounts based on MNLPotBuy and TotM&A use the
23 annual observations in the period 1984-2006. Our standard errors are corrected
for potential autocorrelation using the Newey-West (1987) adjustment. Note that
because the asset-liquidity spread is negative, a positive coeﬃcient on any indicator
implies that a higher value decreases the magnitude of the asset-liquidity discount.
In Panel A we report the results using the implied cost of capital. The results
are similar for all three measures of the aggregate asset-liquidity discount. They
show that the discount is smaller when market conditions are stronger, that is, when
GDP growth, capacity utilization, inflation rate, T-bill rate, and market returns are
higher, and when the default spread is lower. The vast majority of the coeﬃcients
on the business-cycle indicators are statistically significant in all of the models we
consider. Moreover, the R2 for each regression, reported in brackets below the tstatistics, suggests that business-cycle indicators explain a significant fraction of the
time-series variation in the asset-liquidity discount.
In Panel B we report the results using the Fama-French cost of capital. Note
18

that we exclude the market return specification which appeared in Panel A, as the
Fama-French cost of capital has a sensitivity to the market return through market
beta already built into the cost of capital. Once again, the results are similar for all
three measures of the aggregate asset-liquidity discount. Overall, the models show
that the asset-liquidity discount in the Fama-French cost of capital is also smaller
when market conditions are stronger. Thus, both ICC and FFCC give consistent
results.
To summarize, consistent with our first prediction, there is an aggregate assetliquidity discount in firms’ cost of capital that is strongly counter-cyclical. This
finding is consistent with the view that the operating flexibility provided by a liquid
market for corporate assets is more valuable when economic activity is low and
default risk is high. However, the results may be driven by cross-sectional diﬀerences
in firm or industry characteristics which can be correlated with both asset liquidity
and the cost of capital. Hence, we now turn to a multivariate analysis that exploits
the panel structure of our data to address these issues.

B. Multivariate Evidence Relating Asset Liquidity and the Cost of
Capital
In this section we test our second prediction of a negative association between asset
liquidity and cost of capital at the firm level. In our benchmark empirical model
we regress firms’ cost of capital (ICC or FFCC ) on each of the three measures of
asset liquidity (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A) and control for well-known
determinants of the cost of capital including firm size (LogAssets), the market-tobook assets ratio (M/B), the percentile ranking of a firm’s default risk (DRP), financial leverage (Blev), profitability (ROE), equity risk (VolROE), asset tangibility
(FA/TA), R&D expenditures (R&DEx p), firm age (LogAge), whether the firm pays
dividends (DivPay), sales growth (SalGrow), the logarithm of the inverse of price
(LogInvPrice), and the stock return over the last month (RetPM ).
Throughout the paper we estimate our empirical models using the conservative
method of running pooled (panel) OLS regressions and calculating the standard
errors by clustering at the three-digit SIC industry level (using our 304 SIC industry
groupings). This approach specifically addresses the concern that our asset-liquidity
19

measures are constructed at the industry level but the cost of capital and the controls
are firm-level variables. The worry is that the errors, conditional on the independent
variables, are correlated within three-digit SIC industry groupings. One reason why
this may occur is that industry factors may have a similar eﬀect on the equity risk of
all firms in the industry. Clustered errors assume that observations are independent
across industries, but not necessarily independent within industries. The clustering
method makes weak assumptions about the correlation structure of the error term,
and thus is likely to provide the most conservative standard errors.
Panel A of Table 4 reports the results of regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC ) on the three measures of asset liquidity (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and
TotM&A) and the control variables. Noteworthy, including LogInvPrice and M/B
in the regression eliminates the concern that our measures of asset liquidity may
be correlated with stock prices and thus mechanically drive the ICC. We include
RetPM to control for the potential sluggishness of analysts forecasts, but the results
are similar if we control for the past three-, six-, and twelve-month stock returns.
We estimate our empirical models using two approaches.
In columns (1),(3), and (5) we run purely cross-sectional regressions based on the
time-series averages of the variables for each firm over the sample period. Thus, we
rely solely on the variation in asset liquidity across industries to identify its eﬀect on
a firm’s cost of capital. For all three measures of asset liquidity, we find that firms in
industries with a more liquid market of corporate assets have a lower cost of capital.
These eﬀects are highly statistically significant. Since our asset liquidity measures
are standardized, the coeﬃcient estimate on each measure gives the percentage-point
change in the ICC for a one standard-deviation increase in asset liquidity. The crosssectional eﬀect is also economically significant: A one-standard deviation increase in
asset liquidity decreases the cost of capital by 1.8 percentage points per year if we
measure asset liquidity using NoPotBuy, by 1.9 percentage points if we measure it
using MNLPotBuy, and by 1.4 percentage points if we measure it using TotM&A,
respectively.11
In columns (2), (4), and (6) we run pooled (panel) OLS regressions with three11
The results are similar in both magnitude and statistical significance if we estimate our empirical
model using pooled OLS regressions with year dummies or using the Fama-MacBeth approach.

20

digit SIC industry dummies and year dummies, and thus use the time-series variation
in the measures of asset liquidity within industries to identify our results. The
advantage of this approach is that it diminishes the concern that omitted industry
factors correlated with both asset liquidity and cost of capital could drive our results.
The cost, however, is that it ignores the large variation in asset liquidity across
industries and thus it diminishes the power of our tests. Nevertheless, we continue
to find a negative and statistically significant relation between all three measures
of asset liquidity and the cost of capital. These time-series tests imply that a onestandard deviation increase in an industry’s asset liquidity decreases the cost of
capital for firms in that industry by about 1.5 percentage points per year when asset
liquidity is measured by NoPotBuy, by 1.1 percentage points when it is measured
by MNLPotBuy, and by 0.5 percentage points when it is measured by TotM&A,
respectively.
In Panel B we report the results of regressions of the Fama-French cost of capital (FFCC ) on the three measures of asset liquidity (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and
TotM&A) and all the control variables. We omit the coeﬃcients for the control
variables in the interest of space. In columns (1), (3), and (5) we run purely crosssectional regressions based on the time-series averages of the variables for each firm
over the sample period. In these regressions we cluster the standard errors by threedigit SIC industry. In columns (2), (4), and (6) we run Fama-MacBeth regressions
and calculate our standard errors using the Newey-West procedure with 6 lags. For
both estimation approaches and for all three measures of asset liquidity, we find that
firms in industries with a more liquid market of corporate assets have a lower FamaFrench cost of capital. These eﬀects are highly statistically significant, although
smaller in magnitude than those reported in Panel A.12 Depending on the specification, a one-standard deviation increase in asset liquidity decreases the cost of capital
for firms in that industry by about 0.4 to 0.8 percentage points per year.
In sum, we find a negative association between firms’ cost of capital and the liquidity of their assets. This relation holds for tests using the implied cost of capital
12

We focus on purely cross-sectional estimation approaches because by construction the FFCC
exhibits a small time-series variation. The reason is that factor loadings for each firm are based on
5-year rolling window regressions and the average factor returns are constant and common to all
stocks.

21

and the Fama-French cost of capital, and for three diﬀerent measures of asset liquidity. This evidence lends support for our central hypothesis that asset liquidity is
associated with increased operating flexibility. Given the evidence in this section and
the previous section, in the remainder of our analyses in the interest of conciseness we
concentrate on the implied cost of capital as the main measure of a firm’s expected
return and do not report additional results for the Fama-French cost of capital.

C. The Distinction Between Inside and Outside Liquidity
To test our third prediction that inside asset liquidity should decrease firms’ cost
of capital by more than outside asset liquidity we split our measure of asset liquidity based on M&A activity into two components. These are inside industry asset
liquidity (InsM&A), which captures the value of M&A activity in the industry involving acquirers that operate within the industry, and outside industry asset liquidity
(OutM&A), which captures the value of M&A activity in the industry involving
acquirers that operate outside the industry. For this purpose, in Table 5 we run
regressions relating these two measures of asset liquidity to firms’ cost of capital. In
columns (1) and (3) we report the results of purely cross-sectional regressions based
on the time-series averages of the variables for each firm over the sample period. In
columns (2) and (4) we report the results of pooled (panel) OLS regressions with
three-digit SIC industry and year fixed eﬀects. In all models we cluster the standard
errors at the three-digit SIC industry level.
The table shows that there is a negative and statistically significant eﬀect of
both inside and outside liquidity on the cost of capital in the cross-sectional tests.
Similarly, both inside and outside liquidity have reduce the cost of capital in the
tests which rely in the within-industry time-series variation in asset liquidity, but
the eﬀect of outside liquidity is not statistically significant. The striking new result
in this table is that inside liquidity has a much larger eﬀect on the cost of capital
than outside liquidity. The pure cross-sectional results reported in columns (1) and
(3) imply that a one-standard deviation increase in inside liquidity decreases the cost
of capital by 1.6 percentage points per year, but a similar increase in outside liquidity
only decreases it by 0.7 percentage points per year. This diﬀerence is statistically
significant. For the within-industry results reported in columns (2) and (4), such an
22

increase in inside liquidity reduces the cost of capital by 0.6 percentage points, but
the same increase in outside liquidity reduces it by only 0.2 percentage points. This
diﬀerence is also statistically significant.
In sum, consistent with our second prediction, we find that inside industry asset
liquidity has a much larger negative impact on the cost of capital than outside industry liquidity. This is consistent with the view that inside-industry acquirers can
better redeploy the asset than outside acquirers, and thus are willing to pay higher
prices. By making asset markets more liquid, the presence of inside buyers better
enhances firms’ operating flexibility than outside liquidity, and thus has a stronger
negative eﬀect on firms’ cost of capital.

D. Cross-Sectional Variation in the Eﬀect of Asset Liquidity on the
Cost of Capital
In this section, we seek to better understand the economic mechanism underlying
our previous findings. For this purpose, we explore whether the importance of asset
liquidity in explaining firms’ cost of capital varies across firms in ways that are
consistent with the predictions derived from our main hypothesis.
D.1. Product Market Competition and Relative Industry Position
In Table 6 we test our predictions about how the nature of competition in product
markets and a firm’s competitive position may aﬀect the value of operating flexibility.
In columns (1) and (2) we test prediction 4.a that the operating flexibility provided
by a more liquid market for assets is more valuable to firms in more competitive
industries. Since the Census only reports the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI ) of
sales concentration for manufacturing firms but our sample contains a large number
of non-manufacturing firms, we calculate a predicted concentration index for all firms
in our sample using the approach in Hoberg and Phillips (2009).13 We then split the
sample into firms that operate in a high HHI industry (with a predicted HHI in the
top tercile of the distribution) and those that operate in a low HHI industry (with
13

In short, we regress concentration indices in manufacturing industries on employment levels
obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics as well as on Compustat-based concentration indices
and other variables related to concentration. Since our predictors are available for all industries and
not just manufacturing, we then use the estimated coeﬃcients to predict the concentration indices
for all industries in our data.

23

a predicted HHI in the bottom tercile of the distribution), and run our benchmark
regression with three-digit SIC industry fixed eﬀects and year fixed eﬀects separately
for firms in each group. Consistent with our prediction 4.a, the coeﬃcients on both
NoPotBuy and TotM&A are negative and statistically significant for firms in the
low HHI group, but they are much smaller and not statistically significant or only
marginally significant for firms in the high HHI group. The p-values for a formal onetailed test of the null that the eﬀect of asset liquidity is larger in the low HHI group
than it is in the high HHI group are 0.081 for NoPotBuy and 0.109 for TotM&A,
respectively. However, the eﬀect of MNLPotBuy does not diﬀer across firms in the
high and low HHI groups.
In columns (3) and (4) we test prediction 4.b that higher asset liquidity is more
valuable for the smallest firms in the industry. The industrial organization literature commonly denotes as “market leaders” those firms whose sales account for a
sizable percentage of the total gross sales in their industries. Following Haskel and
Scaramozzino (1997) and Campello (2006), we classify as “leaders” firms with market shares of at least 15% in their three-digit SIC industry and classify as “followers”
firms with market shares below 15%. We then run our benchmark regression with
three-digit SIC industry fixed eﬀects and year fixed eﬀects separately for firms in
each group. Consistent with our prediction 4.b, we find that all of our measures of
asset liquidity have a large negative and statistically significant impact on the cost
of capital of followers, but they have little eﬀect on the cost of capital of industry
leaders. For leaders, the coeﬃcients of NoPotBuy and TotM&A are close to zero
and are statistically insignificant, while the coeﬃcient on MNLPotBuy is statistically significant and negative but much smaller than it is for followers. The p-values
for a formal one-tailed test of the null that the eﬀect of asset liquidity is larger for
followers than it is for leaders are 0.046 for NoPotBuy, 0.001 for MNLPotBuy, and
0.006 for TotM&A, respectively.
D.2. Access to Capital, Financial Situation, and Business Environment
In Table 7 we test our predictions that asset liquidity should be more valuable
for firms with less access to external financing and higher default risk (prediction
5.a). For this purpose, we first run our benchmark regression with three-digit SIC
industry fixed eﬀects and year fixed eﬀects separately for firms high and low access
24

to financing, as well as for firms with high and low probability of default. Since
the evidence in Faulkender and Petersen (2006) highlights the importance of having
access to public debt markets, in columns (1) and (2) we split the sample into firms
with unrated and rated debt. Consistent with prediction 5.a, we find that both
NoPotBuy and TotM&A have a negative and statistically significant eﬀect on the
cost of capital of firms with unrated debt, but that this eﬀect is slightly smaller
for firms with rated debt. These diﬀerences in the eﬀect of asset liquidity across
rated and unrated firms are suggestive, but not statistically significant. There is no
diﬀerence in the eﬀect of MNLPotBuy across rated and unrated firms.
In columns (3) and (4) we then split the sample into firms with high default risk
and low default risk, based on whether the distance of a firm’s probability of default
from the industry median is in the top or bottom tercile of the annual distribution
across all firms. Our approach in splitting the sample reflects the spirit of industry
equilibrium models which highlight the importance of a firm’s choices relative to
those of its industry rivals (e.g., Williams (1995)). Also supporting prediction 5.a,
we find that all measures of asset liquidity have a stronger negative eﬀect on the cost
of capital in firms with high default risk than they do in firms with low default risk.
In fact, the eﬀect of TotM&A is not statistically significant and is close to zero for
firms in the low default risk group. The p-values for a formal one-tailed test of the
null that the eﬀect of asset liquidity is larger for firm with high default risk than it
is for firms with low default risk are 0.102 for NoPotBuy, 0.017 for MNLPotBuy, and
0.005 for TotM&A, respectively.
In Table 8 we examine the predictions that the eﬀect of asset liquidity on firms’
cost of capital should be stronger for firms with lower market-to-book ratios and for
those facing negative demand shocks (prediction 5.b). To this end, in columns (1)
and (2) we split the sample into firms with low and high market-to-book value of
assets (V/A), according to whether the distance of a firm’s V/A from the industry
median is in the bottom or top tercile of the annual distribution across all firms. We
then run our benchmark regression with three-digit SIC industry fixed eﬀects and
year fixed eﬀects separately for firms in each sample. Consistent with prediction 5.b,
for all measures of asset liquidity we find that their negative eﬀect on the cost of
capital is larger for firms with low market-to-book ratios than it is for firms with
25

high market-to-book ratios. The p-values for a formal one-tailed test of the null that
the eﬀect of asset liquidity is larger for firm with low market-to-book ratios than
it is for firms with high market-to-book ratios are 0.154 for NoPotBuy, 0.001 for
MNLPotBuy, and 0.004 for TotM&A, respectively.
Last, we examine whether asset liquidity is more valuable for firms in industries
experiencing economic downturns. For this purpose, we follow Opler and Titman
(1994) and identify a three-digit SIC industry to be experiencing a downturn in
a given year when its median sales growth is negative and when its median stock
return is below -30%. In columns (3) and (4) we run our benchmark OLS regression
with year fixed eﬀects separately for firms in industries experiencing a downturn and
those in industries that are not. We do not include the three-digit SIC industry
dummies because industry downturns are not long lasting and so few industries
remain in the downturn group for more than one year. We find that our measures
of asset liquidity are negatively related to the cost of capital and are statistically
significant for both samples of firms. Moreover, consistent with prediction 5.b, the
eﬀects of MNLPotBuy and TotM&A are substantially larger in magnitude for firms
in industries experiencing downturns than they are for firms in industries that are
not. One-tailed tests show that these diﬀerences are statistically significant (with
p-values 0.008 and 0.001, respectively). For NoPotBuy, we find a smaller eﬀect of
asset liquidity during downturns, but the diﬀerence is small and not statistically
significant.

V.

Additional Robustness Tests

A. Controlling for Industry Valuation
In this section we explore whether a correlation between our measures of asset liquidity and industry valuations could drive our results. Our first two measures, NoPotBuy
and MNLPotBuy rely only on information on the existence and access to capital of
a firm’s industry rivals, which is largely outside the firm’s control. In addition, they
are not directly related to stock prices or industry valuations. However, industry
valuations could indirectly aﬀect NoPotBuy if during periods of high industry valuation new firms enter the industry or acquire debt ratings, and they could aﬀect
MNLPotBuy if during these periods industry rivals change their capital structures.
26

More importantly, it is conceptually possible that our tests using TotM&A may suﬀer
from reverse causality: during periods of high industry valuations firms in the industry have a low cost of capital, which in turn may lead to increased M&A activity in
the industry. In our prior analyses we address this issue by controlling for a firm’s
market-to-book ratio and stock price. We also show that our results hold in pure
cross-sectional tests which do not use the time-series variation in asset liquidity.
We further explore whether our results are driven by the time-series variation in
industry valuations. For this purpose, in Table 9 we repeat our analyses after explicitly controlling for two alternative measures of industry valuations constructed at the
three-digit SIC industry level. The first is the logarithm of the average market-tobook equity ratio in the industry (LogIndMB). The second is the industry’s valuation
relative to historical values (IndRelVal). As in Hoberg and Phillips (2009), we construct this variable as the diﬀerence between the industry’s log market-to-book equity
ratio and its predicted value from the benchmark specification in Pástor and Veronesi
(2003). In columns (1) and (3) we run purely cross-sectional OLS regressions using
the time-series averages of the variables over the sample period for each firm and
in columns (2) and (4) we run pooled (panel) OLS regressions with three-digit SIC
industry fixed eﬀects and year fixed eﬀects. In columns (1) and (2) we control for
LogIndMB and in columns (3) and (4) we control for IndRelVal, respectively.
Including these industry valuation and miss-valuation measures in our regression
models does not have a significant eﬀect on the coeﬃcients on NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, or TotM&A, which remain negative and statistically significant for both estimation approaches. The results suggest that a correlation between our measures of
asset liquidity with industry valuations does not drive our results. They also suggest
that a reverse causality driven by changes in industry valuations over time does not
explain our results based on TotM&A.

B. Industry-Level Tests
Our main analyses are based on firm-level regressions of the cost of capital on measures of asset liquidity which are largely measured at the industry level. An alternative estimation approach is to convert the cost of capital and our control variables

27

into three-digit SIC industry-level medians and then estimate the regressions at the
industry level. Hence, in Table 10 we report the results of industry-level regression
models estimated by weighted least squares (WLS), wherein the weights on each
industry-year observation are the number of firms in the industry. The coeﬃcient
estimates obtained using the cross-sectional approach are reported in columns (1),
(3), and (5) and those obtained using the within-industry time-series variation are
reported in columns (2), (4), and (6). As we did before, we cluster the standard
errors by three-digit SIC industry. In our industry-level tests we continue to find
a negative and statistically significant relation between all three measures of asset
liquidity and the cost of capital.

C. Tests Based on the Unlevered Cost of Capital
Since previous work suggests that asset liquidity may aﬀect debt capacity (Shleifer
and Vishny (1992) and Morellec (2001)), which in turn aﬀects firms’ cost of capital,
we investigate whether an association between asset liquidity and financial leverage
could drive our results. Throughout the paper we deal with this issue by including
financial leverage as a control variable in all our tests. In this section, we repeat our
tests using the unlevered cost of capital, which eliminates any concerns that financial
leverage might alter our results.
To estimate the unlevered cost of capital we delever ICC using the ModiglianiMiller formula with taxes. In addition to market debt-to-equity ratios and the top
corporate tax rate, the formula requires that we measure each firm’s cost of debt. We
estimate the cost of debt for each firm-year in our sample by mapping a firm’s S&P
debt rating to the average bond yield in its rating category. Since only a limited
number of firms have credit ratings, we estimate missing credit ratings for other
firms. Specifically, for the subset of companies with credit ratings, we use a set of
explanatory variables to estimate an Ordered Logit model that predicts the S&P
debt rating. Our predictors are the natural logarithm of a firm’s assets, financial
leverage, profitability, interest coverage, the natural logarithm of a firm’s age, and
the volatility of excess returns. Next, we use the estimated coeﬃcients from this
model to predict the debt rating for all the companies whose ratings are missing, but
have the complete set of predictors. For each year, we match a firm’s debt rating to
28

the average bond yield in its rating category, based on individual yields on new debt
issues obtained from SDC.
Table 11 reports regressions of the unlevered implied cost of capital on our three
measures of asset liquidity. In columns (1), (3), and (5) we run purely cross-sectional
OLS regressions using the time-series averages of the variables over the sample period
for each firm. In columns (2), (4), and (6) we run pooled (panel) OLS regressions
with three-digit SIC industry fixed eﬀects and year fixed eﬀects. We cluster the
standard errors by three-digit SIC industry in all models. The control variables are
identical to those we use before, except that we omit financial leverage. Our results
show that financial leverage does not explain the eﬀect of asset liquidity on the cost
of capital. For all measures of asset liquidity and estimation approaches, we find that
the estimated coeﬃcients are similar in both magnitude and statistical significance
to those reported in Table 4.

D. Robustness to Biases in Analyst Earnings Forecasts
While the ICC is very attractive because it is a forward-looking measure of a firm’s
expected return, a potential weakness is that it relies on analyst forecasts. In calculating the ICC we assume that analysts’ consensus forecast is an unbiased estimate of
investors’ expectations. However, as pointed out by some recent papers (e.g. Easton
and Monahan (2005)), one problem with this assumption is that there is evidence
that analysts make biased earnings forecasts. This raises the question of whether
biased analyst forecasts could in turn bias our inferences.
If analyst forecasts are equally biased for all stocks, then this average bias would
not have any eﬀect on our results. However, our analyses could be aﬀected if the bias
in analysts’ forecasts is related to asset liquidity. If the forecasts are systematically
biased in favor of firms with higher asset liquidity, then the estimate of the ICC will
be biased upwards for these firms. This would lead to an understatement of the eﬀect
of asset liquidity on the ICC. Conversely, if the forecasts are systematically biased
against firms with higher asset liquidity, then the estimate of the ICC will be biased
downwards for these firms. This would lead to an overstatement of the eﬀect of asset
liquidity on the ICC.

29

To address this issue, we first examine whether the bias in analysts’ forecasts
is related to our asset liquidity measures. The pair-wise correlations between the
forecast bias and NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, or TotM&A are fairly low (less than 4%
in absolute value). We then add the forecast bias to our regressions and repeat our
analyses, but consistent with the low correlation between the forecast bias and the
asset liquidity variables this has no eﬀect on our results. Last, we re-run our main
analyses after dropping from the sample those firms with analysts’ forecasts biases
in the top 30% or the 50% of the annual distribution. Again, this has no eﬀect on
our results. In sum, there is no indication that our results could be driven by the
biases in analysts’ earnings forecasts.

E. Tests Using a Measure of Asset Liquidity Based on Acquisition
Premiums
We examine an additional fourth measure of asset liquidity which also comes from
the M&A market. This measure captures the idea that firm’s assets are more liquid
when targets operating in the industry are sold at higher premiums. Put diﬀerently,
higher acquisition premiums are likely to be associated with more competition by
buyers of a firm’s assets.14
We calculate this measure using information on all merger deals involving publicly
traded targets recorded in SDC. For each deal, we first compute the acquisition
premium as (bidder’s oﬀer price — target’s pre-bid price) / target’s pre-bid price,
where the target’s pre-bid price is its share price 30 days prior to the announcement.
For each industry and year with at least one transaction, we compute an average
premium across all targets in the same three-digit SIC industry. For industry-years
with no transactions, we set the premium to be equal to the minimum premium
recorded across all industries in that year. We use this approach because the assets in
industries with no transactions are likely to be the least liquid and thus the potential
premiums they could obtain if sold are very low. In fact, on average the premium we
impute is -34%, that is, a significant price discount.15 The final measure, IndPrem,
14

We thank Itay Goldstein for this suggestion.
What is the premium that should be assigned to industries with no mergers is not entirely
obvious and our approach is not without flaws. However, the key issue is that an imputation is
necessary, as otherwise we would be forced to drop from our analysis industries with no merger
transactions. Since these industries are likely to be those with the most illiquid assets, dropping
15

30

results from averaging the acquisition premium for each industry over the past five
years.
We find that a higher value of M&A deals is associated with higher acquisition
premiums (the correlation between TotM&A and IndPrem is 53%). This counters the
argument that a higher volume of transactions could in fact be associated with illiquid
transactions. Moreover, in analyses that are available upon request, we run our crosssectional and time-series regressions of the implied cost of capital on IndPrem and
the control variables in our benchmark empirical model. As we did before, we cluster
our standard errors by three-digit SIC industry. For all specifications we consider,
we find a negative and statistically significant eﬀect of IndPrem on the implied cost
of capital. The economic significance of the eﬀect of IndPrem is similar to that we
obtain using TotM&A.

F. Measurement of Asset Liquidity for Multi-Segment Firms
Two of our measures of asset liquidity, NoPotBuy and MNLPotBuy, depend on identifying the rivals a firm faces in its industry. In our main tests, we assign competitors to
each firm based on their primary SIC code. We now further refine these measures to
incorporate the individual segments multiple-segment firms operate. The industrylevel measures now consider all competitors a firm faces, including the secondary
segments of multiple-segment firms.
Using these updated measures of asset liquidity which incorporate multi-segment
firms, for each firm we compute a weighted average measure of industry asset liquidity
that takes into account the industries in which it operates. We calculate the industry
asset liquidity a multiple-segment firms faces as the weighted-average asset liquidity
of each of its three-digit SIC industry segments, with weights equal to the fraction of
a firm’s total assets accounted for by each segment’s assets. We do this last step for
the asset liquidity measure TotM&A as well. For all three measures of asset liquidity
the results are similar in signficance to those reported.
those industries would cause a serious sample-selection bias.

31

G. Controlling for Stock Liquidity and Cash Holdings
It is possible that the liquidity of a firm’s assets could be empirically related with a
high volume of trading in the firm’s stock. Since firms with more liquid stocks tend
to have a lower cost of capital, a positive correlation between the liquidity of a firm’s
real assets and the liquidity of its stock could explain our results. However, the eﬀect
of asset liquidity on the cost of capital is unaﬀected if we control for stock liquidity
using a firm’s share turnover or the average share turnover of firms in the three-digit
SIC industry.
Recent work argues that cash holdings allow a firm to fund investment and to endure negative cash flow shocks (e.g., Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999),
Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), and Acharya, Almeida, and Campello
(2007)). As a result, higher cash holdings are likely to reduce default risk and thus
the cost of capital. It then follows that a positive correlation of our measures of real
asset liquidity with cash holdings could drive our findings. To address this issue,
we repeat our regressions of the implied cost of capital on asset liquidity and further include a firm’s raw or excess cash holdings16 as an additional control variable.
However, this does not aﬀect our results.

H. Alternative Methods to Assess Statistical Significance
Since the key test variables in our regression analyses (MNLPotBuy, NoPotBuy,
and TotM&A) are measured at the three-digit SIC industry-level, throughout the
paper we cluster the standard errors by three-digit SIC industry. For robustness, we
re-estimate our main specifications clustering our standard errors by both industry
and year, by firm, by year, and by both firm and year, but all of these alternative
approaches give t-statistics that are similar or larger than those reported. Hence, the
approach we use to assess the statistical significance of our results is conservative.
16

Excess cash holdings are the residual of a regression of log cash holdings scaled by assets (net
of cash) on various predictors identified in previous research (e.g., Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and
Williamson (1999)) as well as year and firm fixed eﬀects.

32

VI.

Conclusions

We argue that a more liquid market for real assets reduces a firm’s cost of unwinding
its capital stock and it increases its ability to raise cash, both of which provide
the firm with flexibility in responding to a changing business environment and are
especially valuable in bad times - a point that has been shown to be especially true
during the recent financial crisis. Thus, we hypothesize that asset liquidity increases
a firm’s operating flexibility and as a result it reduces the firm’s cost of capital.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we find an aggregate asset-liquidity discount in
firms’ cost of capital that is strongly counter-cyclical. Moreover, we show that firms
operating in industries with high asset liquidity have a much lower cost of capital both
in cross-sectional and time-series tests. These results are robust to using diﬀerent
measures of potential and historical asset liquidity within an industry, as well as
to measuring a firm’s expected returns using the implied cost of capital and the
Fama-French three-factor model cost of capital.
Our tests also show that the eﬀect of asset liquidity on the cost of capital varies
across and within industries in ways that are consistent with operating flexibility
being an important determinant of firms’ cost of capital. Consistent with theories
suggesting that buyers who operate in the same industry are willing to pay higher
prices for an asset than buyers who operate outside the industry, we also find that
higher asset liquidity from within the industry lowers a firm’s cost of capital more
than asset liquidity from outside the industry. In addition, asset liquidity lowers the
cost of capital more for firms that face more competitive risk in product markets,
have less access to external financing, are closer to default, have lower valuations,
and face negative demand shocks.
Taken together, our results suggest that asset liquidity is a major determinant
of a firm’s operating flexibility, and that it has an economically significant impact
on a firm’s cost of capital. More generally, our study highlights the importance of
real-side fundamentals as important drivers of the required return on equity as well
as the importance of industry factors in asset pricing.

33

REFERENCES
Acharya, Viral, Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello, 2007, Is cash negative debt?
A hedging perspective on corporate financial policies, Journal of Financial
Intermediation 16, 515-554.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Dirk Hackbarth, 2009, Liquidity mergers,
Unpublished Working Paper.
Almeida, Heitor, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, The cash flow sensitivity of cash,
Journal of Finance 59, 1777-1804.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman, 2009, Collateral Pricing, Unpublished
Working Paper.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting default with the Merton distance to default model, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339-1369.
Blume, M. E., and I. Friend, 1973, A new look at the capital asset pricing model,
Journal of Finance 28: 19-33.
Boileau, Martin, and Nathalie Moyen, 2009, Corporate precautionary cash savings:
Prudence versus liquidity constraints, Unpublished Working Paper.
Brav, Alon, Reuven Lehavy, and Roni Michaely, 2005, Using expectations to test
asset pricing models, Financial Management 34, 5-38.
Campello, M., J. Graham, and C. Harvey, 2009, The real eﬀects of financial constraints: Evidence from a financial crisis, Unpublished Working Paper.
Campello, M., L. Chen, and L. Zhang, 2009, Expected returns, yield spreads, and
asset pricing tests, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment
and asset price dynamics: Implications for the cross-section of returns, Journal
of Finance 59, 2577-2603.
Chan, K.C., and Nai-Fu Chen, 1991, Structural and return characteristics of small
and large firms, Journal of Finance 46, 1467-1484.
Chava, Sudheer, and Amiyatosh K. Purnanandam, 2009, Is default risk negatively
related to stock returns?, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Chen, Huafeng, Marcin Kacperczyk, and Hernán Ortiz-Molina, 2009, Labor unions,
operating flexibility, and the cost of equity, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Chen, Long, Ralitsa Petkova, and Lu Zhang, 2008, The expected value premium,
Journal of Financial Economics 87, 269-280.
Claus, James, and Jacob Thomas, 2001, Equity premium as low as three percent?
Evidence from analysts’ earnings forecasts for domestic and international stock
markets, Journal of Finance 56, 1629-1666.
Cooper, Ilan, 2006, Asset pricing implications of nonconvex adjustment costs and
irreversibility of investment, Journal of Finance 61, 139-170.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Karen H. Wruck, 2002, Asset liquidity, debt
covenants, and managerial discretion in financial distress: the collapse of L.A.
Gear, Journal of Financial Economics 64, 3-34.
34

DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Karen H. Wruck, 2002, Asset liquidity, debt
covenants, and managerial discretion in financial distress: The collapse of L.A.
Gear, Journal of Financial Economics 64, 3-34.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2009, Fear of fire sales and the
credit freeze, working paper, University of Chicago.
Easton, Peter D., and Steven J. Monahan, 2005, An evaluation of accounting-based
measures of expected returns, Accounting Review 80, 501-538.
Elton, Edwin J., 1999, Expected return, realized return, and asset pricing tests,
Journal of Finance 54, 1199-1220.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns
on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal
of Financial Economics 43, 153-193.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The equity premium, Journal of
Finance 57, 637—659.
Faulkender, Michael, and Mitchell A. Petersen, 2006, Does the source of capital
aﬀect capital structure?, Review of Financial Studies 19, 45-79.
Faulkender, Michael, and Rong Wang, 2006, Corporate financial policy and the
value of cash, Journal of Finance 61, 1957-1990.
Gavazza, Alessandro, 2008, The role of trading frictions in real asset markets, Unpublished Working Paper.
Gebhardt, William R., Charles M. C. Lee, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2001,
Toward an implied cost of capital, Journal of Accounting Research 39, 135176.
Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang, 2003, Equilibrium cross-section of
returns, Journal of Political Economy 111, 693-732.
Hail, Luzi, and Christian Leuz, 2009, Cost of capital eﬀects and changes in growth
expectations around U.S. cross-listings, Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2009, Real and financial industry booms and
busts, Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.
Hou, Kewei, and David T. Robinson, 2006, Industry concentration and average
stock returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1927-1956.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Richard S. Ruback, 1995, The valuation of cash flow forecasts: An empirical analysis, Journal of Finance 50, 1059—1093.
Kogan, Leonid, 2001, An equilibrium model of irreversible investment, Journal of
Financial Economics 62, 201-245.
Kogan, Leonid, 2004, Asset prices and real investment, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 411-431.
Lang, Larry, Annette Poulsen, and René M. Stulz, 1994, Asset sales, firm performance, and the agency costs of managerial discretion, Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 3—37.
35

Lee, Charles M. C., David Ng, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2008, Testing international asset pricing models using implied cost of capital, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips1998, Asset eﬃciency and the reallocation decisions of bankrupt firms, Journal of Finance 53, 1495-1532.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets:
Who engages in mergers and asset sales and are there eﬃciency gains?, Journal
of Finance 61, 2019-2065.
Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of
interest rates, Journal of Finance 29, 449-470.
Miller, M., and M. Scholes, 1982, Dividends and Taxes: Some empirical evidence,
Journal of Political Economy 90, 1118-1141.
Morellec, Erwan, 2001, Asset liquidity, capital structure, and secured debt, Journal
of Financial Economics 61, 173-206.
Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 1999, The
determinants and implications of corporate cash holdings, Journal of Financial
Economics 52, 3-46.
Opler, Tim C., and Sheridan Titman, 1994, Financial distress and corporate performance, Journal of Finance 49, 1015-1040.
Pástor, Lubos, Meenakshi Sinha, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2008, Estimating
the intertemporal risk-return tradeoﬀ using the implied cost of capital, Journal
of Finance 63, 2859-2897.
Pástor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, Stock valuation and learning about profitability, Journal of Finance 58, 1749-1789.
Pulvino, Todd C., 1998, Do asset fire sales exist? An empirical investigation of
commercial aircraft transactions, Journal of Finance 53, 939-975.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Matthew D. Shapiro, 2001, A study of aerospace plant
closings, Journal of Political Economy 109, 958-992.
Sharpe, W. F., 1978, New evidence on the capital asset pricing model: Discussion,
Journal of Finance 33, 917-920.
Schlingemann, Frederik P., René M. Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling, 2002, Divestitures and the liquidity of the market for corporate assets, Journal of Financial
Economics 64, 117-144.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity:
A market equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.
Weiss, Lawrence A., and Karen H. Wruck, 1998, Information problems, conflicts
of interest, and asset stripping:: Chapter 11’s failure in the case of Eastern
Airlines, Journal of Financial Economics 48, 55-9.
Williams, Joseph T., 1995, Financial and industry structure with agency, Review of
Financial Studies 8, 431-474.
Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60, 67-103.

36

Table 1
Summary Statistics for Main Variables
The table reports summary statistics for the measures of cost of capital, the asset liquidity measures defined for three-digit
SIC industries, and the variables that serve as controls in our analyses. The dependent variables in our tests are ICC, the
implied cost of capital of Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001), and FFCC, the Fama-French three-factor model cost of
capital. The summary statistics on the independent variables are calculated on the sample of firm for which we can calculate
the implied cost of capital, which covers the period 1984-2006 and contains 6,260 firms and a total of 33,788 firm-year
observations (financial institutions and utilities are excluded from the sample). However, the summary statistics for the
FFCC are calculated using the larger sample of firms for which we are able to calculate FFCC during 1984-2006. We use
various measures of asset liquidity which, for ease of comparison, are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation
of one by subtracting the sample mean and dividing by their sample standard deviation. These measures are as follows:
NoPotBuy is the number of rival firms in the industry that have debt ratings, and is calculated for the period 1985-2006
because bond ratings become available in 1985 (the tests which use this variable rely on 6,180 firms and 33,052 firm-year
observations); MNLPotBuy is minus the average book leverage net of cash holdings of rival firms in the industry, averaged
over the past five years; TotM&A is the value of all M&A activity in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the
industry, averaged over the past five years; InsM&A is the value of M&A activity in the industry involving acquirers that
operate within the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years; OutM&A
is the value of M&A activity in the industry involving acquirers that operate outside the industry scaled by the book value of
the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher values of all these variables are associated with higher
asset liquidity. The control variables we use throughout our tests are as follows: LogAssets is the logarithm of total assets;
M/B is the market-to-book assets ratio; DRP is a firm’s percentile ranking based on the yearly distribution of default risk;
Blev is book leverage; ROE is return on equity; VolRoe is the standard deviation of ROE over the past five years; FA/TA is
fixed assets scaled by total assets; R&DExp is R&D expenditures scaled by sales; LogAge is the logarithm of one plus the
number of years since the company was first listed in CRSP; DivPay equals one if the firm pays dividends and zero otherwise;
SalGrow is the annual change in the logarithm of sales; LogInvPrice is the logarithm of one divided by the stock price as of the
estimation date of ICC; and RetPM is the stock return over the past month.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Median

5th Pctile

95th Pctile

0.099
0.142

0.057
0.091

0.107
0.137

0.001
0.004

0.179
0.301

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

-0.383
-0.182
-0.361
-0.413
-0.390

-0.950
-1.461
-1.002
-0.792
-0.884

2.098
1.831
2.243
2.376
2.216

6.363
1.870
0.500
0.210
0.045
0.087
0.300
0.068
2.349
0.429
0.157
-2.986
0.036

1.792
1.712
0.288
0.182
3.037
0.128
0.225
0.207
0.966
0.495
0.255
0.819
0.142

6.215
1.350
0.500
0.189
0.069
0.050
0.242
0.005
2.303
0.000
0.119
-3.056
0.026

3.705
0.601
0.050
0.000
-0.236
0.009
0.036
0.000
0.693
0.000
-0.177
-4.191
-0.165

9.604
4.936
0.950
0.549
0.194
0.267
0.767
0.254
4.043
1.000
0.629
-1.504
0.273

Dependent Variables
ICC
FFCC

Standardized Asset Liquidity Measures
NoPotBuy
MNLPotBuy
TotM&A
InsM&A
OutM&A
Control Variables
LogAssets
M/B
DRP
Blev
ROE
VolROE
FA/TA
R&DExp
LogAge
DivPay
Salgrow
LogInvPrice
RetPM

Table 2
Asset Liquidity and the Cost of Capital: Univariate Tests
The table reports the average cost of capital for quintile portfolios of firms formed using three alternative measures of asset liquidity
defined for three-digit SIC industries: NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A. These measures are standardized to have mean zero and
standard deviation of one. NoPotBuy is the number of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings; MNLPotBuy is
minus the average book leverage net of cash holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the past five years; and
TotM&A is the value of all M&A activity in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past
five years. Higher values of all three variables are associated with higher asset liquidity. For each year we sort firms into quintile
portfolios based on the asset liquidity measure in their three-digit SIC industry. We then compute the average cost of capital for each
quintile portfolio, and subsequently take the average for each quintile across years. The last column reports p-value corresponding to
the test of the difference in means between Quintile 5 and Quintile 1. In Panels A, B, and C we measure a firm’s expected return using
the implied cost of capital (ICC) and rely on the sample described in Table 1. In Panel D we measure a firm’s expected return using the
Fama-French three-factor model (FFCC) and rely on the sample of all firms for which we are able to calculate FFCC during 1984-2006.

Panel A: ICC for Quintile Portfolios Based on (standardized) NoPotBuy
Q1
Mean NoPotBuy

Asset Liquidity Quintile
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q5

Q5 – Q1

p-value

-0.88

-0.68

-0.36

0.23

1.17

2.05

0.000

Equal-Weighted ICC

12.10%

11.76%

10.73%

9.39%

7.80%

-4.29%

0.000

Value-Weighted ICC

9.86%

9.23%

9.78%

8.90%

7.13%

-2.73%

0.000

Q5

Q5 – Q1

p-value

Panel B: ICC for Quintile Portfolios Based on (standardized) MNLPotBuy
Q1
Mean NLPotBuy

Asset Liquidity Quintile
Q2
Q3
Q4

-1.23

-0.65

-0.16

0.50

1.20

2.43

0.000

Equal-Weighted ICC

12.33%

12.29%

11.29%

9.90%

7.25%

-5.08%

0.000

Value-Weighted ICC

11.58%

10.43%

9.56%

8.45%

5.06%

-6.52%

0.000

Q5

Q5 – Q1

p-value

Panel C: ICC for Quintile Portfolios Based on (standardized) TotM&A
Q1
Mean TotM&A

Asset Liquidity Quintile
Q2
Q3
Q4

-0.92

-0.62

-0.30

0.15

1.24

2.17

0.000

Equal-Weighted ICC

12.54%

11.25%

10.39%

10.28%

8.59%

-3.96%

0.000

Value-Weighted ICC

10.73%

9.34%

9.01%

9.01%

6.92%

-3.80%

0.000

Panel D: Value-Weighted FFCC for Quintile Portfolios Based on (standardized) Asset Liquidity
Asset Liquidity Measure

Q1

Asset Liquidity Quintile
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q5

Q5 – Q1

p-value

(1) NoPotBuy

12.30%

10.95%

10.49%

10.48%

9.17%

-3.13%

0.000

(2) MNLPotBuy

11.45%

11.37%

11.33%

10.57%

7.09%

-4.36%

0.000

(3) TotM&A

11.56%

10.74%

10.36%

10.23%

8.73%

-2.83%

0.000

Table 3
Business-Cycle Effects on the Asset-Liquidity Discount
The table reports the results of OLS time-series univariate regressions of the annual average asset-liquidity discount on various
business-cycle indicators that we obtain from the St. Louis Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED). In Panel A we measure a
firm’s expected return using the implied cost of capital (ICC) and in Panel B we measure it using the Fama-French three-factor
model (FFCC). For the tests using both ICC and FFCC, we calculate three different versions of the asset-liquidity discount using
three alternative measures of asset liquidity defined for three-digit SIC industries which are standardized to have mean zero and
standard deviation of one. In all cases the asset-liquidity discount is the difference between the average cost of capital (in %) for
firms in the highest and lowest asset-liquidity quintiles. The first asset-liquidity discount is calculated using standardized NoPotBuy,
which is the number of rival firms in the industry that have debt ratings. The second asset-liquidity discount is calculated using
standardized MNLPBuy, which is minus the average book leverage net of cash holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry,
averaged over the past five years. The third asset-liquidity discount is calculated using standardized TotM&A, which is defined as
the value of all M&A activity in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years.
Higher values of all three variables are associated with higher asset liquidity. The regressions with the asset liquidity discount based
on NoPotBuy are based on the 22 annual observations during the period 1985-2006 and the regressions with asset liquidity discounts
based on MNLPotBuy and TotM&A are based on the 23 annual observations during the period 1984-2006 and. GDP Growth is the
year-over-year growth in the fourth quarter’s GDP; Capacity Utilization is the utilization rate of the installed capacity in the
manufacturing sector for the fourth quarter of each year; Inflation is the year-over-year change in the December’s Consumer Price
Index; T-Bill Rate is the average three-month Treasury Bill Rate during the corresponding year; Default Spread is the average spread
between the yield on Moody’s Baa corporate bond index and the yield of ten-year government bonds during the year; Market Return
is the annual return on the market portfolio (in %). The estimates of the intercept are omitted. The absolute values of t-statistics (in
parentheses) are calculated using standard errors obtained from a Newey-West procedure that accounts for any significant
autocorrelation. The R2 of each univariate regression is reported in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Discount in the ICC
The Dep. Var. is the Asset-Liquidity Discount Based on:
NoPotBuy

MNLPotBuy

TotM&A

(1)

GDP Growth

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.876***
(2.86)
[19.88%]

0.845***
(6.50)
[26.27%]

0.750***
(5.50)
[16.27%]

(2)

Capacity Utilization

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.230***
(4.14)
[10.33%]

0.299**
(2.60)
[17.61%]

0.463***
(5.45)
[33.11%]

(3)

Inflation

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.656***
(3.42)
[9.80%]

0.450*
(1.81)
[4.78%]

0.972***
(4.12)
[17.51%]

(4)

T-Bill Rate

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.748***
(3.67)
[37.32%]

0.728***
(7.33)
[45.68%]

0.935***
(8.85)
[59.20%]

(5)

Default Spread

Coef.
t-stat
R2

-0.748
(0.75)
[1.95%]

-1.802**
(2.08)
[11.67%]

-2.789***
(4.39)
[21.95%]

(6)

Market Return

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.038***
(3.10)
[6.25%]

0.049***
(4.87)
[10.67%]

0.045***
(3.66)
[7.06%]

Panel B: Discount in the FFCC
The Dep. Var. is the Asset-Liquidity Discount Based on:
NoPotBuy

MNLPotBuy

TotM&A

(1)

GDP Growth

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.845**
(2.30)
23.15%

0.455***
(4.66)
13.41%

0.550***
(5.53)
17.37%

(2)

Capacity Utilization

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.483***
(4.00)
56.93%

0.140**
(2.58)
6.78%

0.234***
(5.64)
16.72%

(3)

Inflation

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.474*
(1.85)
6.40%

0.884***
(6.18)
32.40%

0.398
(1.32)
5.82%

(4)

T-Bill Rate

Coef.
t-stat
R2

0.525***
(3.56)
23.00%

0.391***
(3.05)
23.11%

0.333***
(4.41)
14.91%

(5)

Default Spread

Coef.
t-stat
R2

-3.570***
(5.91)
55.62%

-1.120***
(4.45)
7.92%

-1.544***
(4.50)
13.34%

Table 4
Asset Liquidity and the Cost of Capital: Multivariate Analysis
The table reports the results from regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC) and the Fama-French three-factor model cost of capital
(FFCC) on the three alternative standardized measures of asset liquidity calculated for three-digit SIC industries (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy,
and TotM&A,) and a set of control variables. Panel A reports the results using ICC. In columns (1), (3), and (5) we report an OLS purely
cross-sectional regression using the time-series averages of the variables over the sample period for each firm, with standard errors
clustered by three-digit SIC industry. In columns (2), (4), and (6) we report a pooled (panel) OLS regression with three-digit SIC industry
fixed effects and year fixed effects, and standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. Panel B reports the results using FFCC. In
columns (1), (3), and (5) we report an OLS purely cross-sectional regression using the time-series averages of the variables over the sample
period for each firm, with standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. In columns (2), (4), and (6) we report Fama-MacBeth
regressions and report t-statistics which are adjusted for autocorrelation using the Newey-West procedure based on 6 lags. The following
measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one: NoPotBuy is the number of rival firms in the
three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings; MNLPotBuy is minus the average book leverage net of cash holdings of rival firms in the
three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the past five years; and TotM&A is the value of all M&A activity in the industry scaled by the book
value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher values of all three variables are associated with higher asset
liquidity. The control variables are as follows: LogAssets is the logarithm of total assets; M/B is the market-to-book assets ratio; DRP is a
firm’s percentile ranking based on the yearly distribution of default risk; Blev is book leverage; ROE is return on equity; VolRoe is the
standard deviation of ROE over the past five years; FA/TA is fixed assets scaled by total assets; R&DExp is R&D expenditures scaled by
sales; LogAge is the logarithm of one plus the number of years since the company was first listed in CRSP; DivPay equals one if the firm
pays dividends and zero otherwise; SalGrow is the annual change in the logarithm of sales; LogInvPrice is the logarithm of one divided by
the stock price as of the estimation date of ICC; and RetPM is the stock return over the past month. The estimates of the intercept, the
year fixed effects, and the industry fixed effects are omitted. The absolute values of the t-statistics are reported in parentheses below each
estimate. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: The Dependent Variable is the Implied Cost of Capital (ICC)
NoPotBuy
MNLPotBuy

(1)

(2)

-0.018***
(5.65)

-0.015***
(2.97)

TotM&A
LogAssets
M/B
DRP
Blev
ROE
VolROE
FA/TA
R&DExp
LogAge
DivPay
SalGrow
LogInvPrice
RetPM
Constant
Year Dummies
SIC3 Dummies
Estimation
Clustering by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

(3)

(4)

-0.019***
(7.08)

-0.011***
(6.36)

(5)

(6)

-0.005***
(2.64)
-0.001
(1.36)
-0.004***
(5.28)
0.023***
(10.61)
-0.008
(1.07)
0.000***
(3.69)
-0.027***
(9.02)
0.006
(1.30)
-0.013
(0.97)
-0.002**
(2.11)
0.004***
(3.82)
0.003
(1.00)
0.004***
(3.63)
-0.010***
(3.21)
0.169***
(38.02)

-0.005***
(4.48)
-0.008***
(5.63)
0.036***
(7.24)
0.020*
(1.94)
0.002*
(1.74)
-0.051***
(6.10)
0.002
(0.17)
-0.012
(0.85)
-0.001*
(1.80)
0.013***
(5.80)
-0.016***
(3.93)
-0.003
(1.42)
-0.025***
(2.84)
0.117***
(10.72)

-0.001
(1.12)
-0.004***
(5.19)
0.023***
(9.60)
-0.009
(1.18)
0.000***
(3.66)
-0.026***
(8.47)
0.006
(1.30)
-0.012
(0.90)
-0.002**
(2.36)
0.004***
(3.74)
0.003
(0.97)
0.005***
(3.88)
-0.011***
(3.57)
0.148***
(31.53)

-0.008***
(7.83)
-0.008***
(5.75)
0.040***
(8.51)
0.003
(0.26)
0.002*
(1.77)
-0.059***
(6.62)
-0.031***
(2.63)
-0.007
(0.58)
-0.001
(0.69)
0.016***
(6.78)
-0.020***
(3.29)
-0.006***
(3.03)
-0.030***
(2.97)
0.141***
(15.68)

-0.001
(1.18)
-0.004***
(5.02)
0.022***
(10.52)
-0.008
(1.08)
0.000***
(3.75)
-0.027***
(8.65)
0.006
(1.30)
-0.012
(0.89)
-0.002**
(2.48)
0.004***
(3.79)
0.003
(0.97)
0.004***
(3.87)
-0.009***
(2.99)
0.171***
(42.33)

-0.014***
(9.40)
-0.007***
(7.08)
-0.009***
(5.52)
0.029***
(5.72)
0.033***
(2.74)
0.002*
(1.82)
-0.062***
(8.04)
-0.021*
(1.76)
-0.017*
(1.75)
-0.001
(1.34)
0.017***
(7.28)
-0.015**
(2.31)
-0.004*
(1.75)
-0.030***
(3.28)
0.141***
(15.99)

No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

6180
0.36

33052
0.54

6260
0.34

33788
0.55

6260
0.32

33788
0.54

Panel B: The Dependent Variable is the Fama-French Cost of Capital (FFCC)
NoPotBuy
MNLPotBuy

(1)

(2)

-0.004**
(2.29)

-0.005**
(2.77)

TotM&A
All Control Variables
Estimation
Clustering by SIC3
Newey-West 6 lags
Observations

(3)

(4)

-0.006***
(3.03)

-0.005***
(5.03)

(5)

(6)

-0.008***
(3.78)

-0.004**
(2.20)

Yes
Cross-Sectional
Yes
No

Yes
Fama-MacBeth
No
Yes

Yes
Cross-Sectional
Yes
No

Yes
Fama-MacBeth
No
Yes

Yes
Cross-Sectional
Yes
No

Yes
Fama-MacBeth
No
Yes

9930

73893

10180

76575

10180

76575

Table 5
Inside Vs. Outside Asset Liquidity and the Implied Cost of Capital
The table reports the results from regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC) on two standardized measures of asset liquidity
defined at the three-digit SIC industry level (InsM&Q and OutM&A) and a set of control variables. In columns (1) and (3) we report
an OLS purely cross-sectional regression using the time-series averages of the variables over the sample period for each firm, with
standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. In columns (2) and (4) we report a pooled (panel) OLS regression with threedigit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. The following
measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one: InsM&A is the value of M&A activity
in the industry involving acquirers that operate within the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged
over the past five years; OutM&A is the value of M&A activity in the industry involving acquirers that operate outside the industry
scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher values of all three variables are
associated with higher asset liquidity. We also include but do not report the coefficients of the following control variables defined in
Table 1: LogAssets, M/B, DRP, Blev, ROE, VolRoe, FA/TA, R&DExp, LogAge, DivPay, SalGrow, LogInvPrice, and RetPM. The estimates
of the intercept, the year fixed effects, and the industry fixed effects are also omitted. The absolute values of the t-statistics are
reported in parentheses below each estimate. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

InsM&A
OutM&A
All Control Variables
Year Dummies
SIC3 Dummies
Estimation
Clustering by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

-0.016***
(9.09)

-0.006***
(2.78)

(3)

(4)

-0.007***
(2.80)

-0.002
(1.51)

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

6260
0.33

33788
0.55

6260
0.29

33788
0.54

Table 6
The Role of Industry Concentration and Industry Position
The table reports the results from regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC) on the three alternative standardized measures of
asset liquidity calculated for three-digit SIC industries (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A,) and a set of control variables. All
specifications are pooled (panel) OLS regressions with three-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and standard errors
clustered by three-digit SIC industry. Columns (1)-(2) split the sample into high concentration industries and low concentration
industries according to whether the industry’s predicted sales-based Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of concentration (HHI) is in the top
or bottom tercile of the annual distribution, respectively. Columns (3)-(4) split the sample into industry leaders, defined as firms with
at least a 15% market share in their three-digit SIC industry, and industry followers, defined as those with market shares below 15%,
respectively. The following measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one: NoPotBuy is
the number of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings; MNLPotBuy is minus the average book leverage net of
cash holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the past five years; and TotM&A is the value of all M&A
activity in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher values of all
three variables are associated with higher asset liquidity. We also include but do not report the coefficients of the following control
variables defined in Table 1: LogAssets, M/B, DRP, Blev, ROE, VolRoe, FA/TA, R&DExp, LogAge, DivPay, SalGrow, LogInvPrice, and
RetPM. The estimates of the intercept, the year fixed effects, and the industry fixed effects are also omitted. The absolute values of the
t-statistics are reported in parentheses below each estimate. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

High HHI
(1)

Low HHI
(2)

Leaders
(3)

Followers
(4)

0.003
(0.32)

-0.015***
(2.94)

Panel A: The measure of asset liquidity is NoPotBuy
NoPotBuy

-0.007*
(1.94)

-0.021**
(2.33)

Includes all control variables, year dummies, and SIC3 dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

10626
0.55

10362
0.60

5412
0.57

27640
0.55

-0.004**
(2.16)

-0.012***
(5.68)

Panel B: The measure of asset liquidity is MNLPotBuy
MNLPotBuy

-0.011***
(2.97)

-0.010***
(4.87)

Includes all control variables, year dummies, and SIC3 dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

10853
0.56

10582
0.60

5552
0.57

28236
0.55

-0.000
(0.32)

-0.006***
(2.74)

Panel C: The measure of asset liquidity is TotM&A
TotM&A

-0.002
(1.02)

-0.007**
(2.10)

Includes all control variables, year dummies, and SIC3 dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

10853
0.55

10582
0.60

5552
0.57

28236
0.55

Table 7
The Effect of Access to Debt Financing and Default Risk
The table reports the results from regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC) on the three alternative standardized measures of
asset liquidity calculated for three-digit SIC industries (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A,) and a set of control variables. All
specifications are pooled (panel) OLS regressions with three-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and standard errors
clustered by three-digit SIC industry. Columns (1)-(2) split the sample into firms with debt but no debt ratings and those whose debt
is rated, respectively. Columns (3)-(4) split the sample into firms with high distress risk and low distress risk based on whether the
distance of a firm’s probability of default from the industry median is in the top or bottom tercile of the annual distribution across all
firms, respectively. The following measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one:
NoPotBuy is the number of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings; MNLPotBuy is minus the average book
leverage net of cash holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the past five years; and TotM&A is the value
of all M&A activity in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher
values of all three variables are associated with higher asset liquidity. We also include but do not report the coefficients of the
following control variables defined in Table 1: LogAssets, M/B, DRP, Blev, ROE, VolRoe, FA/TA, R&DExp, LogAge, DivPay, SalGrow,
LogInvPrice, and RetPM. The estimates of the intercept, the year fixed effects, and the industry fixed effects are also omitted. The
absolute values of the t-statistics are reported in parentheses below each estimate. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Unrated Debt
(1)

Rated Debt
(2)

High Default Risk
(3)

Low Default Risk
(4)

-0.014***
(2.78)

-0.008***
(2.75)

Panel A: The measure of asset liquidity is NoPotBuy
NoPotBuy

-0.014**
(2.55)

-0.013***
(3.65)

Includes all control variables, year dummies, and SIC3 dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

15400
0.54

12331
0.54

11250
0.49

10968
0.55

-0.014**
(5.65)

-0.009***
(2.94)

Panel B: The measure of asset liquidity is MNLPotBuy
MNLPotBuy

-0.010***
(5.65)

-0.011***
(3.90)

Includes all control variables, year dummies, and SIC3 dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

16079
0.55

12331
0.54

11501
0.49

11211
0.56

-0.007***
(3.44)

-0.002
(1.34)

Panel C: The measure of asset liquidity is TotM&A
TotM&A

-0.005**
(2.27)

-0.003**
(2.11)

Includes all control variables, year dummies, and SIC3 dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

16079
0.55

12331
0.53

11501
0.49

11211
0.56

Table 8
The Effect of Market Valuations and Demand Shocks
The table reports the results from regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC) on the three alternative standardized measures of
asset liquidity calculated for three-digit SIC industries (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A,) and a set of control variables. All
specifications are pooled (panel) OLS regressions with three-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and standard
errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry (except columns (3) and (4) which have no industry fixed effects). Columns (1)-(2) split
the sample into low and high market-to-book value of assets ratios (V/A) based on whether the distance of a firm’s V/A from the
industry median is in the bottom or top tercile of the annual distribution across all firms, respectively. Columns (3)-(4) split the
sample into firms in three-digit SIC industries experiencing an economic downturn and firms in industries that are not experiencing a
downturn, respectively. The following measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one:
NoPotBuy is the number of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings; MNLPotBuy is minus the average book
leverage net of cash holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the past five years; and TotM&A is the value
of all M&A activity in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher
values of all three variables are associated with higher asset liquidity. We also include but do not report the coefficients of the
following control variables defined in Table 1: LogAssets, M/B, DRP, Blev, ROE, VolRoe, FA/TA, R&DExp, LogAge, DivPay, SalGrow,
LogInvPrice, and RetPM. The estimates of the intercept, the year fixed effects, and the industry fixed effects are also omitted. The
absolute values of the t-statistics are reported in parentheses below each estimate. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Low V/A
(1)

High V/A
(2)

Industry Downturn
(3)

Non Industry Downturn
(4)

-0.013*
(1.79)

-0.017***
(4.90)

Panel A: The measure of asset liquidity is NoPotBuy
NoPotBuy

-0.015**
(2.43)

-0.012***
(2.76)

Includes all control variables and year dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
SIC3 Dummies
Yes
Yes
No
No
Observations
R-squared

10915
0.57

11250
0.54

860
0.32

32192
0.35

-0.034***
(5.77)

-0.019***
(6.06)

Panel B: The measure of asset liquidity is MNLPotBuy
MNLPotBuy

-0.013***
(5.89)

-0.009**
(4.82)

Includes all control variables and year dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
SIC3 Dummies
Yes
Yes
No
No
Observations
R-squared

11158
0.58

11501
0.54

868
0.38

32920
0.36

-0.024***
(4.78)

-0.012***
(5.23)

Panel C: The measure of asset liquidity is TotM&A
TotM&A

-0.007***
(3.04)

-0.004**
(2.01)

Includes all control variables and year dummies; standard errors are clustered by SIC3
SIC3 Dummies
Yes
Yes
No
No
Observations
R-squared

11158
0.57

11501
0.54

868
0.39

32920
0.33

Table 9
Asset Liquidity and the Implied Cost of Capital: Controlling for Industry Valuation
The table reports the results from regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC) on the three alternative standardized measures of
asset liquidity calculated for three-digit SIC industries (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A), measures of industry valuation
(LogIndMBE) or miss-valuation (IndRelVal) also defined for three-digit SIC industries, and a set of control variables. In columns (1)
and (3) we report an OLS purely cross-sectional regression using the time-series averages of the variables over the sample period for
each firm, with standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. In columns (2) and (4) we report a pooled (panel) OLS
regression with three-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry.
The following measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one: NoPotBuy is the number
of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings; MNLPotBuy is minus the average book leverage net of cash
holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the past five years; and TotM&A is the value of all M&A activity
in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher values of all three
variables are associated with higher asset liquidity. LogIndMBE is the logarithm of the mean market-to-book equity ratio in the firm’s
industry and IndRelVal is the industry’s relative valuation, computed as the difference between the industry market-to-book equity
ratio and its predicted value based on the benchmark Pastor and Veronesi (2003) specification. We also include but do not report the
coefficients of the following control variables defined in Table 1: LogAssets, M/B, DRP, Blev, ROE, VolRoe, FA/TA, R&DExp,
LogAge, DivPay, SalGrow, LogInvPrice, and RetPM. The estimates of the intercept, the year fixed effects, and the industry fixed effects
are also omitted. The absolute values of the t-statistics are reported in parentheses below each estimate. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

All Control Variables
Year Dummies
SIC3 Dummies
Estimation
Clustering by SIC3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

-0.018***
(5.69)

-0.015***
(3.00)

0.006
(1.19)

-0.004
(1.36)

-0.019***
(7.30)

-0.011***
(6.70)

0.016**
(2.42)

-0.001
(0.41)

-0.014***
(9.62)

-0.005***
(2.65)

0.004
(0.54)

-0.003
(0.96)

Panel A: The measure of asset liquidity is NoPotBuy
NoPotBuy
LogIndMBE

-0.014***
(4.51)
-0.024***
(5.15)

-0.015***
(2.98)
0.002
(1.31)

IndRelVal

Panel B: The measure of asset liquidity is MNLPotBuy
MNLPotBuy
LogIndMBE

-0.013***
(5.78)
-0.025***
(6.39)

-0.011***
(6.38)
0.003
(1.51)

IndRelVal

Panel C: The measure of asset liquidity is TotM&A
TotM&A
LogIndMBE
IndRelVal

-0.011***
(8.81)
-0.031***
(9.45)

-0.005***
(2.62)
0.002
(1.17)

Table 10
Asset Liquidity and the Implied Cost of Capital: Industry-Level Tests
The table reports the results from industry-level regressions of the implied cost of capital (ICC) on the three alternative standardized
measures of asset liquidity calculated for three-digit SIC industries (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A,) and a set of control variables.
For this purpose, all firm-level variables are converted into three-digit SIC industry medians for each year. In columns (1), (3), and (5) we
report an OLS purely cross-sectional industry-level regression using the time-series averages of the variables over the sample period for
each industry, with standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. In columns (2), (4), and (6) we report a pooled (panel) industrylevel OLS regression with three-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC
industry. The following measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one: NoPotBuy is the
number of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings; MNLPotBuy is minus the average book leverage net of cash
holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over the past five years; and TotM&A is the value of all M&A activity in
the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher values of all three variables are
associated with higher asset liquidity. We also include but do not report the coefficients of the following control variables defined in Table
1: LogAssets, M/B, DRP, Blev, ROE, VolRoe, FA/TA, R&DExp, LogAge, DivPay, SalGrow, LogInvPrice, and RetPM. The estimates of the
intercept, the year fixed effects, and the industry fixed effects are also omitted. The absolute values of the t-statistics are reported in
parentheses below each estimate. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

NoPotBuy

(1)

(2)

-0.012**
(2.27)

-0.015**
(2.33)

MNLPotBuy

(3)

(4)

-0.016***
(3.24)

-0.013***
(5.78)

TotM&A
All Control Variables
Year Dummies
SIC3 Dummies
Estimation
Clustering by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

(5)

(6)

-0.011**
(2.47)

-0.003*
(1.81)

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

303
0.59

4631
0.86

304
0.58

4793
0.85

304
0.58

4793
0.85

Table 11
Asset Liquidity and Unlevered Implied Cost of Capital
The table reports the results from regressions of the unlevered implied cost of capital (UNLICC) on the three alternative
standardized measures of asset liquidity calculated for three-digit SIC industries (NoPotBuy, MNLPotBuy, and TotM&A) and a set
of control variables. In columns (1), (3), and (5) we report an OLS purely cross-sectional regression using the time-series averages
of the variables over the sample period for each firm, with standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. In columns (2),
(4), and (6) we report a pooled (panel) OLS regression with three-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and
standard errors clustered by three-digit SIC industry. The following measures of asset liquidity are standardized to have mean
zero and standard deviation of one: NoPotBuy is the number of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry that have debt ratings;
MNLPotBuy is minus the average book leverage net of cash holdings of rival firms in the three-digit SIC industry, averaged over
the past five years; and TotM&A is the value of all M&A activity in the industry scaled by the book value of the assets in the
industry, averaged over the past five years. Higher values of all three variables are associated with higher asset liquidity. We also
include but do not report the coefficients of the following control variables defined in Table 1: LogAssets, M/B, DRP, ROE,
VolRoe, FA/TA, R&DExp, LogAge, DivPay, SalGrow, LogInvPrice, and RetPM. The estimates of the intercept, the year fixed
effects, and the industry fixed effects are also omitted. The absolute values of the t-statistics are reported in parentheses below
each estimate. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

NoPotBuy

(1)

(2)

-0.015***
(4.33)

-0.012**
(2.49)

MNLPotBuy

(3)

(4)

-0.016***
(7.35)

-0.009***
(6.29)

TotM&A
All Control Variables
Year Dummies
SIC3 Dummies
Estimation
Clustering by SIC3
Observations
R-squared

(5)

(6)

-0.013***
(8.52)

-0.004**
(2.25)

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

Yes
No
No
Cross-Sectional
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel
Yes

6180
0.36

33052
0.56

6260
0.36

33788
0.57

6260
0.34

33788
0.57

