NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDER PRESSURE? THE EFFECT OF PEERS ON OUTCOMES OF YOUNG ADULTS
Sandra E. Black
Paul J. Devereux
Kjell G. Salvanes
Working Paper 16004
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16004

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

Devereux thanks the Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Sciences (IRCHSS) for
financial support. Black and Devereux gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National
Science Foundation. Salvanes thanks the Research Council of Norway for financial support. We would
like to thank Eve Caroli, Per-Anders Edin, Kanika Kapur, Eric Maurin, Steve Trejo, and seminar participants
at Paris School of Economics, NYU, Carnegie Mellon/University of Pittsburgh, University of Oregon,
University of Houston/Rice University, Texas A&M, the University of Texas, Austin, and UCLA
Anderson School of Business for helpful comments, We are indebted to Stig Jakobsen who was instrumental
in obtaining data access to the IQ data from the Norwegian Armed Forces. This research was completed
while Black was on leave at the Department of Economics at the University of Texas at Austin. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Under Pressure? The Effect of Peers on Outcomes of Young Adults
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 16004
May 2010
JEL No. I20,J10
ABSTRACT
A variety of public campaigns, including the “Just Say No” campaign of the 1980s and 1990s that
encouraged teenagers to “Just Say No to Drugs”, are based on the premise that teenagers are very susceptible
to peer influences. Despite this, very little is known about the effect of school peers on the long-run
outcomes of teenagers. This is primarily due to two factors: the absence of information on peers merged
with long-run outcomes of individuals and, equally important, the difficulty of separately identifying
the role of peers. This paper uses data on the population of Norway and idiosyncratic variation in
cohort composition within schools to examine the role of peer composition in 9th grade on longer-run
outcomes such as IQ scores at age 18, teenage childbearing, post-compulsory schooling educational
track, adult labor market status, and earnings. We find that outcomes are influenced by the proportion
of females in the grade, and these effects differ for men and women. Other peer variables (average
age, average mother’s education) have little impact on the outcomes of teenagers.

Sandra E. Black
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and IZA
and also NBER
sblack@austin.utexas.edu
Paul J. Devereux
School of Economics
and Geary Institute
University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4
Ireland
and IZA and CEPR
devereux@ucd.ie

Kjell G. Salvanes
Department of Economics
Norwegian School of Economics & Business
Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen, NORWAY
IZA and CEP
kjell.salvanes@nhh.no

1. Introduction
The “Just Say No” campaign of the 1980s and 1990s encouraged children to resist
peer pressure and “say No” to drugs. A key underlying assumption of the campaign,
based on research by Dr. Richard Evans, is that teenagers are susceptible to the influences
of their peers. Despite this perceived wisdom, there is little large-scale empirical
evidence on the long run effect of peers in middle school and high school. This is
primarily due to two factors: the absence of information on peers merged with long-run
outcomes of individuals and, equally important, the difficulty of separately identifying
the role of peers. Using data on the population of Norway and idiosyncratic variation in
cohort composition within schools, this paper examines the role of peer composition in
9th grade on longer-run outcomes such as IQ scores, teenage childbearing, educational
choices, adult labor market status, and earnings. Taken together, the findings provide a
broad understanding of the socio-economic effects of peer composition.
We extend the existing literature on peer effects along two dimensions. First, we
focus on the role of lower secondary school peers (when children are aged 14 to 16)
instead of earlier schooling; teenagers are often perceived as being particularly
susceptible to peer influence. Second, we are able to look at long-run outcomes and are
not limited to test scores while in school. It is possible that short-term effects of peers on
school grades wear off over time and hence are not so important in determining
completed educational attainment and later earnings.1

1

This type of effect has been observed with respect to the effects of school starting age. For example, Elder
and Lubotsky (2009) find that it has large initial impacts on school grades but the effects get smaller with
age.

2

A key difficulty in the literature is the statistical identification of peer effects.2 In
this paper, we use plausibly random peer group variation to identify the role of peers on
long run outcomes. Starting with Hoxby (2000), researchers have exploited across-grade
variation in peers within schools that arises because of random demographic differences
across cohorts. For example, by chance, 3rd grade may be 55% male in 2000 in a certain
school, but only 45% male the following year.3 One concern with this strategy, however,
is that parents may time the entry age of their child to avoid “bad” cohorts; we deal with
this issue by instrumenting the actual peer characteristics of children with what the peer
characteristics would have been if all children started school on time and progressed one
grade each year. Because, in Norway, the compliance rate with school starting age
regulations is high and grade retention is extremely rare, the first stage relationship is
very strong.
We study how a child’s outcomes are influenced by the gender composition of
classmates, their socio-economic characteristics (as proxied by their mother’s educational
attainment), and the average age of classmates. The latter variable is influenced by much
prior research suggesting that school starting age influences the long-run outcomes of
children; in this paper, we continue this area of investigation by examining whether there
are spillover effects on classmates. For example, based on earlier work, there is good
2

Manski (2000) notes that typically behaviors and outcomes are similar among members of the same peer
group and categorizes the possible reasons into 3 groups: (1) Endogenous peer effects occur when
individual outcomes directly influence outcomes of peers (2) Exogenous or contextual peer effects occur
when predetermined characteristics of individuals affect outcomes of peers and (3) correlated effects refer
to non-peer effects reasons for correlated outcomes within peer groups such as endogenous peer group
selection and correlated unobservables of peers. For empirical researchers trying to find evidence of peer
effects, the identification problem amounts to separating (3) out from (1) and (2). See Manski (2000) and
Moffitt (2001). In this paper, we use the term “peer effects” to refer to the combination of endogenous and
contextual peer effects.
3
A disadvantage of this approach is that exogenous variation in peer groups is at the grade-level rather than
at the classroom-level, as the across-classroom distribution of children within grades is likely to be nonrandom.

3

reason to suspect that having older peers may make it more likely that a teenage girl
engages early in sexual activity and hence is more likely to have a teen birth. 4
Our main finding is that students are influenced by the proportion of females in
the grade. Interestingly, there are opposite effects for men and women, in that women
benefit from having a higher proportion of female peers while men are disadvantaged by
female peers. There is very little evidence that the other peer variables we study (average
age, average mother’s education) have any impact on the outcomes of teenagers.
The paper unfolds as follows. In section 2, we discuss the relevant literature. The
empirical methodology and institutional context are described in sections 3 and 4
respectively. Section 5 outlines the data we use. The main results are in section 6.
Section 7 concludes and summarizes the findings.

2. Literature Review
The publication of the Coleman report (1966) highlighted the importance of peers
to the performance of students, arguing that peers are more important than schools as
determinants of student outcomes. Since that time, researchers have tried a variety of
estimation strategies to isolate the causal effect of peers on student performance.5
Most recently, the research in the area has taken on three basic strategies. The
closest to ideal is the randomization of peer assignment, enabling the researcher to
eliminate all concerns about selection. As with other experimental work, however, this is
often limited in its generalizability. The best known experimental work on peers has
focused on college roommate assignment (see work by Sacerdote (2001), Zimmerman

4
5

See Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2008).
Sacerdote (2008) and Epple and Romano (forthcoming) provide comprehensive reviews of the literature.

4

(2003), Carrell, Fullerton, and West (2009)), or has focused on elementary schools in
developing countries (Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2008)).6 None of this experimental
work has looked at the role of early teenage peers in a developed nation context.
The second identification strategy uses individual fixed effects; variation comes
from changes in peer groups over time, primarily due to school-switchers and children
who are held back. These changes in peer groups are then related to changes in the
outcomes of the student, most generally as reflected in test scores.7 Hanushek, Kain,
Markman, and Rivkin (2003) use student and school-by-grade fixed effects to estimate
the effect of elementary school peers on test score gains. There are two sources for
variation in peers: mobility into or out of the school and, less importantly, changes in
student circumstances (income or achievement, for example). They find a positive effect
of peer achievement on test score gains that is relatively constant across quartiles of the
school achievement distribution. A key limitation of this strategy, however, is that it
relies on movers for variation in peers, and the decision to move may be endogenous to
school characteristics.8
A third estimation strategy is to use idiosyncratic variation across school cohorts
to isolate the role of peers. Most closely related to our work is that of Hoxby (2000),
6

Duflo, Dupas and Kremer (2008) randomize peer groups in Kenya. A key advantage of their paper is,
because of the experimental design, they are able to compare the effects of peers in the presence of student
tracking to the effect of peers without tracking and with only idiosyncratic differences in peers. They find
that students of all ability levels do better with tracking. Interestingly, however, they find that students at
the tracking cutoff (those just above are in high ability classes and those below are in low ability classes) do
equally well, suggesting no peer effects conditional on tracking. However, when they look at the effects of
small differences in peers induced by the randomization of peers, they find positive effects of having high
ability peers.
7
Because of the inclusion of individual fixed effects, the strategy relies on relating changes in student
performance to changes in peer group over time; this approach is obviously infeasible when looking at
post-school outcomes.
8
Similar in spirit, Kramarz, Machin, and Ouazad (2009) use British data to distinguish the components of
test scores and test score growth that are related to pupils, schools, and peers. They find that pupil
heterogeneity is a more important determinant of achievement than school quality (although both are
statistically significant). Peer effects are small but significant.

5

Lavy and Schlosser (2007), Bifulco, Fletcher, and Ross (2010), and Gould, Lavy, and
Paserman (2009).9 Gould et al. (2009) use idiosyncratic variation in the proportion of
immigrants in elementary school grades in Israel and study the impact of immigrants on
high school performance. Bifulco et al. (2010) use U.S. data from Add Health focusing
on the effect of percent minorities and college educated mothers per cohort on the
probability of dropping out of high school, attending college, and likelihood of smoking.
In contrast to our study, they do not use school level administrative data and their
principal focus is on the effect of minorities. Lavy and Schlosser (2007) use Israeli data
to examine how idiosyncratic changes in gender composition affect elementary, middle,
and high school performance. Once they establish that student outcomes are better in the
presence of a higher fraction of girls, they then examine whether it is because of changes
in the composition of the class (boys are worse behaved on average) or changes in the
behavior of the individual students, using survey data of students and teachers. While
similar in spirit, our work looks at a variety of peer characteristics and at a country with a
very different institutional framework. Also, unlike Lavy and Schlosser, our outcome
variables are post-school outcomes rather than in-school test scores.

3. Empirical Methodology
A. Using Idiosyncratic Variation in Peer Characteristics
Our general equation of interest is as follows:
(1)

9

Work by Ammermueller and Pischke (2009) uses data from six European countries and within school,
across classroom variation for identification. The authors argue that classroom assignment in primary
school is effectively random, and they find modestly large effects of peer effects on in-school exams.

6

where yics is the outcome measure for individual i in cohort c, in school s. A cohort refers
to all individuals who are in grade 9 in the same year whether or not they have the same
year-of-birth. As is described in section 5 below, we have information on children from
15 cohorts. Outcomes are a function of the individual’s own characteristics, xics, which
include gender, family size and its square, mother’s education, an indicator for whether
the child is firstborn, mother’s age at birth and its square, and immigrant status. Also
included are the mean characteristics of their peers (peers are defined as everybody in
their grade except themselves),

, which are the average age, the fraction female, and

the average socioeconomic status as measured by mother’s education. Our main
coefficients of interest are those in

. We also control for the number of students in the

grade in the school (gsc) and a full set of cohort dummies where

is a dummy variable

equal to 1 if the observation is from cohort c, and equal to zero otherwise.10

refers to

school effects that may or may not differ across cohorts; a key issue is the appropriate
parameterization of

.

One possibility is to parameterize

by including the mean value of student

characteristics measured at the school level.11 In this case, we study the impact of

10

The cohort dummies are not school-specific. All individuals in Norway who started school in the same
year will have the same values for the cohort dummies.
11
We sometimes refer to this as pseudo fixed effects as it is similar in spirit to including school fixed
effects. Mundlak (1978) showed an equivalence between the fixed effects specification and a particular
correlated random effects specification. This implies that estimating
(2)
using school fixed effects produces the same estimate of

as estimating
(3)

7

variation in peer composition, conditional on the average peer composition over all
cohorts in the school. By controlling for the average characteristics of children in the
school across all cohorts, we are taking account of the fact that some schools may
generally attract better students than others. The regression we estimate is then:
(4)
We cluster the standard errors by school to allow for arbitrary within-school correlations
in the errors.
With this parameterization of

, we are assuming that, conditional on cohort

dummies and average student characteristics in the school, peer characteristics in a
particular grade are as good as randomly assigned. While we know there is sorting based
on place of residence, this is not a problem so long as it does not change over time as it
will then be picked up by the average school student characteristics. However, a key
concern is the existence of trends over time in neighborhoods or schools that are
correlated both with peer quality and student outcomes.12 For example, if a
neighborhood/school is becoming “poorer” over time, the average peer quality and
individual student performance will both be declining. If one does not take into account
these differential changes over time, one might observe a spurious relationship between

without school fixed effects. In equation 3, the means of all variables from equation 2 are taken by school,
and added as additional explanatory variables to the model. So
is the within-school mean of the
individual characteristics, and

is the within-school mean of the peer characteristic.

is then the

proportion of individuals in a particular school that are in cohort c. Estimating (3) gives exactly the
same
coefficients as estimating equation (2) using school fixed effects. Given that, in our context,
, equation (1) is very similar to equation (4) below and, in practice, the two strategies give very
similar estimates.
12
Note that national trends will be absorbed by the cohort dummies.

8

peer quality and student performance. We therefore also use parameterizations of

that

allow for changes in school quality over time.
School-Specific Trends
It is common in the literature to allow for school-specific trends (for example, Hoxby
2000) and this is the first approach we take. Given our estimation strategy, it is not
feasible to directly add a linear trend for each school so we implement this in our set-up
as follows: First we regress each individual characteristic, for example female, on school
dummies and school dummies interacted with a linear cohort trend. We then calculate the
fitted value of the characteristic for each school/cohort cell. This fitted value can be
interpreted as the expected peer composition in the school for that cohort if composition
changes follow a school-specific linear trend. We add these fitted values (one for each
peer characteristic) to the specification in equation (4). In effect, this means we study the
effects of variation in peer characteristics conditional both on the mean peer
characteristics in the school, and conditional on the predicted peer characteristics for that
cohort in the school, allowing for a school-specific linear trend.
Moving Average Approach
The second approach we take to allow for changes in school quality over time
takes a much less parametric perspective. The intuition is as follows: instead of
comparing across long periods of time and imposing a particular functional form on the
trend, we narrow the comparison. For every year, we regress the performance of a
student in that year on the characteristics of her peers, conditional on the average
characteristics of other students in the school taken over that year and the two adjacent
years (the one before and the one after). By construction, any deviation in peer

9

characteristics from this 3-year average cannot be due to a linear trend over this 3-year
period and can therefore be treated as idiosyncratic variation.13 We add the 3-year
moving average of student characteristics as extra control variables in equation (4).
It is important to note, however, that this is an extremely restrictive comparison.
To the extent that peers in neighboring years actually do have an effect on an individual’s
performance, we will underestimate the role of peers on student outcomes. As a result,
we view this estimate as a lower bound on true peer effects.14

B. Using Sibling Differences
There is always a concern that the peer variation used in the methods above is not
purely idiosyncratic and there may still remain (conditional) correlations between a
child’s family background and his peers. One way to rule out this possibility is by using
sibling fixed effects. To do so, we restrict the sample to siblings who go to the same
school. With sibling fixed effects, a potential source of bias is if, somehow, the “better”
child in the family ends up in a cohort with a better peer group. The only plausible way in
which this could happen is if parents manipulate school starting age so as to influence the
peer group their children face. Our instrumental variables strategy (described below)
deals with this possibility. Note that while the sibling fixed effects strategy has the
advantage of ruling out any possibility that peer composition is correlated with family
background characteristics, it has the disadvantage that one-child families are excluded
from estimation (and when we split by sex we must omit families with fewer than two
13

By necessity, we exclude cohorts 1 and 15 as they are not middle cohorts in any 3-cohort sequence.
Our moving average strategy is somewhat similar to that used by Gould et al. (2009). They condition on
the lag and the lead of the relevant peer variable, as well as the number of persons in the class. Their
approach may have greater potential for bias; if the lead and lag are correlated with unobserved school
characteristics, it is likely that the current value of the peer variable is as well.
14

10

children of that sex). Thus, the estimation sample is somewhat unrepresentative and
estimates are less precise because of the smaller sample sizes. Also, there is some risk
that if peer quality is higher for one child in a family, this may correlate with other timevarying features of the school also being better. This is an issue because this strategy does
not carefully control for school-level changes over time.

Endogeneity of School Starting Age
There is a potential endogeneity problem in equation (4) in that parents may
strategically choose the starting age of their child in response to the peer composition of a
particular cohort in a particular school. For example, a parent may hold back their child
by a year if the child has friends that are not starting until a year later. Thus, while the
peer composition in one’s year-of-birth may be random (conditional on the school), the
peer composition in one’s grade may not be.15 To deal with this, we instrument the peer
variables with what they would have been if everybody had started on time i.e. the peer
characteristics of one’s birth cohort.16 For completeness, we instrument all other variables
with what they would have been if everybody started on time. For example, we
instrument the cohort dummies with birth-year dummies.17 Additionally, we instrument
the actual school starting age of the child with what it would have been if the child started
on time.

15

If everybody followed the administrative rule, all students in a particular grade would have the same
year-of-birth.
16
This instrumental variables strategy is similar in spirit to that of Hoxby and Weingarth (2006) who use
characteristics of peers who are assigned to a school as instruments for the actual peer characteristics in the
school.
17
Our instrumental variables strategy partially motivates the specification we use i.e. equation (4) rather
than equation (2). It would be impossible to instrument 1000+ school-specific trends but it is easily feasible
to instrument the controls for the fitted peer variables with what they would be if everyone started on time.

11

4. Norwegian School Structure
In Norway, compulsory education is free; since 1997, schooling has been
compulsory from age 6 to 16 (10th grade). However, the cohorts we consider faced a
school starting age of 7 with 9 years of compulsory schooling. Schools are run by the
local municipality and there is no tracking by ability during the years of compulsory
schooling.18 School attendance is based on your place of residence, and the rules that
pupils attend the school in their catchment area are strictly enforced.19
The focus of our study is on lower secondary school, which is comprised of
grades 7-9. The mandatory school system in Norway is split into primary schools (grades
1-6) and lower secondary schools (grades 7-9). Most pupils attended separate primary
and secondary schools, while about 20 percent went to combined primary and secondary
schools (Hægeland, Raaum, and Salvanes, 2005). Most combined schools are in rural
areas and have a small number of students.

18

There are very few private schools in Norway and only about 2% of all pupils attend them.
At the high school level there are differences across municipalities and across time regarding the degree
of school choice but this does not occur until students have completed lower-secondary school.
19

12

Unlike in the United States, students stay with the same group of students for all
their classes in the day and throughout the year. Different teachers are allocated to each
class based on field. There is essentially no grade retention in Norway (Strøm, 2004),
suggesting that all students that start the same year also graduate the same year.
Furthermore, 95.3 percent of the students lived in the graduation municipality for all
three years in the lower secondary school, suggesting very little mobility.

5. Data
Our primary data source is the Norwegian Registry Data, a linked administrative
dataset that covers the population of Norwegians up to 2006 and is a collection of
different administrative registers such as the education register, family register, and the
tax and earnings register. These data are maintained by Statistics Norway and provide
information about educational attainment, labor market status, earnings, and a set of
demographic variables (age, gender) as well as information on families.20 We focus on
cohorts born between 1959 and 1973.21
The school data come from the Norwegian education register. Each school in
Norway was legally required to report when a student graduated from primary and
secondary school. As a result, we know from which school each pupil graduated.

Peer Characteristics
There are a number of ways peers in middle school could affect the outcomes of
an individual. Teachers may adapt the way they teach to be most appropriate to the

20
21

See Møen, Salvanes and Sørensen [2004] for a description of these data.
We exclude a small number of individuals who started school more than 1 year early or 1 year late.

13

group as a whole, peers may help the other students in the class by providing assistance
or acting as role models, and the characteristics of peers may influence the self-esteem of
students in the class. Because there is so little understanding of the mechanisms for peer
effects, it is very difficult to know the appropriate measures of peer
quality/characteristics.
In our model, we use three measures of peer characteristics.22 The first is the
fraction of girls in the grade. Evidence suggests that girls are better behaved and cause
fewer disruptions in the classroom (Lavy and Schlosser, 2007). Theoretical work by
Lazear (2001) suggests that having less-disruptive students in the class has beneficial
effects on all students in the class; in this case, a higher fraction of girls in the classroom
would have a positive effect on outcomes of both boys and girls. However, a higher
fraction of girls in the class could also provide greater distraction for teenage boys. This
could cause differential effects by gender, with more girls having a negative impact on
outcomes of boys, and, symmetrically, more boys having a negative impact on outcomes
of girls. Ultimately, this is an empirical question.
Our second measure is the average age in the classroom. In earlier work, we
documented an effect of school starting age on the outcomes of adults; one of the most
notable findings was the effect on teenage childbearing. (See Black, Devereux and
Salvanes, 2008.) Women who start school younger are more likely to have children as
teenagers. One possible explanation for this is the influence of peers; girls who start
school younger have a relatively older peer group and may be influenced by their peers’

22

In the peers literature, researchers often focus on the effects of peer ability on outcomes (see Lavy et al.
2009 for a recent example). We have no measure of ability and so focus on the effects of pre-determined
peer characteristics.

14

behavior.23 This would imply that, conditional on own age, having older peers increases
the likelihood of teen pregnancy. Peer age could also affect other outcomes by changing
the average maturity in the classroom. In this case, we would expect that having older
peers would lead to better academic outcomes. Because grade repetition is extremely rare
in Norway, the average school starting age of peers determines the average age of peers
in 9th grade and we use both terms interchangeably.
Our final measure of peer characteristics is the average mother’s education of the
students in the grade, which we use as a proxy for socioeconomic status.24 In general, we
would expect peers with higher socio-economic status to have positive spillovers. Early
work by Evans, Oates, and Schwab (1992) studies the relationship between the presence
of disadvantaged peers and teenage pregnancy; they find a significant, although small,
relationship between the two which disappears when they control for selection into
schools using a simultaneous equations model and city-level characteristics as
instruments.
Peers are measured as the group of students in your grade and school in the 9th
grade. There may be substantial persistence in peers over time. As a result, these peer
measures represent not only the peers an individual faces in the 9th grade but, to the
extent these are the same peers they have had throughout their educational experience

23

Cascio and Schanzenbach (2007) use variation in peers induced by the randomization to classes in the
Tennessee STAR experiment to examine the role of relative age on the performance of students in the 8th
grade as well as whether or not the individual takes the SAT or ACT exam. The authors find little effect of
relative age once controlling for the age of the individual; however, when the data is decomposed by family
background, there is some effect of relative age on the outcomes of more disadvantaged students.
24

We have also tried creating a socio-economic index by regressing an individual’s educational attainment
on dummies for family size, mother’s education, father’s education, whether the person is an immigrant,
and family income in 1978, 1983, and 1988 and using the predicted value as a socioeconomic index. We
found very similar results for this variable to those we report for mother’s education.

15

(and will continue to have into the future), the estimated effect represents the cumulative
effect of peers throughout the educational experience.
As described below, we create instruments for these peer variables using the
individuals who were born in the same cohort and went to the same school (whether or
not they finished in the same year).
The variation we are using is that in peer characteristics, conditional on average
student characteristics in the school and on cohort fixed effects. To alleviate concerns
about insufficient variation in our variables of interest, we have calculated the fraction of
total variation in peer characteristics that is explained by these control variables using the
R2 from regressions with the peer characteristics as dependent variables. In the
specification that allows for school-specific linear trends, the percentage explained ranges
from 17% (percentage female) to 46% (average age) to about 91% (mother’s education).
With the moving average controls, the percentages are higher at 35%, 51%, and 92%
respectively. This suggests there is still substantial variation left in these variables even
after including cohort fixed effects and detailed controls for school characteristics.25

Outcome Variables
IQ Scores
The IQ score data is taken from the Norwegian military records from 1980 to
2005. Before young men enter the service, their medical and psychological suitability is
assessed; this occurs for the great majority between their eighteenth and twentieth

25

The 10th percentile values of the peer variables are .41, 7.2, and 8.8 for the percentage female, the
average age, and the average mother’s education, while the 90th percentile values are .56, 7.4, and 10.9
respectively.

16

birthday.26 In Norway, military service is compulsory for every able young man; as a
result, we have military data for men only.27
The IQ measure is the mean score from three IQ tests -- arithmetic, word
similarities, and figures (see Sundet et al. [2004, 2005] and Thrane [1977] for details).
The arithmetic test is quite similar to the arithmetic test in the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale (WAIS) [Sundet et al. 2005; Cronbach 1964], the word test is similar
to the vocabulary test in WAIS, and the figures test is similar to the Raven Progressive
Matrix test [Cronbach 1964]. The IQ score is reported in stanine (Standard Nine) units, a
method of standardizing raw scores into a nine point standard scale that has a discrete
approximation to a normal distribution, a mean of 5, and a standard deviation of 2.28 We
have IQ scores on about 84% of the relevant population of men in Norway.
Teenage Childbearing
We construct our teenage childbearing variable by restricting the sample to
women aged at least 36 in 2006 and denoting a teen birth if they have a child that is aged
at least 16 in 2006 who was born before the woman was aged 20.29 Approximately 9.7%
of our sample of women had a child before age 20.
Educational Track
At the end of 9th grade (the end of compulsory education), an individual chooses
(conditional on grades) whether to enter the academic track, the vocational track, or drop
out of school. The academic track (or general track, also called gymnasium) is a three
26

We add a control for the year the test was taken in the IQ score specifications.
Norway has mandatory military service of between 12 and 15 months (fifteen in the Navy and twelve in
the Army and Air Force) for men between the ages of 18.5 (17 with parental consent) and 44 (55 in case of
war). However, the actual draft time varies between six months and a year, with the rest being made up by
short annual exercises.
28
The correlation between this IQ measure and the WAIS IQ has been found to be .73 (Sundet et al., 2004).
29
In order to know whether a woman had a teen birth we need to observe both the mother and child in the
administrative panel. The result is that the cohorts we use are born between 1963 and 1970.
27

17

year high school education preparing for college. Students who complete this track are
then eligible for college enrolment. In contrast, the vocational track consists of
vocational training and, although it generally takes 3 years, can require as little as one
year in school followed by an apprenticeship. Upon completion, the individual receives a
certificate of proficiency within their area of specialization. 30 Using OLS and controlling
for family background factors, there is an earnings premium of almost 20% to taking the
high school track rather than the vocational track
Labor Market Variables
Earnings are measured as total pension-qualifying earnings reported in the tax
registry in 2005. These are not topcoded and include labor earnings, taxable sick benefits,
unemployment benefits, parental leave payments, and pensions. We identify full time
workers (defined as 30+ hours per week) using the fact that our dataset identifies
individuals who are employed and working full time at one particular point in the year (in
the 2nd quarter in the years 86-95, and in the 4th quarter thereafter).31 About 71% of our
male sample are employed full time in 2005; the equivalent figure for women is 48%.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for our sample.

6. Results
A. Balancing Tests

30

Overall, 74% of girls follow the academic track, 20% the vocational track, and the remaining 6% drop
out after compulsory schooling. For men, the numbers are 45% academic, 48% vocational, and 7% drop
out.
31
An individual is labelled as employed if currently working with a firm, on temporary layoff, on up to two
weeks of sickness absence, or on maternity leave.

18

Before presenting our results, we first examine the validity of our identifying
assumptions. The basic notion is that, conditional on the controls, variation in peer
characteristics should be “as if random” and, hence, should not be correlated with
predetermined characteristics of children such as their family background variables. To
examine this issue, we regress mother’s education and other predetermined variables on
the peer characteristics using the specifications described earlier but excluding the
predetermined variables (i.e. all the individual control variables) from these regressions.
To the extent that the presence of these variables in the main specifications reduces bias,
these balancing tests provide a worst-case assessment of the situation. The estimates
reported are from IV models where the actual peer variables are instrumented by what
they would be if everyone started school on time. The estimates are in Appendix Table 1.
The first panel of Appendix Table 1 is the quasi fixed effects specification that
includes controls for the mean values of the peer variables for the school. The second
panel adds controls for the school-specific trends by adding the predicted value of the
peer variables given a linear school-specific trend. The third panel instead adds the 3-year
moving average of the peer characteristics as controls.
Note that in all 3 panels but particularly in panels 2 and 3, there is a tendency for
a strong negative coefficient on, say, average mother’s education of peers when the
dependent variable is mother’s education. This results from small sample bias and is
similar to the short panel bias that occurs in dynamic fixed effects models. To see why,
consider the 3rd panel where we control for the 3-year moving average of mother’s
education in the school. If conditional on this, your peer average maternal education is
high, your own maternal education will tend to be low (as both your maternal education

19

and that of your peers go into forming the moving average). The 4th panel attempts to
correct for this bias by forming the school means and the moving averages leaving out
observation i. For the most part, the large negative relationships disappear in the 4th
panel.
Unsurprisingly, the proportion of peers that are female is unrelated to any
predetermined variable in any specification (except a negative relationship with sex as a
result of small sample bias in the first 3 panels). For the other two peer variables, the
results show a clear pattern of improvement from panel 1 to panel 4. The quasi fixed
effects specification in panel 1 is clearly inadequate for studying average mother’s
education of peers. However, any positive relationship between this and a child’s own
characteristics disappear once moving averages are included as controls. Average age of
peers is unrelated to all variables except first-born status in the trends and moving
average specifications. We have no idea why. Overall, the conclusion is that all
specifications are likely to be valid when studying the effect of proportion female.
However, when studying the other two peer variables, we can have far more confidence
in the specifications with trends and moving averages.

B. Education Track
The first outcome we look at is the education track; Table 2 shows estimates
where the dependent variable is whether the student follows an academic high school
track after completing compulsory schooling, estimated by gender. When we look at the
coefficients for the individual level characteristics for both boys and girls, it is not
surprising that first-borns and students with higher maternal education are more likely to

20

follow this track.32 The OLS impact of school starting age is negative but the IV
estimates are positive and suggest that starting school a year later increases this
probability by about 1% for boys and .7% for girls.33
The only peer variable that appears to influence educational track choice is the
fraction of the class that is female, and this is only true among boys – more girls make it
less likely that any particular boy does the academic track. To get a sense of the
magnitude of these effects, going from 40% girls to 60% girls reduces the probability by
about .01 from a baseline of about .5. The other peer characteristics are all small and
statistically insignificant with the exception that maternal education has a statistically
significant positive effect in the quasi fixed effects specification. However, this result
disappears once we allow for time-varying school quality using either the trends or the
moving average. None of the other peer characteristics appears important for either sex.
Almost all estimates are insignificant and the peer effects are much smaller than the
analogous direct effects, despite the fact that the standard deviations of the individual
characteristics are much higher than those of the peer characteristics.

C. Completed Years of Education
For the remaining outcome variables, we report only the IV estimates for the peer
characteristics. Estimates for completed years of education are in Table 3. These results
reveal an interesting dichotomy. A higher proportion of girls has a negative effect on
completed education of boys. However, if anything, more girls have a positive effect on
32

See Black, Devereux, Salvanes (2005a, 2005b) for analysis of the effects of birth order and maternal
education in Norway.
33
The change in sign from OLS to IV results from the fact that, in the IV specification, we instrument child
age with what it would have been if the child had started school at the age specified by the administrative
rule. Late school starters appear to be negatively selected and this leads to large negative OLS age effects.

21

education of girls so it appears that each sex benefits from having more of their own
gender. The size of the effect for boys is about -.2 which implies that going from 40% to
60% girls would reduce average completed education of boys by about .04. The effects of
peer maternal education seem equally small for boys and girls at about .03 – the
coefficient is slightly larger and more significant for girls but the difference is quite
small.

D. Teenage Childbearing
Motherhood at young ages has been associated with many long-term economic
and health disadvantages such as lower education, less work experience and lower wages,
welfare dependence, lower birth weights, higher rates of infant mortality, and higher rates
of participation in crime (Ellwood, 1988; Jencks, 1989; Hoffman, and Furstenberg, 1993;
Kiernan, 1997). There is an ongoing debate as to the extent that these adverse effects of
teen childbearing are truly caused by having a teen birth rather than reflecting unobserved
family background differences. (See Hotz, McElroy, Sanders 2005 for an example).
However, as a policy matter, efforts to reduce the rate of teen childbearing are often
considered as a strategy to improve the life chances of young women.
Table 3 presents the results of 2SLS linear probability models of teenage
childbearing. The fraction female is negative and statistically significant in both
specifications. The effect size is about -.025 which implies that if a class went from 40%
female to 60% female, the resultant probability of a woman giving birth as a teen falls by
-.005. Given that the baseline probability is about .1, and this is a large change in class
composition, this seems to be a relatively modest sized effect.

22

We hypothesized that higher peer age may lead to more teen pregnancies.
However, we find very small and statistically insignificant coefficients in the two
specifications, suggesting that the effect of starting school later on teen pregnancy comes
primarily from absolute rather than relative age effects. There is also little evidence that
peer maternal education matters for teen childbearing.

E. IQ Test Scores
Table 3 has estimates where the dependent variable is IQ test scores for men at
around age 18. The dependent variable is measured in stanine units with a standard
deviation being approximately 2 stanines. Here, we find some evidence that having
classmates with higher maternal education has a positive effect. However, this effect is
only statistically significant in the trends specification. The maternal education effect of
about .03 suggests that even increasing average maternal education of peers by 1 year
would only increase IQ scores of a student by about 1.5% of a standard deviation. This is
surely a modest effect.

F. Labor Market Outcomes in 2005
Table 3 also has estimates from a 2SLS linear probability model of whether or not
the individual works full time in 2005 and 2SLS regression of their log earnings in 2005
on our measures of peer characteristics. Because of the fundamentally different labor
market experiences of men and women, we have omitted estimates that pool genders and
simply report results separately by sex. The only peer variable that matters is fraction
female. Once again we have the contrasting effects that more girls appear to increase full-

23

time participation for women but reduce it for men (although the male estimates are not
quite statistically significant). The finding is very similar for earnings with more girls
being beneficial to women but having an adverse, although statistically insignificant,
effect on men.

Results using sibling fixed effects
The sibling fixed effects estimates are presented in Table 4. Because this method
requires two children of the same sex per family, the sample sizes are much smaller than
before and the standard errors are correspondingly higher. As a result, there are very few
statistically significant peer effects. However, the same general pattern that was seen in
Table 3 is present here – a higher fraction of female peers generally improves outcomes
of girls and hurts outcomes of boys.

Recent Cohorts
We also have information on children who start school between 1982 and 1996
(Oslo from 1985) and who finish school lower secondary school between 1991 and
2006.34 Because these are more recent cohorts, we do not have labor market information
or even completed education for most of them, and so we report estimates for high school
track.
For more recent cohorts who started school between 1992 and 1996, we also have
information on 10th grade math scores. Data are collected by the Directorate for Primary
and Secondary Education. Scores are awarded on a scale from one to six, with higher

34

There is no information on lower secondary school attended for any person who finished lower
secondary school in 1990 so this cohort is excluded from all analysis in this paper.

24

scores indicating better performance. We focus on marks in math assessed throughout the
year (Math Score1) as well as performance in the final written examination at the end of
10th grade (Math Score2). The final exam mark is based on a five-hour test in math. All
pupils in the country do the same (subject-specific) test, and pupils are randomly
allocated to subjects such as math, English and Norwegian.35 While the grading for the
final exam is anonymous and done by external examiners, the assessment throughout the
year is done by teachers. We use these test scores to compare the results generated with
our datasets (pooled and then by gender, for comparability) to those for in-school scores
in the existing literature.36
The main estimates are in Table 5. As in the earlier cohorts, we find that a higher
fraction of women reduces the proportion who do the academic high school track and that
this effect is only significant for boys. The magnitude is very similar in these cohorts to
that for the earlier cohorts. The sibling fixed effects estimates in Table 7 also show the
negative effect of more females on academic track. Interestingly, our earlier findings
about the impact of girls also hold for cohorts in which the educational attainment of girls
had increased relative to that of boys.
On the other hand, while the magnitude and statistical significance of the
estimates varies by specification, both sets of estimates suggest that math scores are
higher when there is a higher fraction of girls. We find this result both for in-class
assessment (Score1) and for exam results (Score2). Given that the standard deviation of
math test scores is 1.1 (see Appendix Table 2), the coefficient values of between .1 and
.27 from the various specifications imply that a 10% increase in the proportion of girls
35

Because of the fact that the test taken (English, Norwegian, or Math) is randomized so students only take
one of these 3, we only have information on Math test scores for about one third of the sample.
36
Appendix Table 2 contains descriptive statistics for the sample of recent cohorts.

25

would lead to between .9% and 2.5% of a standard deviation increase in math test scores.
This result is both qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with the findings of Lavy
and Schlosser (2007) for Israel, Kang (2007) for South Korea, and Hoxby (2000) for the
United States. The findings for high school track and math test scores taken together
suggest the possibility that while having more girls in a grade increases test scores, it may
have other detrimental effects (particularly on boys).
In terms of the other peer variables, there is some evidence that having older
classmates reduced the probability that boys follow the high school track, but this is not
consistent across specifications. Similarly, there is a little evidence that higher maternal
education of peers leads to higher math test scores.
Table 6 reports sibling fixed effects estimates for the recent cohorts. We do not
split by gender because the standard errors become sufficiently high as to make the
estimates quite uninformative. Also, we do not report estimates for Math Score2 as there
are very few cases where we have scores for two people in the same family. The sibling
fixed effects estimates are less precisely estimated but the coefficients on proportion
female are quite similar to those in Table 5.

Non-Linear Effects
Our base specification allows for linear effects of the average characteristic over
all peers, excluding the individual him/herself. It also allows for parameter heterogeneity
by gender but not along other dimensions. However, in addition to the homogenous effect
linear-in-means model, we have also estimated more flexible specifications that enable us
to test for non-linear and heterogeneous effects.

26

To test for non-linear effects, we created 3 categories for each peer variable. For
proportion female, we categorized classes as being less than 40% female, between 40 and
60% female, or being more than 60% female. We created similar splits for the other two
peer variables.37 In all cases, there was no evidence of these types of non-linear effects.38
An alternative approach to non-linearities is to allow outcomes to depend on a
measure of the variability of peer characteristics in addition to the mean level. We have
implemented this by adding the standard deviation of mothers’ education in the grade and
the standard deviation of age in the grade as additional peer variables. As before, we
instrument these variables with what they would have been if everybody had started
school on time. The estimates are reported in Table 7. We find no effect of the standard
deviation of child age. However, while not all estimates are statistically significant, there
is a clear suggestion that a lower standard deviation of mothers’ education produces
better outcomes.39 The coefficient implies that a one standard deviation increase in the
standard deviation of mothers’ education leads to a fall in completed education of about
.02 of a year on average. This would seem to be a fairly small effect. Also, the
coefficients on average maternal education of peers are generally higher in Table 7 than
in Table 3 because the mean and standard deviation of maternal education are positively
correlated. The increases in the coefficients are small and remain consistent with a very
modest role of average peer socio-economic status.

37

These non-linearities allow for evidence of threshold, or “epidemic” effects (Crane 1991).
We note, however, that the standard errors become quite high in some of our sample splits so that
differences in coefficients would have to be fairly large for us to reject the linear model.
39
Note that we control for grade size and have also checked that the estimates are robust to adding
additional controls for the square root and the square of the number of students in the grade in the school.
Thus, our estimates are not contaminated by correlations between the standard deviation of maternal
education and the size of the grade.
38

27

To test for heterogeneity, we carried out separate regressions of the linear-inmeans peers model by different types of individuals. We found no evidence of
heterogeneity when we split the sample by low, medium, or high mother’s education.
Similarly splits by whether first born, whether started school late, whether had a birth
month that predicted being relatively old for the class, or whether was in a large school or
a small school all showed no evidence of heterogeneous effects. It is plausible that school
peer effects might be larger for teenagers who are only children as peer influence does
not compete with the influence of siblings. However, we also found no evidence for this
type of heterogeneity.
We also estimated some specifications that allowed for both non-linearity and
heterogeneous effects. For example, we allowed the effects of low, median, or high
mothers education to vary by whether the peers were male or female. Once again, there
was no evidence to reject the simple linear-in-means constant effects model.

7. Conclusions
Public policies are affected by, and often rely on, the fact that an individual’s
peers influence his/her behavior. Despite this, the evidence on the existence of peer
effects has been inconclusive. In this paper, we have investigated the importance of three
peer characteristics in lower secondary school on subsequent outcomes of students. We
have two main findings. The first is that average age of peers and their socio-economic
status (as proxied by mother’s education) have very little effect on long run outcomes.
The non-importance of average age of peers implies that relative age effects cannot

28

explain the finding of Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2008) that girls who start school
younger are more likely to have teen births.
The second main finding is that the proportion of girls appears to matter and in a
way that differs by gender – a higher proportion of girls is generally good for the longer
run outcomes of girls but bad for boys. This is despite the existing evidence that suggests
that a higher proportion of girls improves shorter run, in-school test scores for both boys
and girls. Importantly, because we are able to look at in-school test scores for a
subsample of our data, we are able to demonstrate that these test score gains are true in
our data as well; short term test score gains due to a higher fraction of girls are offset by
the longer run negative effects of a higher fraction of girls on boys. Our results suggest
that a higher proportion of girls reduces the probability teenage boys continue onto an
academic high school track and reduces completed years of schooling. It appears that, at
least for teenagers, peer sex composition has complicated effects.

29

References
Ammermueller, Andreas and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. (2009). “Peer Effects in European Primary
Schools: Evidence from PIRLS,” Journal of Labor Economics, 27, July, 315-348.
Bifulco,Robert, Jason Fletcher, and Stephen Ross. (2010). “The Effect of Classmate
Characteristics on Individual Outcomes: Evidence from the Add Health,” memo, Yale
University.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. (2005a). “Why the Apple Doesn’t
Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital.” American
Economic Review, 95(1), 437-49.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. (2005b). “The More the Merrier? The
Effects of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXX, 669-700.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux Paul and Kjell G. Salvanes,(2008). “Too Young to Leave the
Nest? The Effects of School Starting Age,” NBER Working Paper No. 13969.
Carrell, Scott E., Richard L. Fullerton, and James E. West. (2009). “Does Your Cohort Matter?
Measuring Peer Effects in College Achievement,” Journal of Labor Economics,
27(3)439-464.
Cascio, Elizabeth and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. (2007). “First in the Class? Age and the
Education Production Function,” NBER Working Paper No. 13663.
Coleman, James. et al. (1966). Equality of Educational Opportunity, Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Crane, Jonathan. (1991).“The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on
Dropping Out and Teenage Child Bearing.” American Journal of Sociology,, 96, 122659.
Cronbach, Lee J.(1964). Essentials of Psychological Testing, 2nd Edition, London, UK: Harper
and Row.
Duflo Esther, Pascaline Dupas and Michael Kremer. (2008). “Peer Effects and the Impact of
Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,”.
Elder, Todd E., and Darren H. Lubotsky.(2009). “Kindergarten Entrance Age and Children’s
Achievement: Impacts of State Policies, Family Background, and Peers,” Journal of
Human Resources, 44(3), 641-683.
Ellwood, D. (1988). Poor Support, New York, NY: Basic Books.

30

Epple, Dennis and Richard E. Romano. “Peer Effects in Education: A Survey of the Theory and
Evidence.” Handbook of Social Economics, Benhabib, Bisin, and Jackson, Editors.
Forthcoming.
Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab. (1992). “Measuring Peer Group
Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(5), 966-991.
Gould, Eric, Victor Lavy and Daniele Paserman. (2009). “Does Immigration Affect the Long
Term Educational Outcomes of Natives? Quasi-Experimental Evidence,” Economic
Journal, 119(540), 1243-1269.
Hægeland, T., O. Raaum og K.G. Salvanes. (2005). “Pupil achievement, school resources and
family background,” IZA dp 1459.
Hanushek, Eric, John Kain, Jacob Markman and Steven Rivkin. (2003). “Does Peer Ability
Affect Student Achievement?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18(5),, 527-544.
Hoffman, S., Foster, E., and Furstenberg jr., F. (1993). “Reevaluating the Costs of Teenage
Childbearing,” Demography, 30(1), 1-13.
Hotz, V. J., McElroy, S., and Sanders S. (2005). “Teenage Childbearing and its Life Cycle
Consequences: Exploiting a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Human Resources,40(3),
683-715.
Hoxby, Caroline. (2000). “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
Variation,” NBER Working Paper No. 7867.
Hoxby, Caroline and Gretchen Weingarth. (2006). “Taking Race out of the Equation: School
Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects,” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Jencks, C. (1989). “What Is the Underclass—and Is It Growing?” Focus, 12, 14-26.
Kang, Changhui. (2007). “Classroom Peer Effects and Academic Achievement: QuasiRandomization Evidence from South Korea,” Journal of Urban Economics, 61, 458-495.
Kiernan, K. (1997). “Becoming a Young Parent: A Longitudinal Study of Associated Factors,”
British Journal of Sociology, 48, 406-28.
Kramarz, Francis, Stephen Machin, and Amine Ouazad. (2009). “What Makes a Test Score?
The Respective Contributions of Pupils, Schools and Peers in Achievement in English
Primary Education,” CEE DP 102.
Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser. (2007). “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at
School,” NBER Working Paper No. 13292.

31

Lavy, Victor, Olmo Silva, and Felix Weinhardt. (2009). “The Good, the Bad and the Average:
Evidence on the Scale and Nature of Ability Peer Effects in Schools,” NBER Working
Paper No. 15600.
Lazear, Edward “Education Production. (2001).” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 777803.
Manski, Charles. (2000). “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, .
Møen, J., Salvanes K. and Sørensen E. (2004). ‘Documentation of the Linked EmpoyerEmployee Data Base at the Norwegian School of Economics’, Mimeo, The Norwegian
School of Economics and Business Administration.
Moffitt, Robert. (2001). “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions” in
Social Dynamics, Steven Durlauf and Peyton Young, Editors, Cambridge:MIT Press.
Mundlak, Yair. (1978). "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data," Econometrica,
46(1),69-85.
Sacerdote, Bruce. (2001). “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 681-704.
Sacerdote, Bruce. (2008). “Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big are
They, and How Much Do We Know Thus Far?” mimeo Darthmouth College.
Strøm, B. (2004). “Student Achievement and Birthday Effects”, memo, University of
Trondheim.
Sundet, Martin Jon, Dag G. Barlaug, and Tore M. Torjussen. (2004). "The End of the Flynn
Effect? A Study of Secular Trends in Mean Intelligence Test Scores of Norwegian
Conscripts During Half a Century," Intelligence , XXXII, 349-362.
Sundet, Jon Martin, Kristian Tambs, Jennifer R. Harris, Per Magnus, and Tore M. Torjussen.
(2005). “Resolving the Genetic and Environmental Sources of the Correlation Between
Height and Intelligence: A Study of Nearly 2600 Norwegian Male Twin Pairs,” Twin
Research and Human Genetics, VII, 1-5.
Thrane, Vidkunn Coucheron.1977). “Evneprøving av Utskrivingspliktige i Norge 1950-53,”
Arbeidsrapport nr. 26, Oslo:INAS.
Zimmerman, David J. (2003). “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(1), 9-23.

32

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Individual Characteristics
Girls
Educational Attainment
12.58
(2.59)
Mother’s Education
9.81
(2.46)
Mother’s Age at Birth
26.98
(5.91)
Family Size
3.11
(1.33)
Fraction Firstborn
.39
(.49)
Immigrant
.02
(.14)
Fraction Students Starting On Time
.947
(.224)
School Starting Age
7.26
(.31)
Expected School Starting Age
7.25
(.28)
Fraction doing Academic Track in High School
.74
(.44)
Fraction doing Vocational Track
.20
(.40)
Fraction Having a Child as a Teenager
.097
(.30)
IQ Test Score
School/Peer Characteristics
# of Students in Grade
Average Age
Average Female
Average Mother’s Education
N
Number of Schools

100
(51)
7.3
(.07)
.49
(.07)
9.82
(.90)
434,001
1,235

Boys
12.35
(2.49)
9.84
(2.48)
26.97
(5.90)
3.10
(1.32)
.39
(.49)
.02
(.13)
.936
(.244)
7.28
(.32)
7.25
(.28)
.45
(.50)
.47
(.50)

5.2
(1.8)
100
(51)
7.3
(.07)
.49
(.07)
9.82
(.90)
450,902
1,235

Standard deviations in parentheses.

33

Table 2: Effect of Peers on Educational Track
(Dummy=1 if Academic Track)
Men

Women

School Means

School Means
and Trends

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

-.051*
(.012)

-.062*
(.014)

-.054*
(.012)

-.068*
(.014)

-.053*
(.014)

Average Age#

-.006
(.015)

-.018
(.025)

-.005
(.015)

-.028
(.025)

Mother’s Education#

.016*
(.003)

.019*
(.003)

.003
(.003)

(.0004)

.051*
(.0004)

-.058*
(.002)

.011*
(.003)

Peer Characteristics
Fraction Female#

Individual Characteristics
.051*
Mother’s Education
School Starting Age#

School Means
and
Moving Average
IV
OLS

School Means

School Means
and Trends

School Means
and
Moving Average
IV
OLS

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

-.072*
(.018)

.006
(.012)

.010
(.014)

-.001
(.012)

.003
(.014)

-.004
(.014)

-.010
(.017)

-.021
(.020)

-.033
(.029)

.034*
(.014)

.008
(.024)

.028
(.015)

.007
(.024)

.047*
(.019)

.030
(.028)

.004
(.003)

.002
(.003)

.002
(.004)

.006*
(.003)

.006
(.003)

.003
(.003)

.002
(.003)

.003
(.003)

.0001
(.004)

.050*
(.0004)

.051*
(.0004)

.050*
(.0005)

.051*
(.0005)

.031*
(.0004)

.031*
(.0004)

.031*
(.0004)

.031*
(.0004)

.031*
(.0004)

.031*
(.0004)

-.058*
(.002)

.011*
(.003)

-.059*
(.002)

.011*
(.004)

-.049*
(.002)

.007*
(.003)

-.049*
(.002)

.007*
(.003)

-.049*
(.002)

.009*
(.003)

Number of Schools
N

1232
1232
1232
1232
1231
1231
1230
1230
1230
1230
1228
1228
450,897 450,897 450,897 450,897 393,362 393,362 433,997 433,997 433,997 433,997 379,096 379,096
All specifications include additional controls for family size, family size squared, an indicator if first born, mother’s age at birth, mother’s age at
birth squared, an indicator for immigrant status, school grade size, and indicators for cohort. IV specifications instrument variables denoted with a
# with what they would be if all students had started school in accordance with the school starting age laws in Norway at that time. Cohort
dummies are instrumented with year of birth dummies.
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
*: Statistically Significant at the 5% level.

34

Table 3: IV Effect of Peers on Various Outcomes
Education
Control for Trends
Fraction Female

Men
IQ Scores

FT

Log
(Earnings)

Education

Women
Teen Birth
FT

Log
(Earnings)

-.203*
(.064)

-.068
(.052)

-.022
(.013)

-.028
(.019)

.143*
(.073)

-.023*
(.011)

.034*
(.014)

.077*
(.021)

Mean Age

-.226*
(.112)

.006
(.094)

.018
(.023)

-.016
(.035)

-.038
(.126)

.020
(.019)

-.004
(.025)

.049
(.038)

Average Mother’s Education

.030
(.016)

.031*
(.012)

-.002
(.003)

-.002
(.005)

.039*
(.017)

.001
(.002)

-.005
(.003)

-.003
(.005)

N
Control for Moving Average
Fraction Female

450,561

415,123

450,897

416,746

433,769

345,682

433,997

396,239

-.182*
(.084)

-.056
(.066)

-.032
(.017)

-.034
(.025)

.029
(.090)

-.026*
(.013)

.043*
(.018)

.075*
(.028)

Mean Age

-.142
(.137)

.015
(.110)

.02
(.028)

-.008
(.042)

.033
(.147)

.0006
(.022)

-.015
(.029)

.036
(.045)

Average Mother’s Education

.032
(.020)

.027
(.015)

-.004
(.004)

-.008
(.006)

.028
(.021)

.003
(.003)

-.005
(.004)

.002
(.007)

N
393,079
365,545
393,362
363,618
378,906
319,162
379,096
346,191
All specifications include additional controls for whether first-born, school starting age, mother’s education, family size, family size squared,
mother’s age at birth, mother’s age at birth squared, an indicator for immigrant status, school grade size, and indicators for cohort. IV
specifications instrument all peer variables with what they would be if all students had started school in accordance with the school starting age
laws in Norway at that time. Cohort dummies are instrumented with year of birth dummies. School starting age is instrumented with expected
school starting age. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
*: Statistically Significant at the 5% level.

35

Table 4: IV Effect of Peers on Various Outcomes
Sibling Fixed Effects
HS
Track

Education

Men
IQ
Scores

Fraction Female

-.070*
(.021)

-.142
(.100)

-.130
(.075)

-.008
(.022)

-.019
(.033)

-.037
(.021)

.150
(.104)

-.029
(.018)

.030
(.025)

.048
(.039)

Mean Age

-.054
(.038)

-.248
(.184)

.165
(.139)

.014
(.041)

-.013
(.060)

-.053
(.039)

-.040
(.191)

-.029
(.033)

-.008
(.047)

.031
(.071)

Average Mother’s
Education

-.004
(.005)

.005
(.023)

-.030
(.017)

.007
(.005)

.002
(.008)

-.002
(.005)

.024
(.024)

-.009
(.004)

-.009
(.006)

.007
(.009)

FT

Log
(Earnings)

HS
Track

Education

Women
Teen
Birth

FT

Log
(Earnings)

Families
82,133
82,129
81,050
82,133
81,499
76,718
76,718
73,984
76,718
75,959
N
180,964
180,828
166,907 180,964
168,639
168,940
168,868
141,686 168,940
155,523
All specifications include additional controls for gender, whether first-born, school starting age, mother’s education, mother’s age at birth,
mother’s age at birth squared, an indicator for immigrant status, school grade size, and indicators for cohort. IV specifications instrument all peer
variables with what they would be if all students had started school in accordance with the school starting age laws in Norway at that time. Cohort
dummies are instrumented with year of birth dummies. School starting age is instrumented with expected school starting age. Standard errors are
clustered at the school level.
*: Statistically Significant at the 5% level.

36

Table 5: IV Effect of Peers on Various Outcomes
Recent Cohorts
All
Men
Math
Math
HS Track
Math
Math
Score1
Score2
Score 1
Score 2

HS
Track

Women
Math
Score1

Math
Score2

-.033*
(.008)

.019
(.042)

.136
(.081)

-.045*
(.012)

.007
(.055)

.098
(.101)

-.014
(.012)

.035
(.056)

.182
(.099)

Average Age

-.008
(.015)

-.099
(.079)

.111
(.132)

-.026
(.022)

-.144
(.101)

.017
(.174)

.011
(.021)

-.047
(.103)

.216
(.158)

Average Mother’s
Education

.003
(.002)

.015
(.009)

.037*
(.015)

.001
(.003)

.006
(.012)

.042*
(.019)

.005
(.002)

.024
(.012)

.034
(.020)

Number of Schools
1262
N
788340
Control for Moving Average
Fraction Female
-.044*
(.010)

1112
251786

1062
96261

1261
403595

1102
128632

1042
49374

1259
384745

1105
123154

1048
46887

.121*
(.055)

.210*
(.108)

-.040*
(.015)

.153*
(.072)

.159
(.134)

-.026
(.015)

.098
(.071)

.270*
(.132)

Average Age

-.017
(.018)

-.028
(.097)

.147
(.175)

-.062*
(.026)

.001
(.126)

.162
(.224)

.031
(.026)

-.042
(.125)

.151
(.208)

Average Mother’s
Education

.001
(.002)

.015
(.011)

.017
(.020)

-.001
(.003)

-.006
(.014)

-.001
(.024)

.003
(.003)

.037*
(.015)

.032
(.026)

Number of Schools
N

1262
685132

1109
199278

1028
76892

1261
350783

1099
101773

1004
39444

1257
334349

1101
97505

1010
37448

HS Track
Control for Trends
Fraction Female

All specifications include additional controls for whether first-born, school starting age, mother’s education, family size, family size squared,
mother’s age at birth, mother’s age at birth squared, an indicator for immigrant status, school grade size, and indicators for cohort. IV
specifications instrument all peer variables with what they would be if all students had started school in accordance with the school starting age
laws in Norway at that time. Cohort dummies are instrumented with year of birth dummies. School starting age is instrumented with expected
school starting age. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
*: Statistically Significant at the 5% level.

37

Table 6: IV Estimates of Effect of Peer Characteristics
on Educational Track and Test Scores
Sibling Fixed Effects/Recent Cohorts
High School Track
Math Score 1
Fraction Female

-.031*
(.011)

.098
(.056)

Average Age

.010
(.019)

-.287*
(.100)

Mother’s Education

-.002
(.002)

-.019
(.012)

Number of Families
N

204,632
464,083

100,620
137,567

All specifications include additional controls for gender, school starting age, mother’s education, mother’s age at
birth, mother’s age at birth squared, an indicator for immigrant status, school grade size, and indicators for
cohort. IV specifications instrument all variables with what they would be if all students had started school in
accordance with the school starting age laws in Norway at that time. Cohort dummies are instrumented with year
of birth dummies.
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
*: Statistically Significant at the 5% level.

38

Table 7: IV Effect of Peers on Various Outcomes--Non-Linear Effects
Men
Women
HS Track

Education

IQ Scores

FT

Log
(Earnings)

HS Track

Education

Teen
Birth

FT

Log
(Earnings)

-.068*
(.014)

-.200*
(.064)

-.073
(.053)

-.022
(.013)

-.029
(.019)

.004
(.014)

.146*
(.073)

-.023*
(.011)

.033*
(.014)

.077*
(.021)

Mean Age

-.031
(.025)

-.233*
(.115)

.043
(.095)

.023
(.024)

-.019
(.036)

.007
(.025)

-.049
(.130)

.019
(.020)

.0005
(.026)

.049
(.039)

Average Mother’s
Education

.008*
(.004)

.050*
(.018)

.051*
(.014)

.002
(.004)

.005
(.006)

.008*
(.004)

.059*
(.020)

-.002
(.003)

-.004
(.004)

.001
(.006)

Standard Deviation of
Mother’s Education

-.010*
(.005)

-.046*
(.022)

-.042*
(.018)

-.008
(.004)

-.017*
(.006)

-.014*
(.005)

-.046*
(.024)

.006
(.003)

-.001
(.005)

-.009
(.007)

Standard Deviation of
Age

-.009
(.062)

-.073
(.292)

.366
(.241)

.042
(.060)

-.013
(.091)

.005
(.062)

-.109
(.319)

.004
(.047)

.042
(.062)

-.001
(.095)

450,561

415,123

450,897

416,746

433,997

433,769

345,682

433,997

396,239

-.182*
(.084)

-.063
(.067)

-.033*
(.017)

-.036
(.025)

-.010
(.017)

.021
(.093)

-.025
(.013)

.038*
(.018)

.075*
(.029)

Control for Trends
Fraction Female

N
450,897
Control for Moving Average
Fraction Female
-.072*
(.018)
Mean Age

-.030
(.030)

-.146
(.141)

.051
(.113)

.036
(.028)

-.003
(.043)

.030
(.029)

.061
(.155)

-.005
(.024)

-.002
(.031)

.037
(.047)

Average Mother’s
Education

.005
(.005)

.053*
(.023)

.045*
(.018)

-.001
(.005)

-.004
(.007)

.008
(.005)

.057*
(.025)

.001
(.003)

-.003
(.005)

.011
(.007)

Standard Deviation of
Mother’s Education

-.006
(.006)

-.048*
(.028)

-.036
(.022)

-.008
(.006)

-.009
(.008)

-.018*
(.006)

-.064*
(.030)

.003
(.004)

-.004
(.006)

-.021*
(.009)

Standard Deviation of
Age

.040
(.080)

-.012
(.382)

.370
(.304)

.078
(.075)

.036
(.025)

.018
(.079)

.227
(.433)

-.052
(.059)

.113
(.082)

.022
(.125)

39

N

393,362
393,079
365,545
393,362
363,618
379,096
378,906
319,162
379,096
346,191
All specifications include additional controls for whether first-born, school starting age, mother’s education, family size, family size squared,
mother’s age at birth, mother’s age at birth squared, an indicator for immigrant status, school grade size, and indicators for cohort. IV
specifications instrument all peer variables with what they would be if all students had started school in accordance with the school starting age
laws in Norway at that time. Cohort dummies are instrumented with year of birth dummies. School starting age is instrumented with expected
school starting age. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
*: Statistically Significant at the 5% level.

40

Appendix Table 1: Effect of Peers on Predetermined Characteristics (IV Estimates)
Controls for School Means
Family
Whether
Expected Mother’s
Size
First-born
School
Age at
Starting
Birth
Age
-.003
.001
-.001
.099
(.027)
(.009)
(.006)
(.127)

Mother’s
Education

Father’s
Education

Fraction
Female

.031
(.037)

.069
(.050)

Average Age

.185*
(.070)

.272*
(.093)

-.096*
(.049)

.011
(.018)

-.078*
(.014)

Mother’s
Education

.189*
(.017)

.363*
(.024)

-.120*
(.018)

.005
(.003)

.001
(.001)

Mother’s
Education

Whether
Immigrant

Whether
Female

-.003
(.002)

-.072*
(.014)

-.067
(.233)

.007
(.004)

-.004
(.018)

.217*
(.045)

.001
(.001)

.001
(.002)

Whether
Immigrant

Whether
Female

-.003
(.002)

-.179*
(.016)

Controls for School Means and Trends
Father’s
Family
Whether
Expected Mother’s
Education
Size
First-born
School
Age at
Starting
Birth
Age
.022
-.003
-.002
-.002
.118
(.053)
(.025)
(.009)
(.006)
(.120)

Fraction
Female

-.017
(.051)

Average Age

.051
(.097)

.149
(.101)

-.054
(.045)

.035*
(.018)

-.190
(.016)

-.725
(.219)

.005
(.004)

.013
(.021)

Mother’s
Education

-.289*
(.020)

-.120*
(.016)

.015*
(.006)

-.004
(.002)

.002
(.002)

.092
(.029)

-.0015*
(.0006)

-.001
(.003)

41

Mother’s
Education

Controls for School Means and Moving Average
Father’s
Family
Whether
Expected Mother’s
Education
Size
First-born
School
Age at
Starting
Birth
Age
.039
-.019
.003
.001
.150
(.077)
(.036)
(.012)
(.012)
(.157)

Whether
Immigrant

Whether
Female

-.002
(.003)

-.601*
(.028)

Fraction
Female

-.012
(.093)

Average Age

-.074
(.153)

.090
(.132)

-.013
(.060)

.070*
(.021)

-.547*
(.028)

-1.153*
(.272)

.009
(.005)

-.038
(.034)

Mother’s
Education

-.702*
(.032)

-.323*
(.024)

.042*
(.009)

-.020*
(.003)

.001
(.003)

.266*
(.038)

-.003*
(.001)

-.001
(.005)

Whether
Immigrant

Whether
Female

-.002
(.003)

.007
(.018)

Mother’s
Education

Controls for School Means and Adjusted Moving Average
Father’s
Family
Whether
Expected Mother’s
Education
Size
First-born
School
Age at
Starting
Birth
Age
.037
-.011
.002
-.003
.129
(.070)
(.036)
(.012)
(.007)
(.155)

Fraction
Female

.006
(.061)

Average Age

.071
(.102)

.131
(.119)

-.014
(.060)

.069*
(.021)

-.003
(.017)

-.516
(.269)

.010
(.005)

-.018
(.021)

Mother’s
Education

-.077*
(.021)

-.019
(.020)

-.006
(.009)

-.0002
(.003)

.001
(.002)

.065
(.037)

-.0003
(.001)

-.001
(.003)

Each column reports the estimates from a separate regression. All specifications include additional controls for indicators for cohort. IV
specifications instrument all peer variables with what they would be if all students had started school in accordance with the school starting age
laws in Norway at that time. Cohort dummies are instrumented with year of birth dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
*: Statistically Significant at the 5% level.

42

Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics
Recent Cohorts
Individual Characteristics
Girls
Mother’s Education
11.58
(2.63)
Mother's Age at Birth
27.00
(5.04)
Family Size
2.72
(1.08)
Fraction Firstborn
.44
(.50)
Immigrant
.04
(.19)
Fraction Students Starting On Time
.975
(.156)
School Starting Age
7.25
(.28)
Expected School Starting Age
7.25
(.28)
Fraction doing Academic Track in High School
.70
(.45)
Fraction doing Vocational Track
.29
(.45)
Math Score 1
3.53
(1.12)
Math Score 2
3.24
(1.10)
School/Peer Characteristics
# of Students in Grade
Average Age
Average Female
Average Mother's Education
N*
Number of Schools

80
(40)
7.3
(.07)
.49
(.08)
11.60
(.82)
384,745
1,259

Boys
11.61
(2.63)
27.00
(5.04)
2.73
(1.08)
.44
(.50)
.03
(.18)
.975
(.155)
7.26
(.30)
7.25
(.28)
.46
(.50)
.52
(.50)
3.40
(1.15)
3.19
(1.13)

79
(40)
7.3
(.07)
.49
(.08)
11.60
(.82)
403,599
1,261

* For girls, there are 123,154 observations on Math Score 1 and 46,887 observations on Math Score 2. For boys,
there are 128,632 observations on Math Score 1 and 49,374 observations on Math Score. Standard deviations in
parentheses.

43

