NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RISK CONTENT OF EXPORTS:
A PORTFOLIO VIEW OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Julian di Giovanni
Andrei A. Levchenko
Working Paper 16005
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16005

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

We would like to thank Michael Alexeev, Christian Broda, Thomas Chaney, Shawn Cole, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Jean Imbs, Ayhan Kose, Akito Matsumoto, Rodney Ramcharan, Jaume
Ventura, seminar participants at various institutions, and especially Romain Rancière for helpful suggestions.
Piyush Chandra provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and should not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board,
its management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Julian di Giovanni and Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Risk Content of Exports: A Portfolio View of International Trade
Julian di Giovanni and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 16005
May 2010
JEL No. F15,F40
ABSTRACT
It has been suggested that countries which export in especially risky sectors will experience higher
output volatility. This paper develops a measure of the riskiness of a country's pattern of export specialization,
and illustrates its features across countries and over time. The exercise reveals large cross-country
differences in the risk content of exports. This measure is strongly correlated with terms-of-trade and
output volatility, but does not exhibit a close relationship to the level of income, overall trade openness,
or other country characteristics. We then propose an explanation for what determines the risk content
of exports, based on the theoretical literature exemplified by Turnovsky (1974). Countries with comparative
advantage in the safe sectors or strong enough comparative advantage in the risky sectors will specialize,
whereas countries whose comparative advantage in the risky sectors is not too strong will diversify
their export structure to insure against export income risk. We use both non-parametric and parametric
techniques to demonstrate that these theoretical predictions are strongly supported by the data.

Julian di Giovanni
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
jdigiovanni@imf.org
Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

1

Introduction

As world international trade experienced dramatic growth over the past few decades, the benefits
and costs of increased integration remain a hotly debated topic. In particular, the relationship
between trade openness and volatility has received a great deal of attention.1 One channel for
this relationship is through the pattern of specialization: countries that come to specialize in
particularly risky sectors after trade opening may experience increased macroeconomic volatility
(OECD 2006, Caballero and Cowan 2007). This mechanism is also related to the finding that
terms-of-trade volatility is important in explaining cross-country variation in output volatility (e.g.,
Mendoza 1995). Indeed, differences in terms-of-trade volatility across countries must be driven
largely by patterns of export specialization.
However, there is currently no systematic empirical evidence on how countries differ in the
riskiness of their export composition. The main goal of this paper is to develop and analyze a
measure of the riskiness of a country’s export structure, which we call the risk content of exports,
using a large industry-level dataset of manufacturing and non-manufacturing production and trade.
Examining the patterns of the risk content of exports yields some striking conclusions. First,
differences between countries are large quantitatively. Those in the top five percent of the distribution exhibit an average standard deviation of the export sector some 7.5 times larger than those
in the bottom five percent. The most risky countries in our sample are typically middle-income
countries whose exports are highly concentrated in volatile industries such as Mining and Metals.
Advanced countries are in the middle and bottom half of the riskiness distribution. Their exports
are typically in medium-risk sectors and fairly diversified. However, diversification is not the only
way to achieve a low risk content of exports. Among the countries with the safest export structures
are actually some of the poorest and least diversified countries in our sample. Their risk content
of exports is low because they specialize in the safest sectors. Thus, differences in riskiness across
sectors, in addition to simple diversification, play a big role in shaping the risk content of exports.
Second, the risk content of exports is robustly related to the variance of terms-of-trade, total
exports, and GDP growth. As a preview of the results, Figure 1 shows the scatterplot of terms-oftrade volatility against our measure of the risk content of exports. Notably, all of the variation in
the risk content measure comes from differences in export patterns, as it does not use any country1

A number of cross-country empirical studies analyze the relationship between trade openness and volatility.
Easterly, Islam and Stiglitz (2001) and Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003) find that openness increases the volatility
of GDP growth. Kose et al. (2003) and Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2006) also find that greater trade openness
increases the volatility of consumption growth, suggesting that the increase in output volatility due to trade is not
fully insured. Moreover, Rodrik (1998) provides evidence that higher income and consumption volatility is strongly
associated with exposure to external risk, proxied by the interaction of overall trade openness and terms of trade
volatility. Recent work by Bejan (2004) and Cavallo (2005) finds that openness decreases output volatility.

1

specific information on volatility. Nonetheless, there is a close positive relationship between the two
variables, suggesting that export specialization does exert an influence on macroeconomic volatility.
Having described the features of risk content of exports and its relationship to macroeconomic
volatility, the paper then studies what in turn explains it. Surprisingly, the variation in the risk
content of exports is not highly correlated with traditional country-level variables such as income,
trade openness, or financial integration. Figure 2 displays the scatterplot of the risk content of
exports against per capita income. There is virtually no correlation between these two variables.
What, then, determines risk content of exports? In order to guide the empirical exercise, we
appeal to a well-established theoretical literature on trade patterns under uncertainty, going back to
Turnovsky (1974) and Helpman and Razin (1978). We present a simple model to illustrate its key
insight: when sectors differ in volatility, export patterns are conditioned not only by comparative
advantage but also insurance motives. A country may be induced to diversify exports in order
to insure against adverse shocks to any one industry. We show that the amount of diversification
exhibits a U-shape with respect to the strength of comparative advantage in the risky sector. A
country with a comparative advantage in the safe sector will specialize fully. So will the country
whose comparative advantage in the risky sector is so strong that it ignores insurance considerations
in favor of higher return in the risky sector. At intermediate values of strength of comparative
advantage, however, the country will find it optimal to diversify exports.2
In order to show that the data support the portfolio view of export patterns, we must find
an empirical proxy for the notion of strength of comparative advantage in risky industries. Since
comparative advantage is intrinsically difficult to measure directly, our approach borrows from
Balassa’s (1965) index of revealed comparative advantage. We construct a measure of “risk-weighted
comparative advantage” based on the shares of world exports that a country captures in each sector.
That is, a country is assumed to have a strong comparative advantage in a given sector if it has
a relatively large share of world exports in that sector. We then weight this proxy for strength of
comparative advantage by industry-specific volatility to arrive at our main index.
We test for the presence of the U-shape between diversification and comparative advantage in
risky sectors using both non-parametric and semi-parametric techniques. In the first exercise, we
use locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (Lowess) to estimate this relationship. The advantage
2

Note that one of the central points of Helpman and Razin (1978) is that in the presence of international risk
sharing, volatility differences across sectors become irrelevant, as countries insure through asset trade and not through
production decisions. Empirical evidence brought to bear since then, however, shows that international output
risk sharing is quite limited, especially in non-advanced countries. For various approaches that have reached this
conclusion, see, among others, Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992), Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen and Yosha (2003), and
Kaminsky, Reinhart and Végh (2005). In our own data, risk content of exports is virtually uncorrelated with available
measures of financial integration. Thus, theoretical implications of uncertainty for trade patterns without asset trade
are still well worth considering, especially when, as we show below, they are strongly supported by the data.

2

of this non-parametric procedure is that it imposes very little structure on the data, and is locally
robust: observations far away in the sample have no influence on the estimated local relationship.
Its limitation is that it does not allow us to control for other possible determinants of diversification.
In the second exercise, we turn to a semi-parametric approach, which controls for a multitude of
other covariates of specialization parametrically, while still retaining a fully flexible form of the
relationship between the two variables of interest. In both non-parametric and semi-parametric
exercises, we present the full set of results using both a cross-sectional sample and a panel of 5-year
averages with fixed effects. We show that the U-shape is present and remarkably robust under both
estimation techniques, and across various subsamples of industries and time periods. The empirical
results thus confirm the main implications of the portfolio view of international trade.
To summarize, the paper’s contribution is twofold. First, we develop a measure of export
riskiness that can be an important building block for analyzing the relationship between trade
openness and volatility. Second, we propose an explanation for the observed variation in this
measure across countries, and provide evidence in support of this explanation.
We use data on industry-level value added and employment for the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors to construct the covariance matrix. Sector-level manufacturing value added
and employment data are taken from United Nations Industrial Development Organization (2005).
Value added data for the Agriculture and Mining and Quarrying sectors come from the United
Nations Statistical Yearbook (2003). We combine these with employment data in the two sectors
from International Labor Organization (2003). The resulting dataset is a three-dimensional unbalanced panel of 69 countries and 30 sectors (28 manufacturing, plus Agriculture and Mining and
Quarrying), for the period 1970–99. Trade data over the same time span come from the World
Trade Database (Feenstra et al. 2005), which contains information on more than 130 countries.
In order to assess whether countries differ in export structure risk, we must first derive an
empirical measure of volatility across industries in our data. We use the production data to estimate
a variance-covariance matrix for our set of sectors using a methodology similar to Koren and
Tenreyro (2007). The procedure extracts the industry-level time series that can be thought of as
a global shock to each sector, from which a full variance-covariance matrix can be calculated. The
resulting matrix is country- and time-invariant, and we interpret it as representing the “inherent”
volatility and comovement properties of sectors. We then define the risk content of exports as
simply the variance of the country’s export pattern. Using the estimated covariance matrix and a
large panel of industry-level exports data, we calculate this measure for a wide sample of countries
and over time. Note that by construction, differences in the risk content of exports across countries
arise purely from export patterns. A country’s export structure is more risky when its exports are

3

highly undiversified, or when it exports in riskier sectors.
This paper is related primarily to two strands of the literature. The first studies determinants
of macroeconomic volatility using industry-level data. Most closely related are the papers by Imbs
and Wacziarg (2003) on specialization, and by Koren and Tenreyro (2007) on the decomposition of
output volatility into various subcomponents. Our work uses trade data in addition to production
in order to focus on the relationship between trade patterns and volatility, the link often implicit
but not examined directly in the above studies. Furthermore, we provide evidence on a particular
theoretical explanation for cross-country differences in the risk content of exports. A complementary
paper (di Giovanni and Levchenko 2009) studies the question of how trade openness changes the
volatility of output itself, something that we hold constant here to examine specialization differences
instead.
The second strand is the literature on trade patterns under uncertainty. In addition to Turnovsky
(1974) and Helpman and Razin (1978), relevant theoretical contributions also include Grossman
and Razin (1985) and Helpman (1988). However, so far there has been very little empirical evidence
to complement theory. Exceptions include Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2003) and Koren (2003). These
examine the effect of international risk sharing on production specialization and trade volumes, respectively. In this paper we take a step back from the focus on the effects of financial liberalization,
and examine instead the key predictions of theory regarding trade patterns.3
The paper is organized as follows. The analytical framework is presented in Section 2. Section
3 summarizes the data. Section 4 describes the construction of the risk content of exports and its
components. Section 5 presents empirical evidence supporting the portfolio view of export patterns,
and Section 6 concludes.

2

Analytical Framework

This section provides a theoretical illustration of what determines a country’s export pattern in
safe and risky sectors. The insights behind the determinants of trade patterns under uncertainty
have been well understood since at least Turnovsky (1974) and Helpman and Razin (1978) (see
also Grossman and Razin 1985, Helpman 1988, and more recently Koren 2003). Here we confine ourselves to a simple version of the Turnovsky model, in order to illustrate most clearly the
relationships involved and guide the empirical exercise.
Consider a Ricardian economy with one factor, L, three intermediate tradeable goods, and one
3

Our paper complements recent work by Cuñat and Melitz (2006). These authors model how comparative advantage in risky and safe sectors is generated by differences in countries’ labor market rigidities. In this paper, we
take the underlying determinants of comparative advantage as given and provide a systematic empirical test of the
predictions of theory of trade under uncertainty regarding trade patterns.

4

non-tradeable final consumption good C. There are two safe intermediates M and S, and a risky
one, R. Production of all three intermediates is linear in L, such that one unit of labor produces
one unit of good M or S. The output of good R is stochastic: one unit of L produces θ units of
good R, where θ is a random variable with mean θ̄ and variance σθ2 . The timing of the economy
is as follows: first, agents make production decisions in the tradeable intermediates sectors. Then,
uncertainty about the stochastic productivity in the R-sector is resolved, and intermediate and
final good production takes place. Finally, agents trade and consume. For expositional simplicity,
we assume that the country is endowed with one unit of L.
The country is small and can trade costlessly with the rest of the world at exogenously given
prices of the three goods.4 Since R is the risky good, we assume that its world price, pR , is
stochastic, with mean p̄R and variance σp2 . Note that the good R is stochastic in both productivity
and price. This is the conceptual equivalent to our empirical analysis, which cannot distinguish
between price and quantity volatility. We normalize the price of good M to one, pM ≡ 1, and
assume that the country has a comparative advantage in goods S and R vis-à-vis good M : pS > 1
and pR θ ≡ E(pR θ) > 1. This ensures that the country always imports good M , and exports S, R,
or both.5
The non-tradeable final good production uses the three intermediate goods with constant returns
to scale: C = C(cR , cS , cM ).6 The price of the final consumption good, P , is the cost function
associated with producing one unit of C. We assume that agents’ utility is logarithmic in C. After
uncertainty has been realized, agents maximize utility in consumption subject to the standard
budget constraint given income I. Because agents simply spend their entire income on C, the
4

Alternatively, we could adopt a two-country model, and solve for prices from goods market clearing. In order to
do so, we would first need to specify the correlation properties of production across countries in each sector. Because
of this need to specify the exact cross-country correlation structure of shocks, a multi-country equilibrium model is
in fact no more general than the small-country setup considered here. Doing so would also add analytical complexity
without changing the basic insights we wish to illustrate. Thus we stick to the original Turnovsky setup.
5
Note that none of the results will change if there is a large number of M goods, or if the production of good M
is stochastic, as long as the country has an average comparative advantage in the good S.
6
For the purposes of deriving the results, we need not specify the precise functional form of this production
function, due to the fact that under the small country assumption we don’t have to solve for prices, which are given
exogenously. To be concrete, one can think of C(cR , cS , cM ) as a CES aggregator, for instance.

5

resulting indirect utility function is:7
V (I, P ) = ln(I) − ln(P ).
Before uncertainty is realized, agents must decide in which sectors to produce. The assumptions
put on world prices, namely pS > 1, imply that the economy will never produce good M . The
strength of comparative advantage between the safe and risky sectors, pR θ − pS , as well as the
2 , will determine the pattern of specialization in R and
volatility of the risky sector, Var(pR θ) ≡ σR

S.8 In particular, let LR be the share of the labor force employed in the risky sector. The economy
will solve the following utility maximization problem:
max E{ln(I) − ln(P )}
LR

(1)

s.t.
I ≤ pR θLR + pS (1 − LR ).

It is immediate that when written as a planning problem, the specialization decision is identical
to the textbook portfolio choice problem with one risky and one safe asset. As Appendix A
demonstrates, the equilibrium allocation that solves this maximization problem is equivalent to
a decentralized competitive general equilibrium outcome with many identical consumers-owners of
firms and entrepreneurs, in which firms make production decisions to maximize net shareholder
value (see also Helpman and Razin 1978, chs. 5–6).
This is an optimization problem with one decision variable LR , which leads to the following
familiar first-order condition:
E {VI (pR θLR + pS (1 − LR )) (pR θ − pS )} = 0,

(2)

where VI denotes the derivative of V (I, P ) with respect to I. As a preliminary point, in the absence
of uncertainty — when pR θ always takes on a given value p̃R θ̃ — there is complete specialization
7
The logarithmic utility is not necessary for the results, but adds some analytical tractability. When the volatility
in good R comes exclusively from uncertainty in θ (that is, price pR is constant), all of the results in this Section
go through under a wide class of utility functions. With price volatility, there is one extra complication, because
both arguments in the indirect utility V (I, P ) are stochastic. For a general functional form, this can give rise to the
well-known hedging demands: there may be an incentive for the country to specialize in the risky sector, because
it provides some amount of insurance against fluctuations in the overall price level: in states when the world price
realization is high, the price of the optimal consumption basket will be high, but so will the revenue from the risky
sector. A convenient property of log utility is that it removes the hedging demands from the portfolio problem, and
thus lets us proceed treating volatility in θ and pR symmetrically. For a general utility function, hedging demands
become weaker as the share of the risky industry in the overall domestic consumption basket decreases. All the
results presented in this Section then still go through under a more general utility function and with price volatility
as long as the effect of the fluctuations in the stochastic export price on the domestic consumption price level is not
too strong (for more on this see Turnovsky 1974, and Helpman and Razin 1978, ch. 4).
8
We can use the Taylor approximation to show that Var(pR θ) ≈ p̄2R Var(θ) + θ̄2 Var(pR ) + 2pR θCov(pR , θ). We
assume throughout that Cov(pR , θ) is such that Var(pR θ) is strictly positive.

6

as in any standard Ricardian model:
p̃R θ̃ > pS =⇒ LR = 1
p̃R θ̃ < pS =⇒ LR = 0.
When pR θ is stochastic, a Taylor approximation for V 0 around pR θ yields the following familiar
solution to the optimal portfolio problem:
LR =

pR θ − pS
,
2λ
σR

(3)

where λ is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion, λ = −VII /VI .
There are several cases to consider. First, if the country has an average comparative advantage
in the safe sector, pR θ < pS , it will specialize completely in the S-sector. If it has an average
comparative advantage in the risky sector, pR θ > pS , it will optimally choose specialization, LR , to
trade off the higher return in the R-sector against the insurance provided by the S-sector. If the
comparative advantage (pR θ − pS ) is not too strong, it will reach an interior solution, 0 < LR < 1.




Finally, for a given pS there exists a threshold pR θ H , such that for all pR θ > pR θ H the country
specializes fully in good R (LR = 1), in spite of the fact that it is more risky. That is, if the
comparative advantage in the risky sector is strong enough, the country will produce only in the
risky sector, ignoring insurance considerations.9
To summarize, LR = 0 when the country’s comparative advantage in the risky sector in nonexistent, and LR = 1 when it is sufficiently strong. How does the optimal structure of production LR
depend on comparative advantage when LR is interior? Using equation (3) and the functional form


2 constant,
R
> 0: holding σR
for λ = 1/ pR θLR + pS (1 − LR ) , it is easy to check that d p dLθ−p
( R S)
stronger comparative advantage in the risky sector raises the share of production allocated to that
sector.10
Thus, the most important result for the purposes of this paper is that the economy will specialize
if its comparative advantage is in the safe sector, or if its comparative advantage in the risky sector
9

The easiest example is one in which the support of pR θ has a finite and positive minimum value, [pR θ]min , and
even at that worst realization of pR θ, the country still has a comparative advantage in the risky sector, [pR θ]min > pS .
10
This seems like a very sensible result, and while it holds for a wide range of functional forms, it may not hold for
all concave utility functions. The reason is that as the mean return to the risky asset becomes higher, there are both
income and substitution effects. The latter implies a shift towards the risky asset, as its relative price has decreased.
But the agent now has a higher expected income achievable at any given level of risk. In some cases, the agent may
choose to use the increased income to purchase additional insurance, and an increase in the return to the risky asset
may actually lower its portfolio share. It turns out that LR increases in the strength of comparative advantage in
the risky sector as long as the derivative of the coefficient of absolute risk aversion with respect to wealth is less
than some positive threshold. That is, what matters is not how risk averse the agents are per se, but how fast that
risk aversion increases in wealth. For instance, the result will always obtain if the utility function exhibits Constant
Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA), no matter how high the risk aversion. By contrast, it may fail to hold only when
absolute risk aversion increases sufficiently steeply in wealth. Proof is available from the authors upon request.

7

is sufficiently strong. In the intermediate cases, the country will diversify its exports between the
risky and safe sectors. Furthermore, its allocation to the risky sector increases monotonically in
the strength of its comparative advantage. This latter result implies that export diversification
exhibits a U-shape with respect to comparative advantage: the country is most diversified for
some intermediate value of comparative advantage in the risky sector, and it begins specializing
progressively more in the safe (risky) sector as it becomes better at producing the safe (risky) good.
This result is illustrated graphically in Figure 3. On the horizontal axis is the strength of
comparative advantage in the risky sector. On the vertical axis, the top panel shows the optimal
factor allocation to the risky sector, LR , while the bottom panel shows the Herfindahl index of
export shares, which is our theoretical and empirical measure of export diversification.
Before turning to the data, it is worth making an additional remark. One of the central points
of Helpman and Razin (1978) is that if countries are allowed to trade not only goods but also
assets, there is no incentive to insure through changing the production structure, and therefore
riskiness of industries is irrelevant for the export pattern (see also Saint-Paul 1992). The case of
no international risk sharing is still well worth considering, however. Available empirical evidence
shows that there is little or no risk sharing across countries, especially non-advanced ones (Backus
et al. 1992, Kalemli-Ozcan et al. 2003, Kaminsky et al. 2005). Thus, the no asset trade assumption
appears to be more relevant empirically, at least when it comes to asset trade for the purposes of
insurance. Furthermore, the model with asset trade delivers empirical predictions clearly distinct
from ours, and we use our data to determine which set of assumptions is supported. The semiparametric estimation exercises below control for differences in levels of financial integration across
countries, leaving the results unchanged.11

3

Data

In order to perform the analysis, we require industry-level panel data on both production and trade.
For the manufacturing sector, industry-level value added and employment come from the 2005
UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database, which reports data according to the 3-digit ISIC Revision
2 classification for the period 1963–2002 in the best cases. There are 28 manufacturing sectors in
total, plus the information on total manufacturing. We dropped observations that did not conform
to the standard 3-digit ISIC classification, or took on implausible values, such as a growth rate of
more than 100 percent year to year. We also corrected inconsistencies between the UNIDO data
11

The Turnovsky-Helpman-Razin framework predicts that the U-shape will be less pronounced in more financially
integrated countries compared to the less financially integrated ones. Splitting the sample of countries according to
the quartiles of financial integration, we found no evidence that the U-shape is different in the subsamples. This
further confirms that differences in financial integration do not drive our results.

8

reported in U.S. dollars and domestic currency. The resulting dataset is an unbalanced panel of 59
countries, but we ensure that for each country-year there is a minimum of ten sectors, and that for
each country, there are at least ten years of data.
The difficulty we face is that much of world trade is in non-manufacturing industries. Thus,
we supplement the UNIDO manufacturing data with information on value added in Agriculture,
Hunting, Forestry and Fishing (“Agriculture” for short), and Mining and Quarrying (“Mining”)
sectors from the United Nations Statistical Yearbook (2003). Unfortunately, a finer disaggregation
of output data in these sectors is not available. Furthermore, this data source also does not contain
information on employment in these sectors for a large enough set of countries and years. Thus, we
obtain employment data from International Labor Organization (2003), and combine them with
the United Nations Statistical Yearbook (2003) value added data. We inspect each data source for
jumps due to reclassifications, and remove countries for which less than eight years of observations
are available. The intersection of value added and employment observations for these two nonmanufacturing sectors contains data for 39 countries for at most 31 years. There is not a perfect
overlap with the manufacturing data: for eight countries non-manufacturing data are available,
but manufacturing data are not. The non-manufacturing sample contains a number of important
agricultural and natural resource exporters, such as Australia, Canada, Brazil, Chile, Indonesia,
Mexico, Norway, United States, and Venezuela.
We use data reported in current U.S. dollars, and convert them into constant international
dollars using the Penn World Tables (Heston, Summers and Aten 2002).12 Appendix Table A1
reports the list of countries in our sample, along with some basic descriptive statistics on the
average growth rate of value added per worker and its standard deviation. We break the summary
statistics separately for Agriculture, Mining, and total Manufacturing, in order to compare growth
rates coming from different datasets, and show for which countries and sectors data are available.
There is some dispersion in the average growth rates of the manufacturing output per worker,
with Honduras and Tanzania at the bottom with average growth rates of −5.5 percent and −3.9
percent per year over this period, and Malta at the top with 10 percent per year. The rest of the
top 5 fastest growing countries in manufacturing productivity are Ireland, Korea, Indonesia and
Singapore. There are also differences in volatility, with France and United States having the least
volatile manufacturing sector, and Senegal and Philippines the most. The range of growth rates in
Agriculture is somewhat narrower, ranging from −2.5 percent for Mexico to 8 percent for Estonia
and 6.6 percent in Barbados. Mining growth rates are quite a bit more volatile, with an average
growth rate of 20 percent in Portugal being the highest. Appendix Table A2 lists the sectors used
12
Using the variable name conventions from the Penn World Tables, this deflation procedure involves multiplying
the nominal U.S. dollar value by (100/P ) ∗ (RGDP L/CGDP ) to obtain the constant international dollar value.

9

in the analysis, along with the similar descriptive statistics. Growth rates of value added per worker
across sectors are remarkably similar, ranging from roughly 2 percent per year for Food Products
and Agriculture to 6.5 percent for Petroleum Refineries and 7.2 percent for Mining. Individual
sectors have much higher volatility than manufacturing as a whole, and differ among themselves as
well. The least volatile sector, Agriculture, has an average standard deviation of 11.4 percent. The
most volatile sector is Mining and Quarrying, with a standard deviation of 35.7 percent.
Data on international trade flows come from the World Trade Database (Feenstra et al. 2005).
This database contains bilateral trade flows between some 150 countries, accounting for 98 percent
of world trade. Trade flows are reported using the 4-digit SITC Revision 2 classification. We
aggregate bilateral flows across countries to obtain total exports in each country and industry. We
then convert the trade flows from SITC to ISIC classification and merge them with production
data. The final sample contains trade flows of 130 countries for the period 1970–99, giving three
full decades.

4

The Risk Content of Exports

The main purpose of this paper is to document in a systematic way whether some countries specialize in more or less risky sectors, or perhaps in sectors that exhibit especially high or low covariances.
This section describes in detail the steps of constructing the measure of the risk content of exports,
as well as its basic features across countries and over time.

4.1

Construction of the Sector Variance-Covariance Matrix

Using annual data on industry-level value added per worker growth over 1970–99 for C countries
and I sectors, we construct a cross-sectoral variance-covariance matrix using a method similar to
Koren and Tenreyro (2007). Let yict be the value added per worker growth in country c, sector i,
between time t − 1 and time t.13 First, in order to control for long-run differences in value added
growth across countries in each sector, we demean yict using the mean growth rate for each country
13
We use the volatility of value added per worker, and not the volatility of total value added, for two reasons. First,
it is the empirical equivalent of the stochastic output per worker pR θ in the model. That is, we must measure the
volatility of a unit of investment in the sector. And second, it is the more standard approach in the literature (see,
e.g., Koren and Tenreyro 2007). Alternatively, we computed the covariance matrix using the volatility of total value
added growth in each sector. The resulting matrix is very similar to the one used in the paper, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.76 between the sector-level volatilities obtained using total value added and value added per worker.
None of the results that follow change under this alternative strategy.

10

and sector over the entire time period:14
yeict

T
1X
= yict −
yict .
T
t=1

Second, for each year and each sector, we compute the cross-country average of value added per
worker growth:
C
1X
yeict .
Yit =
C
c=1

The outcome, Yit , is a time series of the average growth for each sector, and can be thought of
as a global sector-specific shock. Using these time series, we calculate the sample variance for each
sector, and the sample covariance for each combination of sectors along the time dimension. The
sample variance of sector i is:15
T

σi2

1 X
=
(Yit − Yi )2 ,
T −1
t=1

and the covariance of any two sectors i and j is:
T

1 X
σij =
(Yit − Yi )(Yjt − Yj ).
T −1
t=1

This procedure results in a 30 × 30 variance-covariance matrix of sectors, which we call

Σ.

By

virtue of its construction, we think of it as a matrix of inherent variances and covariances of sectors,
and it is clearly time- and country-invariant. The panel data used to compute Σ is described above,
and comprises of 59 countries for the manufacturing sector and 39 countries for Agriculture and
Mining. We report the results in Table 1. Since presenting the full 30 × 30 covariance matrix is
cumbersome, the table reports its diagonal: the variance of each sector, σi2 . The Mining sector
is the most risky while Wearing Apparel, Machinery, and Food Products sectors are among the
least risky. We should pay particular attention to how the two non-manufacturing sectors compare
with the rest of the data, as they come from a different source. Mining and Quarrying is actually
the most volatile sector in the sample, with a standard deviation of 11.3%. This is close to the
standard deviation of the second most volatile sector, which is 9.3%. Furthermore, the second and
third most volatile sectors, Miscellaneous Petroleum and Coal Products and Non-Ferrous Metals,
14

This is equivalent to regressing the pooled sample of value added per worker growth on country×sector dummies
and retaining the residual.
T
P
15
In a perfectly balanced panel of countries, sectors, and years, Yi = T1
Yit = 0 by construction. In our
t=1

unbalanced panel, this is strictly speaking not the case when computing the sample mean, though it makes virtually
no difference for the resulting variance and covariance estimates.

11

are themselves natural-resource intensive, suggesting that our data sources are conformable. The
volatility of Agriculture is comfortably in the middle of the sample.
While this risk measure has been purged of country×sector specific effects, it is nonetheless very
highly correlated with the simple standard deviation reported in Appendix Table A2, in which all
the observations across countries and years were pooled. The simple correlation coefficient between
the two is 0.82, and the Spearman rank correlation is 0.81.16 How does our estimate of sector-specific
volatility compare to other sector characteristics? It seems to be positively correlated with average
sector growth, with a rank correlation of 0.67. This is consistent with the findings of Imbs (2007)
that growth and volatility are actually positively correlated at sector level. Surprisingly, sector risk
seems to be uncorrelated with the external dependence from Rajan and Zingales (1998), with the
Spearman rank correlation of 0.05. The same is true for the measures of liquidity needs used by
Raddatz (2006). Depending on which variant of the Raddatz measure we use, the correlation is
either zero or mildly negative. The correlations between sector riskiness and measures of reliance
on institutions from Cowan and Neut (2007) are also close to zero.17 Sector riskiness does seem
to be weakly correlated with capital intensity, reported in Cowan and Neut (2007). The simple
correlation is 0.2, while the Spearman rank correlation is 0.14.

4.2

Construction of the Risk Content of Exports

For each country and year, we construct shares of each sector in total exports, aX
ict . Using the
sectoral variance-covariance matrix

Σ,

and the industry shares of exports for each country and

each year, we define the risk content of exports as:
RCXct = aX
ct

0

ΣaX
ct ,

X
where aX
ct is the 30 × 1 vector of aict . The resulting measure is simply the aggregate variance of

the entire export sector of the economy. We used production data for 69 countries to construct

Σ.

However, using the trade data we can build measures of risk content of exports for the entire

sample in the World Trade Database — a final sample of 130 countries in the present study.
Appendix Table A3 reports the risk content of exports in our sample of countries for the decade
of the 1990s, along with information on the top two export sectors, the share of the top two export
16

Alternatively, we computed the covariance matrix while switching the order of the last two steps. That is, we
first computed the variances and covariances of sectors in each individual country, and then took the average of each
element in the covariance matrix across countries. The resulting matrices are very similar: the correlation between
the variances obtained under these two approaches is 0.76. To help account for differences in country and sector size,
we also computed the covariance matrix weighting observations by GDP and the sector size. The resulting covariance
matrices were once again very similar to the one used to carry out the analysis.
17
These authors use measures of product complexity — the number of intermediate goods used and the Herfindahl
index of intermediate good shares — to proxy for reliance on contracting institutions. Our sector riskiness measure
is actually somewhat positively correlated with the former, but negatively with the latter.

12

sectors in total exports, and the simple Herfindahl index of overall export shares. The latter is
meant to be a measure of export diversification that does not take into account riskiness differences
among sectors.
It is important to note that this procedure uses the same covariance matrix Σ for all countries.
Lack of data availability prevents us from adopting a more direct approach. A potential alternative
would be to construct separate covariance matrices for every country, and build the risk content
of exports based on those. However, this strategy is not feasible because the production data
necessary to construct the covariance matrix only exists for a small number of countries. Applying
the same covariance matrix allows us to “leverage” the available information on the volatility of
production to build risk content of exports for some 130 countries. Though it has its limitations,
a similar strategy has been used successfully in both macroeconomics (Rajan and Zingales 1998,
and the large literature that followed), and trade (e.g., Romalis 2004, among others). Existing
papers that adopt this approach typically use the U.S. data to build industry-specific indicators.
The advantage of the approach taken in this paper is that it uses information on a large number of
countries. Nonetheless, it is important to show that applying the same covariance matrix does not
mask important reversals in the characteristics of the covariance matrix in individual countries or
groups of countries. Appendix B describes the battery of checks that we perform in order to ensure
this is the case.

4.3

Risk Content of Exports and Country Characteristics

Differences in the risk content of exports are large. Note that the risk content measure captures the
variance of the output per worker growth in the export sector. Countries in the top five percent of
the distribution in the 1990s have an average variance of the export sector of 0.0098, compared to
0.0002 for countries in the bottom five percent. This is equivalent to a 56-fold difference in variance,
or about an 7.5-fold difference in standard deviation of output per worker growth. Countries
with the highest risk content are those with a high export share in Mining and Quarrying, in
these cases mainly crude oil (Angola, Nigeria, Iran). Surprisingly, in the bottom half of the risk
content distribution are also some of the poorest and least diversified countries (Honduras, Ethiopia,
Bangladesh). Thus, it seems that for these countries, a lower risk content of exports reflects mostly
a high export concentration in the least risky industries, mainly Food Products, Textiles, and
Clothing. In the bottom half of the distribution are also most of the advanced economies, with a
high share of exports in medium risk industries such as Transportation Equipment and Machinery,
and a diversified export base. Those characteristics are shared by a few emerging economies such
as Korea, Thailand and Philippines.

13

Does risk content matter for macroeconomic volatility? Panel I of Table 2 presents regressions
of the volatility of terms-of-trade growth, export growth, and GDP-per-capita growth on the risk
content of exports and income per capita. The risk content of exports is positively associated
with all three measures of volatility, and highly significant. Figure 1 displays the relationship
between the risk content of exports and terms-of-trade volatility. It is evident that the relationship
is quite close, with a correlation coefficient between the two variables of 0.52. What is notable
about these results is that our risk content measure does not use any country-specific information
on the volatility of sectors. The differences in risk content among countries are driven entirely
by differences in export specialization.18 Thus, these results can be interpreted as displaying the
relationship between average long-run export specialization patterns and overall volatility.
The risk content of exports does not exhibit a strong relationship with the usual country outcomes, such as per capita income, trade openness, or financial integration. Panel II of Table 2
regresses the risk content of exports on these measures. None of these variables is significant. Figure 2 plots the log risk content of exports against the log level of PPP-adjusted income per capita
for the 1990s, along with the least squares regression line. While there does seem to be a negative
relationship, it is not very pronounced. In particular, even some of the poorest countries in the
sample (Tanzania, Ethiopia, Madagascar) have the same level of risk content of exports as some of
the richest ones (Finland, Canada, Sweden).

4.4

Decomposition of the Risk Content of Exports

Having described the features of the risk content of exports, we now would like to examine what
drives it. In particular, a higher risk content of exports can reflect a higher allocation of exports in
risky sectors, or a high degree of specialization (as well as the covariance properties of the sectors in
which the country specializes). We now attempt to establish whether variation in the risk content
of exports is driven primarily by simple diversification of export shares (aX
ict ’s), or by countries’
specialization in risky sectors (σi2 ’s). To do so, we first decompose the risk content of exports into
18
An additional concern may be that the positive association between terms-of-trade volatility and risk content
could be generated mechanically by the volatility of export shares: countries with volatile terms-of-trade will also
have volatile export shares. On the contrary, the cross-sectional risk content measure in Figure 1 and Table 2 is
constructed using the average export shares aX
c over the period 1970-1999, eliminating the possibility of this kind of
mechanical association.

14

the following components:
aX
ct

0

X0
2
ΣaX
ct ≡ act Σ − σ̄ I



=

I
X

2
aX
ict

σi2

0

2 X X
aX
ct + σ̄ act act

− σ̄

2



+2

i=1

= σ̄ 2

X
aX
ict ajct σij

+ σ̄

j6=i i=1

I
X

aX
ict

|i=1 {z

Herfxct

+

I X
I
X

I
X

2

+2āX

{z

aX
ict

2

I X
I
X

X
aX
ict ajct σij

j6=i i=1

}

MeanRiskct

2

I
X
i=1

2
aX
ict σi + 2

|i=1 {z

}

X
aX
ict − ā

|i=1

I
X

2

|

{z

Covariancect

}


X 2
σi2 − σ̄ 2 − 2ā
| {zσ̄}
} Constant

Curvaturect

The first term, Herfx, captures simple diversification that ignores riskiness differences across sectors:
it is simply the Herfindahl index of export shares. The second term, which we call MeanRisk, is
the average variance of a country’s exports. It is a “diversification-free” measure, in the sense that
two countries with the same Herfindahl of exports can nonetheless have very different values of
MeanRisk, if in one of the countries the largest export sectors are riskier. MeanRisk is intended to
be a complement to the “pure diversification” measure Herfx, and the two are meant to capture
the main forces driving risk content.
The third term captures the covariance effect, or the off-diagonal components of

Σ,

which

are generally insignificant. The fourth term, which we call Curvature, captures the interaction
X
between Herfx and MeanRisk. In a perfectly diversified economy (aX
ict = ā for all i), or when all

sectors have the same variance, Curvature is zero. As the economy begins specializing, Curvature
becomes negative if the country increases its export share in sectors that are safer than average. By
contrast, Curvature becomes positive when the economy starts specializing in riskiest sectors. This
term captures the notion that a more specialized economy is not necessarily riskier than a more
diversified one: specializing in safe sectors results in the negative Curvature term and may reduce
overall volatility. By contrast, specializing in the riskier sectors has a compounded effect: overall
volatility increases due to both lack of diversification and higher than average sector risk. Finally,
the last term, Constant, is common to all countries and is simply the average exports share, āX ,
I
P
which always equals 1/I, times the average of sector-level variances, σ̄ 2 =
σi2 /I.
i=1

Figure 5 plots the risk content of exports against the Herfindahl index of export concentration.19
It is clear that the risk content of exports is not primarily driven by diversification. The relationship
19

The Herfindahl index takes on higher values for less diversified economies. Thus, in generating the graph, we
reverse the x-axis, so that more diversified economies are further to the right.

15

between export diversification and the risk content of exports is negative as expected. However, at
low levels of diversification, there is a great deal of variation in the risk content of exports. That is,
while the riskiest economies in our sample are also the least diversified (e.g., Angola, Nigeria, Iran),
there are also many undiversified economies that are among the safest (e.g., Mauritius, Bangladesh,
El Salvador). As expected, there is less dispersion in the risk content of exports among the welldiversified economies (e.g., OECD countries).
It appears, therefore, that diversification, while clearly important, cannot account for a large
portion of the variation in the risk content of exports. The differences in the average riskiness
play an important role. Figure 6 confirms this result. It plots the risk content of exports against
the average riskiness of the export sector, MeanRisk, along with a quadratic regression line. The
relationship is much closer. This figure reveals why the countries at the top of the risk content of
exports distribution are there: it is because they specialize in the risky sectors, not simply because
they are undiversified.
Table 3 presents sample medians for the five components of risk content of exports, both in
levels and as shares of the total. The medians are reported for the whole sample, as well as the
four quartiles of the risk content of exports distribution. Not surprisingly, Herfx, MeanRisk, and
Curvature all increase as we move up in the risk content distribution. What is interesting is that
the curvature term is negative at the bottom of the distribution, and positive at the top. That is,
at a given level of diversification, countries at the low risk content of exports produce more in safer
sectors, while high risk content countries produce in riskier ones.20
It is clear from this discussion that developing countries are not necessarily the most exposed to
external risk. Indeed, a more complex picture emerges. Some of the least risky export structures
are observed in the poorest and least diversified countries in our sample because they specialize
in the least risky sectors. Advanced economies tend to have an intermediate level of export risk,
and achieve it mainly through diversification of export structure rather than specializing in safe
sectors. The countries with the highest export risk are the middle-income countries, which are
highly specialized in risky industries, predominantly Mining and Quarrying.
20
How are we to reconcile the fact that graphically MeanRisk seems to explain variation in risk content better than
Herfx, while in the table the share of RCX taken up by Herfx is much larger? Note that in the table, the columns
I
I
2
P
P
2
report the entire terms in the decomposition, that is, σ̄ 2
aX
and 2āX
aX
ict
ict σi . Thus, we can think of this as
i=1

i=1

the distinction between the R-squared and a coefficient estimate: the “coefficient” on the Herfx term, σ̄ 2 , is higher
and thus it accounts for a larger share of RCX on average. The Figures show that MeanRisk can nonetheless better
account for variation in RCX, that is, it has a higher “R-squared.”

16

5

A Portfolio View of International Trade

5.1

Implementation

In this section, we demonstrate empirically that the data exhibit a strong and robust U-shaped
pattern consistent with the canonical model of trade patterns under uncertainty. In order to do this,
we cannot perform a direct test of how the strength of comparative advantage in the risky sectors
affects specialization. This is because it is not feasible to construct direct measures of pR θ − pS ,
or even relative productivity in the risky sector θ, due to severely limited coverage of production
data: while risk content measures can be constructed for 130 countries, manufacturing productivity
can be obtained for at most 60 countries, while there are fewer than 30 countries for which both
non-manufacturing and manufacturing production data are available consistently.
However, it is possible to construct a proxy for the strength of comparative advantage in risky
sectors using export data based on Balassa’s (1965) measure of “revealed comparative advantage.”
In particular, we define risk-weighted comparative advantage as follows:
!
X
Xict /XiW t
2
RiskCAct =
,
σi 1 P
(X
/X
)
ict
iW
t
i
I
i

(4)

where Xict are country c’s exports in sector i, XiW t are world exports in sector i, and σi2 is the sectorlevel volatility as calculated in Section 4.1. That is, Xict /XiW t is the share of world exports in sector
i captured by country c, which is normalized by the average share of world exports captured by the
P
country, I1 i (Xict /XiW t ), in order to control for overall country size. This is essentially Balassa’s
(1965) revealed comparative advantage, which is observed at the country-sector-time level.21 To
obtain a country-time level proxy for strength of comparative advantage in risky sectors, RiskCAct ,
we simply weight revealed comparative advantage in a given sector by its volatility σi2 . The key
assumption is that the larger is the share of world exports that the country captures in a sector,
the stronger is its comparative advantage in that sector. The strength of comparative advantage is
then weighted by sector risk to obtain a summary measure of the riskiness of a country’s pattern
of comparative advantage.
In our model, we can derive the U-shaped relationship between RiskCA and Herfx, under
the assumption that XiW t does not change in response to changes in Xict , consistent with the
small open economy setup we adopted. This relationship is depicted in Figure 4. In our simple
theoretical setup it is of course entirely unsurprising that a U-shaped relationship driven by the
21

There is one minor difference with the original Balassa measure, which uses
P the share of country’s total exports
in overall world exports Xct /XW t , instead of the average across sectors, I1 i (Xict /XiW t ), in the denominator to
normalize sectoral export shares. Our results are not sensitive to this modification. We make this change because the
unmodified Balassa index produces a few outliers, namely small countries which happen to capture relatively large
shares of world exports in rare sectors (mainly tobacco).

17

underlying comparative advantage in Figure 3 gives rise to a U-shaped relationship based on export
patterns in Figure 4. This is because export patterns are completely determined by the strength of
2 . While the relationship between RiskCA and Herfx comes
comparative advantage for a given σR

out naturally from the model, there could still be a concern that in the data, such an exportbased index will not be a good proxy for the actual strength of comparative advantage pR θ − pS .
Available empirical evidence does show that there is a link between export patterns and measured
differences in productivity (Golub and Hsieh 2000, Choudhri and Schembri 2002, Costinot and
Komunjer 2008).22 Thus we believe that RiskCA is a meaningful proxy.
Note also that while RiskCA captures the average volatility of a country’s pattern of revealed
comparative advantage, it is also possible that countries can insure export income risk through the
covariance properties of sectors. For instance, a country may have high shares in two especially
volatile sectors, but its actual risk content of exports will be low if those sectors also exhibit
strongly negative comovement with each other. This mechanism does not appear to be important
quantitatively, however. Countries with the high RiskCA tend to have high export shares in
positively, rather than negatively, correlated sectors: a typical pair of top two largest export sectors
is Mining and Petroleum Refineries. In Section 5.4, after presenting the main results on the Ushaped relationship between comparative advantage in risky sectors and diversification, we show
that the risk content of exports behaves in the way predicted by theory: it is first flat, then
increasing as a function of revealed comparative advantage in risky sectors. This confirms that the
covariance terms do not overturn the main conclusions of the paper.
We estimate the relationship of interest both non-parametrically and semi-parametrically. The
first exercise employs the Lowess methodology to estimate the U-shaped relationship between Herfx
and RiskCA. What is notable about this procedure is that it is locally robust: unlike a regression
with a linear and a squared term, observations far away along the x-axis do not exert any influence
on the estimated relationship between the two variables at each point. The second exercise estimates
the U-shaped relationship using a hybrid of parametric and non-parametric models, allowing us to
control for a wide variety of additional explanatory variables to reduce omitted variable concerns.

5.2

Non-Parametric Estimation

The Lowess estimator (Cleveland 1979) is an example of a local linear regression estimator. Suppose
there is a data sample, indexed by n = 1, ..., N , of independent and dependent variable pairs —
in our case, (RiskCAn , Herfxn ). For each observation n, the procedure runs a bivariate weighted
least-squares regression on a subsample of data centered around RiskCAn , which is called the
22
Earlier studies include MacDougall (1951), MacDougall (1952) and Balassa (1963). See also Harrigan (1997) for
evidence that productivity differences affect output shares, which are presumably in turn reflected in export patterns.

18

midpoint. The regression estimates are then used to predict the value of the dependent variable at
the midpoint. This procedure is repeated using each observation in the sample as the midpoint,
thereby tracing out a curve describing the non-parametric relationship between the two variables.
In our implementation, the weights correspond to a tricubic kernel that places less weight on
observations farther away from the midpoint. The range of the independent variable in each
regression is determined by the bandwidth, that is, the proportion of the full sample used in
each regression. We follow standard practice and use eighty percent of the sample to run each
regression. The use of Lowess is advantageous because it has a variable bandwidth range, is robust
to outliers, and uses a local polynomial estimator to minimize boundary problems (Cameron and
Trivedi 2005).23
We run the Lowess procedure on cross-sectional data, for which Herfx and RiskCA are computed
using average export shares over 1970–99, as well as five-year panel data, which gives us a larger
sample size. Following Imbs and Wacziarg (2003), we use fixed effects in the Lowess procedure. In
particular, each local regression includes fixed effects for all countries included in the local sample.
To compute the predicted value of Herfx at the midpoint, we then average over the estimated
fixed effects to obtain an average value of the fixed effect at the midpoint. It is important to note
that the group of countries in each local regression changes over the whole sample. Therefore,
both the average estimated fixed effect and the slope coefficient will be different at each midpoint.
When tracing out the curve, the predicted Herfx will thus reflect both within- and between-country
variation. Nonetheless, the estimated slope coefficients themselves are identified purely from the
within-country variation in each local regression.
Deriving analytical standard errors for the estimated Lowess relationship is possible. However,
given small-sample concerns, we choose to bootstrap the standard errors. In particular, we re-run
the Lowess procedure 10,000 times on data sampled randomly with replacement, and use these
estimates to compute the standard deviations for each point. Thus, for a cross-sectional regression
on 130 countries this is equivalent to running 130×10,000 locally weighted regressions. We then
compute 95 percent confidence intervals as ± two standard deviations.
Figures 7(a) and 7(b) present the cross-sectional and panel Lowess estimates computed using
data for all sectors. The solid line represents the central estimate, while the dashed lines are the
confidence bands. A U-shape is quite apparent in both the cross section and the panel estimates.
The upward part of the curve is not surprising: it largely captures countries that are heavy exporters
23
There is a consistency-efficiency trade-off in choosing the size of the bandwidth: large bandwidths improve the
efficiency of the estimates, but will lead to potential biases in the estimated relationship. Given our small dataset,
we chose a larger bandwidth to obtain greater precision in the estimates. Moreover, the pattern in the raw data is
quite pronounced, so we are willing to trade off smoothness for tighter local estimates. The estimated curves do not
differ significantly when choosing a bandwidth equal to forty or sixty percent of the sample.

19

of risky commodities, such as oil producers. But, the existence of downward part of the curve is
further evidence supporting the theory. Finally, the trough of the curve appears at approximately
one-third of the maximum value of RiskCA, implying a potential asymmetry in the estimated
U-shape.
Figures 7(c) and 7(d) present cross-sectional and panel Lowess estimates using Herfx and
RiskCA computed from only the manufacturing sector data. The U-shaped pattern is even more
pronounced compared to the one obtained using all the sectors, especially for the downward part
of the curve. Furthermore, the trough of the estimated curves is closer to the midpoint of RiskCA.
We also estimate the Lowess over a variety of sub-samples to check for robustness. In particular,
we find that the U-shape is robust — for both all sectors and the manufacturing sector only — if
we split the sample in half by income per capita; if we drop countries that specialize in the mining
sector; and across different time periods. Since the production data is especially sparse for Africa,
and many African countries are among the least diversified ones in the sample, we also re-ran the
analysis on a sample that excludes African countries. The U-shape was still present and statistically
significant. These results are available upon request.
To further demonstrate robustness of the results, following Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) we plot
each estimated local slope coefficient against RiskCA, and examine their significance. If the Ushape is indeed robust in the data, we should find significant coefficients that are both positive
and negative, as well a zero coefficients. We are particularly interested in the significance of the
downward sloping portion of the U-shape. Figures 8(a) and 8(b) plot the slope coefficients that
correspond to the Lowess estimates for all sectors of Figures 7(a) and 7(b), respectively. Thin
lines plot the insignificant slope coefficients, while the bold lines denote those that are significantly
different from zero. The slope coefficient is negative and significant for low values of RiskCA,
then becomes insignificantly different from zero, before finally becoming positive and significant at
larger values of RiskCA. Figures 8(c) and 8(d) plot the slope coefficients the Lowess estimates for
manufacturing sector only, corresponding to Figures 7(c) and 7(d). These graphs provide additional
empirical support for the U-shaped relationship between Herfx and RiskCA.
Could the U-shaped relationship between strength of comparative advantage and specialization
arise for other reasons? After all, it is reasonable to expect countries with a strong comparative
advantage to specialize, and those with weak comparative advantage to diversify, regardless of the
insurance motive suggested by the Turnovsky model. Note, however, that the variation in RiskCA
is driven entirely by the differences in σ’s, not strength of comparative advantage per se. An index
like the one in equation (4), but not weighted by the variances of individual sectors produces a value
of 1 for every country. Thus, the variation in RiskCA across countries is driven by the differences

20

across countries in how volatile sectors are, and not by how extreme the comparative advantage
is across countries. There could still be a concern that the relationship we trace out is somehow
induced mechanically by the configuration of the σ’s in the data. To address this issue, we took
the actual export shares that are used to compute the Herfindahl index and RiskCA for each of
the 130 countries in the sample, and reassigned σ’s randomly without replacement from the vector
of actual σ’s in the data. The goal is to see whether random assignment of the volatilities to the
existing trade data would produce a U-shape. The results of simulating the data 1000 times are
presented in Appendix Figure A4. The hollow dots are the actual data, while the gray area depicts
the range of possible outcomes in simulated data. It is clear that there is no mechanical tendency
in these data to form a U-shape. Only at the very top of the RiskCA range does it appear that
there is some narrowing of the range of outcomes.24
Overall, the Lowess cross-sectional and panel estimates show strong evidence of a U-shaped
relationship between Herfx and RiskCA. However, this relationship may be contaminated by the
omission of other potential variables. To address this concern we next turn to a semi-parametric
methodology.

5.3

Semi-Parametric Estimation

The Lowess methodology is a robust way to trace out the non-linear relationship between the
risk-weighted comparative advantage and specialization. However, this bivariate approach ignores
other variables that may potentially affect a country’s Herfx, and may be correlated with RiskCA.
One such variable is income per capita. In particular, Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) find a U-shape
relationship between countries’ specialization patterns in production and their level of development,
while Koren and Tenreyro (2007) find a negative relationship between the level of development and
average production risk.
A priori, we do not view the omission of income per capita to be a major concern, since the
correlation of income per capita and RiskCA is only 0.05 in our data, while the Spearman rank
correlation is also very low (0.12). Thus, it is unlikely that the U-shaped relationship between
diversification and RiskCA is generated by differences in per capita income. However, we can
control for the influence of income as well as other potential omitted variables using semi-parametric
methods. In particular, we follow the “double-residual” methodology proposed by Robinson (1988)
to estimate the non-linear relationship between Herfx and RiskCA, while controlling for additional
explanatory variables (see also Imbs and Rancière 2007).25 We estimate the following empirical
24

Note that this gray area does not represent the full range of possible (Herfx, RiskCA) pairs, which is almost
surely wider than the shaded area. This explains why the countries with the highest and the lowest Herfx in the
actual data are at the boundary of the shaded area.
25
An alternative strategy could be to estimate the full multivariate relationship non-parametrically, but this ap-

21

model:
Herfxct = γ 0c Xct + g (RiskCAct ) + εct ,

(5)

where g (RiskCAct ) captures the non-linear relationship between Herfxct and RiskCAct , and Xct is
a matrix of controls that are incorporated parametrically.
Equation (5) is estimated by a sequence of non-parametric and parametric regressions in three
steps:
1. Estimate a bivariate Lowess between Herfxct and RiskCAct , and between each of the controls
d
\ct and X
Xct and RiskCAct . Retain the residuals from this procedure, denoting them Herfx
ct .
d
\ct on X
2. Regress Herfx
ct using OLS to obtain an unbiased estimate of γ c . Use the estimated
\
\ct = Herfxct − γ̂ 0c Xct .
γ̂ c to purge the influence of the additional controls from Herfxct : Herfx
\
\ct and RiskCAct to estimate the non-linear relationship, g(·),
3. Finally, apply Lowess to Herfx
between specialization and risk-weighted comparative advantage.
In other words, Step 1 eliminates the non-linear impact of RiskCAct from both Herfxct and the
controls Xct . This removes the bias created by the non-linearity in the empirical model.26 Note
that in the panel specifications with country and time fixed effects, this step involves a Lowess
between RiskCAct and each of the country and time dummies. Step 2 controls for the additional
explanatory variables parametrically. Step 3 is the analog to the non-parametric estimation in the
previous subsection. This methodology is consistent, but there are efficiency losses. We therefore
bootstrap the standard errors in the final step of the estimation procedure as in the non-parametric
estimations described above.27
The choice of variables in Xct is based on Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) and Kalemli-Ozcan et
al. (2003). These controls include the PPP-adjusted real per capita income and its square from
the Penn World Tables; log of population density, defined as area divided by population; the
log of population; and log of distantness. The latter is simply GDP-weighted distance to all
potential trading partners. Population, area, and total GDP come from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators, while the bilateral distances come from the Centre d’Etudes Prospectives
et d’Informations Internationales (CEPII). These controls are meant to capture how country size
and distance to trading partners affect the degree of specialization in trade.28 We also include a
proach quickly runs into the “curse of dimensionality.” Given our small sample size, even running the Lowess on only
RiskCA and income per capita is impractical, particularly if we wish to bootstrap the standard errors.
26
The linear coefficients will be biased even if they are stable across the sample.
27
This approach is also suggested by Yatchew (2003).
28
We also controlled for overall trade openness directly, and the results were unchanged.

22

measure of financial integration, defined as (total external assets + total external liabilities)/GDP
from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).29
Equation (5) is estimated using both the cross-sectional sample of 30-year averages, and the
panel sample of 5-year averages. All of the panel specifications include country and time fixed
effects in Xct .30 Just as we did under the non-parametric approach, we present a full set of results
both for all sectors, and the manufacturing sectors only.
Figures 9(a)-9(d) present the cross-sectional and panel semi-parametric estimates computed
using data for all sectors and manufacturing only.31 The figures are analogous to the bivariate
Lowess estimates depicted in Figure 7, but now control for a number of other variables.32 The
U-shape is quite apparent in both the cross-sectional and the panel estimates, and is similar to the
bivariate estimates. Turning to the estimated slope coefficients for RiskCA in figures 10(a)-10(d),
the same pattern emerges as that depicted in the non-parametric counterparts in Figure 8. The
coefficients once again move from being negative and significant, to insignificantly different from
zero, and then to positive and significant. However, the absolute size of the coefficients is smaller
than the bivariate non-parametric estimates.

5.4

Back to the Risk Content of Exports

Both nonparametric and semi-parametric results reveal the existence of a strong U-shaped relationship between the degree of countries’ export specialization and the strength of comparative
advantage in risky sectors. These results provide novel evidence in support of the Turnovsky model
of trade in the presence of uncertainty outlined in Section 2. What does this relationship imply for
the behavior of the overall risk content of exports?
We can build an intuition as follows. Above, we found that as a country’s comparative advantage
in risky sectors becomes stronger, it will first diversify into riskier sectors, then specialize further
in those risky sectors. This implies that at low levels of RiskCA, increasing RiskCA has conflicting
effects: on the one hand the share of risky sectors in overall exports increases. On the other, there is
more diversification. The overall effect on the risk content is ambiguous, and thus we would expect
that for low levels of comparative advantage in risky sectors, the relationship between RiskCA and
the overall risk content is essentially flat, or weakly increasing. On the other hand, at high levels of
RiskCA, increasing comparative advantage in risky sectors will both increase the average riskiness,
29

We also experimented with the measure of extent of international income insurance estimated by Volosovych
(2006), and the results were robust.
30
Note that just as in the non-parametric estimations, the country fixed effects will capture both between and
within variation as we trace out the non-linear effect of RiskCA on Herfx.
31
Appendix Table A4 presents the step-2 residual OLS regression of Herfx on the controls.
32
There are now only 109 countries in the sample due missing data for some of the explanatory variables.

23

and reduce diversification. The two effects begin reinforcing each other at values of RiskCA greater
than the minimum point on the Herfx-RiskCA curve.
Figure 11 confirms this intuition. The two left panels report the cross-sectional non-parametric
estimates of the relationship between RCX and RiskCA, for all sectors as well as manufacturing
only.33 Indeed, at low levels of RiskCA, the relationship is flat, while at higher levels it is increasing.
The right panels plot together the fitted non-parametric relationships between RCX and RiskCA
(solid line) and Herfx and RiskCA (dashed line). It is remarkable that RCX is indeed roughly flat
until the minimum point in Herfx, and then begins increasing unambiguously.

6

Conclusion

Whether increased trade openness has contributed to rising uncertainty and exposed countries
to external shocks remains a much debated topic. In this paper, we use industry-level data to
document a particular aspect of the relationship between openness and volatility: the riskiness of
export patterns across countries and over time. We establish that the risk content of exports is
strongly positively correlated with the variance of terms-of-trade, total exports, and GDP growth,
suggesting that export specialization does affect macroeconomic volatility. However, it is not closely
related to the usual country characteristics, such as income per capita or trade openness. The risk
content of exports is determined by both differences in diversification of export structure, and the
average riskiness of exporting sectors. While diversification clearly matters, much of the variation
in the risk content of export is driven by the average risk. For instance, the poorest countries, while
least diversified, are also among the least exposed to external risk.
We then move beyond a descriptive characterization, and propose an explanation for what
determines the risk content of exports. Going back to a well-established theoretical literature in
trade, we provide an illustrative example of its central insight: when sectors differ in their riskiness,
there is an incentive for countries to diversify exports to insure against export income risk. The
amount of export diversification exhibits a U-shape with respect to the strength of comparative
advantage in risky sectors: countries with no comparative advantage in those sectors, or whose
comparative advantage in those sectors is very strong, will specialize. Countries with intermediate
values of comparative advantage will diversify. The final part of the paper shows that the data
provide strong support for this prediction.
Thus, we view this paper’s contribution as twofold. First, it introduces a new measure of
riskiness of a country’s export pattern, which can become an important tool for the analysis of
the relationship between trade and macroeconomic volatility. Second, it provides novel empirical
33

Results are similar for panel estimates, but are omitted to conserve space.

24

evidence on an established theoretical literature in trade.

Appendix A

Decentralization of the Planning Problem

This Appendix demonstrates that the planning problem analyzed in the main text is an outcome
of a competitive equilibrium. The treatment closely follows Helpman and Razin (1978), chs. 5-6,
which can serve as a further reference. Consider an economy comprised of households and firms.

A.1

Firms

Production is competitive and firms are price takers. The firms choose input levels to maximize
their net value (Diamond 1967). They issue claims on their (possibly stochastic) output. In sector
i, let qi denote the firm’s stock price. In sector S, the firm that employs LS workers can issue up
to ZS = LS claims, each of which delivers one unit of good S. In sector R, the firm that employs
LR workers issues ZR = LR claims, each unit delivering a stochastic amount θ of good R.34
Let w be the wage paid to workers. A firm in sector i issues Zi claims to maximize its net stock
market value:
max {qi Zi − wLi }
Zi

s.t.
Zi = Li
That is, the firm chooses its inputs to maximize its gross stock market value qi Zi , minus the input
costs wLi . It is clear that the solution to this maximization problem is:
Zi = 0

if

qi < w

Zi = [0, +∞) if
Zi = +∞

if

qi = w

qi > w.

Since all firms in the sector are identical, and technology exhibits constant returns, this optimization
problem characterizes the sector as a whole.

A.2

Households

Households supply labor, own the firms in the economy, and invest in claims on future output that
the firms issue (real equities). As in the main text, the total amount of labor in the economy is
34
We take it for granted that no firms will operate in sector M , as its production technology is the same as in
sector S, while pS > pM ≡ 1. That is, the country’s pattern of comparative advantage implies that producing in
sector S always dominates producing in sector M .

25

L = 1. Consumers maximize expected utility, by investing in a portfolio of stocks. Let zi denote
the number of sector i real equities purchased by the consumer. Then, the household’s ex ante
portfolio problem is:
max E [V (I, P )]

zS ,zR

s.t.
qS zS + qR zR = w + (qS ZS − wLS ) + (qR ZR − wLR )
I = pS zS + pR θzR .
Following the notation in the main text, V (I, P ) is the indirect utility of the consumer with income
I at the price level P . The first constraint states that the household’s income is the sum of labor
income w and the net profits from its ownership of firms in the two sectors, (qS ZS − wLS ) and
(qR ZR − wLR ). The household uses that income to purchase claims on the (possibly stochastic)
output in each of the sectors, paying the price qi . The second constraint implies that as a consequence of the household’s investments, after the resolution of uncertainty its income consists of the
total revenue from owning the claims on outputs of the two goods. Using the first constraint to
express zS as:

1
[w + (qS ZS − wLS ) + (qR ZR − wLR ) − qR zR ] ,
qS
the first-order condition of the consumer optimization problem can be written as:
 


pS
pS
E VI
[w + (qS ZS − wLS ) + (qR ZR − wLR ) − qR zR ] + pR θzR
pR θ −
qR
= 0. (A.1)
qS
qS
zS =

A.3

Equilibrium

An equilibrium is a set of prices and the resource allocations (qS , qR , w, LS , LR ), such that: (i) firms
maximize net shareholder value; (ii) consumers maximize expected utility; and (iii) security and
factor markets clear. Labor market clearing requires that:
LS + LR = 1.
Security market clearing implies that:
zi = Zi = Li ,

i = S, R.

(A.2)

We will consider interior equilibria, such that there is some production of both S and R. The
analysis of corner equilibria is straightforward. Positive but finite production of these goods implies
that the share prices in both industries satisfy:
qi = w,

i = S, R.
26

(A.3)

Note that conditions (A.2)-(A.3) together imply that the net profits in the two industries are zero,
(qS ZS − wLS ) = (qR ZR − wLR ) = 0, as expected in a competitive economy with constant returns
to scale technology. Labor market clearing implies that LS = 1 − LR , and thus the economy’s
production structure is pinned down by a single equilibrium value, LR , which is the amount of
labor in the R-sector. Plugging equations (A.2)-(A.3) into the first-order condition for utility
maximization (A.1) yields:
E [VI (pS (1 − LR ) + pR θR LR ) (pR θ − pS )] = 0.
This equation is an implicit expression for the allocation of resources, LR , that characterizes the
decentralized equilibrium of an economy in which consumers maximize expected utility, and firms
maximize net shareholder value. Note that this expression is identical to the one that characterizes
the planner’s problem analyzed in the main text, equation (2).

Appendix B

Robustness of Applying the Same Covariance Matrix
to All Countries

This Appendix shows that applying the same covariance matrix does not mask important reversals
in the ranking of sectors according to volatility in individual countries or groups of countries.
We do this in a number of ways. First, we calculate the covariance matrix for several subsamples,
and compare the results. For instance, we break the country sample into OECD and non-OECD
countries, and construct

Σ

for each of these country groups. The resulting matrices are quite

similar: the correlation between sector-specific variances estimated on the two subsamples is 0.64,
and the Spearman rank correlation is 0.78. Another key concern is that countries differ significantly
according to their export specialization. For example, it could be that in individual countries,
sectors that capture a large share of overall exports are systematically more volatile. Thus, by
pooling across countries, we do not make any distinction based on whether a country is a net
importer or exporter in a given industry. In order to see whether these differences are important,
we construct

Σ on the subsamples of net exporters and net importers in each sector.

This way, in

a given country, some of the sectors will end up in the net exporters sample, while others will be
in the net importers sample. It turns out that the estimates of

Σ from these subsamples are quite

similar, with the correlation of 0.86 and the Spearman rank correlation of 0.78. On average, the
variances computed from the net exporter sample are actually slightly larger than those from the
net importer sample. Finally, we also break up the sample into two subperiods, 1970–84 and 1985–
99. The results are once again quite similar, with the correlation between the two subperiods of 0.70
and Spearman rank correlation of 0.62. While the matrices calculated on individual subsamples
27

may differ among each other, each individual subsample matrix is very similar to the full sample
matrix. Correlation coefficients between sector standard deviations computed on subsamples with
the full sample standard deviations range from 0.87 to 0.96. Thus, applying Σ to the entire sample
of countries is unlikely to appreciably affect the results.
The second check we perform is to construct the covariance matrices for those countries in which
some production data are available. In the entire sample of countries with some production data,
the average correlation between the individual country sector-level volatilities and the volatilities
in the master

Σ

matrix is about 0.45, with a similar average rank correlation. However, as

mentioned above, data for many countries contain missing sectors, and thus many of the resulting
correlations are calculated on highly incomplete samples of sectors. Alternatively, we isolated the
15 countries that have data on all 30 sectors. The average correlation between the country-specific
volatilities and the common volatility from

Σ in this subsample was 0.56.

Also, the first principal

component accounts for 65% of the variation in the country-specific volatilities among these 15
countries, implying a very high degree of correlation of the country-specific volatilities in this group
of countries.
Finally, we computed the risk content of exports based on country-specific risk matrices, and
compared it to the headline risk content of exports variable used in the paper. To do this, we looked
country-by-country at whether missing sectors in the country-specific matrix are important export
sectors. That is, if electronics is missing in the Jamaican risk matrix, it’s not important because
Jamaican electronics exports are negligible, so we computed the risk content of exports for Jamaica
based on its matrix, in spite of missing sectors. By contrast, if the oil sector is missing from the
Saudi Arabian production data, we did not compute the country-specific risk content of exports for
Saudi Arabia. There are 27 countries for which enough production data are available to compute
the country-specific risk content of exports. The correlation between the country-specific and the
headline risk content of exports among these countries is 0.68, and the Spearman rank correlation
is 0.41. Appendix Figure A1 shows the scatterplot of the two variables.
To summarize, though the approach taken in the paper has limitations, several checks of the
methodology lend support to the assumption that sector-level volatility is highly correlated across
countries. Thus, it is informative to analyze the risk content of exports measure introduced here.

References
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, “International Real Business Cycles,”
Journal of Political Economy, August 1992, 100 (4), 745–75.
Balassa, Bela, “An Empirical Demonstration fo the Classical Comparative Cost Theory,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, August 1963, 45 (3), 231–38.
28

, “Trade Liberalization and Revealed Comparative Advantage,” Manchester School, 1965, 33,
99–123.
Bejan, Maria, “Trade Openness and Output Volatility,” October 2004. Mimeo, ITAM.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, “Growth Volatility and Equity
Market Liberalization,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 2006, 25, 370–403.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Kevin Cowan, “Financial Integration Without the Volatility,” May 2007.
Mimeo, MIT.
Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi, Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Cavallo, Eduardo A., “Openness to Trade and Output Volatility: A Reassessment,” 2005. Mimeo,
Harvard University.
Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Lawrence L. Schembri, “Productivity Performance and International
Competitiveness: an Old Test Reconsidered,” Canadian Journal of Economics, May 2002, 35
(2), 341–62.
Cleveland, William S., “Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing Scatterplots,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, December 1979, 74 (368), 829–36.
Costinot, Arnaud and Ivana Komunjer, “What Goods Do Countries Trade? A Structural Ricardian
Model,” November 2008. Mimeo, MIT and U.C. San Diego.
Cowan, Kevin and Alejandro Neut, “Intermediate Goods, Institutions, and Output Per Worker,”
2007.
Cuñat, Alejandro and Mark J. Melitz, “Volatility, Labor Market Flexibility, and the Pattern of
Comparative Advantage,” March 2006. Mimeo, University of Essex and Harvard University.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Trade Openness and Volatility,” Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2009, 91 (3), 558–585.
Diamond, Peter A., “The Role of a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model with Technological Uncertainty,” The American Economic Review, sep 1967, 57 (4), 759–776.
Easterly, William, Roumeen Islam, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth
Volatility,” in B. Pleskovic and N. Stern, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics, 2001.
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo, “World
Trade Flows: 1962–2000,” January 2005. NBER Working Paper No. 11040.
Golub, Stephen S. and Chang-Tai Hsieh, “Classical Ricardian Theory of Comparative Advantage
Revisited,” Review of International Economics, May 2000, 8 (2), 221–34.
Grossman, Gene M. and Assaf Razin, “The Pattern of Trade in a Ricardian Model with CountrySpecific Uncertainty,” International Economic Review, February 1985, 26 (1), 193–202.
Harrigan, James, “Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization: Estimating the
Neoclassical Model,” American Economic Review, September 1997, 87 (4), 475–94.
Helpman, Elhanan, “Trade Pattern under Uncertainty with Country Specific Shocks,” Econometrica, May 1988, 56 (3), 645–659.
and Assaf Razin, A Theory of International Trade under Uncertainty, Academic Press, 1978.

29

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, “Penn World Table Version 6.1,” October 2002.
Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP).
Imbs, Jean, “Growth and Volatility,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (7), 1848–1862.
and Romain Rancière, “The Overhang Hangover,” 2007. Mimeo, HEC Lausanne and IMF.
and Romain Wacziarg, “Stages of Diversification,” American Economic Review, March 2003,
93 (1), 63–86.
International Labor Organization, “Yearbook of Labour Statistics, 62nd Issue,” 2003. CD-ROM.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent E. Sørensen, and Oved Yosha, “Risk Sharing and Industrial Specialization: Regional and International Evidence,” American Economic Review, June 2003, 93
(3), 903–18.
Kaminsky, Graciela L., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Végh, “When It Rains, It Pours:
Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth S.
Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Vol. 19, Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
Press, 2005, chapter 1, pp. 11–53.
Koren, Miklós, “Financial Globalization, Portfolio Diversification, and the Pattern of International
Trade,” 2003. IMF Working Paper 03/233.
and Silvana Tenreyro, “Volatility and Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2007, 122 (1), 243–87.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, “Financial Integration and Macroeconomic Volatility,” IMF Staff Papers, 2003, 50 (Special Issue), 119–41.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” March 2006. IMF
Working Paper No. 06/69.
MacDougall, G.D.A., “British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by the Theory of
Comparative Costs, Part I,” Economic Journal, December 1951, 61 (244), 697–724.
, “British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by the Theory of Comparative Costs,
Part II,” Economic Journal, September 1952, 62 (247), 487–521.
Mendoza, Enrique, “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange Rate, and Economic Fluctuations,”
International Economic Review, February 1995, 36 (1), 101–137.
OECD, The Rise of China and India: What’s in it for Africa?, OECD Publishing, May 2006.
Raddatz, Claudio, “Liquidity Needs and Vulnerability to Financial Underdevelopment,” Journal
of Financial Economics, June 2006, 80 (3), 677–722.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, “Financial dependence and growth,” American Economic
Review, June 1998, 88 (3), 559–86.
Robinson, P.M., “Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression,” Econometrica, July 1988, 56
(4), 931–54.
Rodrik, Dani, “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?,” Journal of Political
Economy, October 1998, 106 (5), 997–1032.
Romalis, John, “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,” American Economic
Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 67–97.

30

Saint-Paul, Gilles, “Technological choice, financial markets, and economic development,” European
Economic Review, May 1992, 32 (4), 763–781.
Turnovsky, Stephen J., “Technological and Price Uncertainty in a Ricardian Model of International
Trade,” The Review of Economic Studies, April 1974, 41 (2), 201–217.
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, “Industrial Statistics Database,” 2005. CDROM.
United Nations Statistical Yearbook, “UN National Accounts Database,” 2003. Electronic Resource.
Volosovych, Vadym, “Financial Market Integration, Risk Sharing, and Institutions: Theory and
Evidence,” December 2006. Working Paper 06008, Department of Economics Working Papers,
Florida Atlantic University.
Yatchew, Adonis, Semiparametric Regression for the Applied Econometrician Themes in Modern
Econometrics, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003.

31

Table 1. Sector-Specific Volatility
ISIC
1
2
311
313
314
321
322
323
324
331
332
341
342
351
352
353
354
355
356
361
362
369
371
372
381
382
383
384
385
390

Sector Name
Agriculture
Mining and quarrying
Food products
Beverages
Tobacco
Textiles
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Leather products
Footwear, except rubber or plastic
Wood products, except furniture
Furniture, except metal
Paper and products
Printing and publishing
Industrial chemicals
Other chemicals
Petroleum refineries
Misc. petroleum and coal products
Rubber products
Plastic products
Pottery, china, earthenware
Glass and products
Other non-metallic mineral products
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Fabricated metal products
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electric
Transport equipment
Professional & scientific equipment
Other manufactured products

Variance
0.0012
0.0127
0.0006
0.0007
0.0023
0.0014
0.0006
0.0012
0.0010
0.0019
0.0007
0.0035
0.0007
0.0040
0.0007
0.0037
0.0087
0.0012
0.0012
0.0008
0.0015
0.0008
0.0060
0.0069
0.0007
0.0006
0.0006
0.0015
0.0015
0.0010

St. Dev.
0.0342
0.1128
0.0248
0.0262
0.0475
0.0377
0.0241
0.0343
0.0317
0.0435
0.0264
0.0589
0.0263
0.0630
0.0263
0.0610
0.0933
0.0348
0.0345
0.0279
0.0384
0.0282
0.0774
0.0829
0.0267
0.0241
0.0250
0.0385
0.0389
0.0321

Notes: This table reports the sector-specific variance and standard deviation of the growth rate of output
per worker, i.e., the diagonal of the Σ matrix constructed as described in Section 4.1.

32

Table 2. The Risk Content of Exports and Macroeconomic Characteristics
I. Macroeconomic Volatility and RCX
Dep. Var.:
TOT
Exports GDP per capita
(1)
(2)
(3)
RCX
0.613** 0.578**
0.236**
(0.082)
(0.110)
(0.085)
GDP per capita
-0.773** -0.349**
-0.497**
(0.092)
(0.120)
(0.080)
Constant
6.192** 4.079**
-0.251
(0.837)
(0.922)
(0.716)
Observations
114
124
114
R2
0.547
0.318
0.345
II. RCX and Macroeconomic Determinants
Dep. Var.:
RCX
RCX
RCX
(1)
(2)
(3)
GDP per capita
-0.060
(0.090)
Trade openness
0.184
(0.169)
Financial openness
0.235
(0.188)
Constant
-6.722** -7.974**
-8.287**
(0.730)
(0.672)
(0.850)
Observations
124
124
111
2
R
0.003
0.008
0.019
Notes: This table reports cross-country regressions. Panel I reports regressions of macroeconomic volatility
measures on RCX, controlling for GDP per capita. Panel II relates RCX to potential macroeconomic determinants. Terms-of-trade, GDP per capita and trade openness measures are calculated using Penn World
Tables data; export volatility is calculated using total exports data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators; financial openness is defined as (total external assets + total external liabilities)/GDP,
and is obtained from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). All dependent and independent variables are in logs,
and are calculated over 1970–99. Robust standard errors in parentheses; + significant at 10%; * significant
at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

33

Table 3. Risk Content of Exports Decomposition: Sample Medians for All Sectors, 1970–99

RCX

(1)
Herfx

(2)
MeanRisk

Whole Sample
Quartile
First
Second
Third
Fourth

0.0005

0.0006

0.0002

0.0003
0.0004
0.0007
0.0033

0.0002
0.0007
0.0006
0.0010

0.0001
0.0001
0.0002
0.0005

Whole Sample
Quartile
First
Second
Third
Fourth

-

1.121

-

0.949
1.538
0.777
0.291

(3)
Covariance
Levels
0.0001

(4)
Curvature

(5)
Constant

-0.0001

-0.0002

-0.0001
-0.0003
0.0000
0.0020

-0.0002
-0.0002
-0.0002
-0.0002

0.291

0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
Shares
0.201

-0.099

-0.292

0.434
0.233
0.288
0.145

0.404
0.274
0.071
0.037

-0.348
-0.684
-0.049
0.609

-0.589
-0.355
-0.207
-0.046

Notes: This table reports the median values of risk content of exports (RCX) and the components of
the decomposition described in Section 4.4, calculated using trade shares in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors. The table reports both the levels and shares of the different components in total
RCX, for the whole cross section, as well as each of the four quartiles.

34

0

Figure 1. Terms-of-Trade Volatility and the Risk Content of Exports, 1970–99

ALB

Log(Volatility of TOT)
−6
−4
−2

GNQ
BDI
RWA
MMR
ROM
PRY
SYC
ETH
BGDNICUGA
CMR
GNB
SLVKHM GHA
CAF
ECUNER
HTI
CIV
IDN
BEN
LKA
MUS PAK
TCD PER SLE
TZAGMB BFA
DOM
TUR BLZ
CHL
PNG
MRT
COLTUN
MAR JAM
IND
KEN
GUY
MWI
MOZ
URY
BRA
HND
CRI
MEX
GTM
MLI
THA
JPN
ZWE
ARG
MDG FJI
BRB
NZL
MYS
CHN
JOR
PHL
SEN
VNM
AUSZAF
POL
NOR
ESP
ISL
ITA
PRT
CYP
KOR
ISR
IRL
USA
DEU
CHE
FRA
KNA
LBNGBR NPL
GRC
PAN SWE
HUN
BGRCAN FIN
DNK
TWN

TGO

NGA
DZA IRN
GAB
SYR COG
AGO
VEN

TTO
GIN

BOL
EGY

−8

HKG
SGP

−9

AUT

y = 1.168 + 0.798*x, R−sq = 0.27
(0.096) (0.123)

NLD

−8

−7
−6
Log(Risk Content of Exports)

−5

−4

−4

Figure 2. Risk Content of Exports and GDP per Capita, 1970–99

−9

Log(Risk Content of Exports)
−8
−7
−6
−5

NGA

IRN
DZA

AGO
COG
SYR
BOL
GIN
EGY

TGO
NER
SLE MRT

GAB
VEN
TTO

IDN
GNQ
CMR

SAU OMNQAT
KWT

ECU
CHL
PNG
JOR PER
ZAF
JAM

NOR
BHR BHS
BMU
AUS

BFA TCDMNG CAF
MLI
GNB
GHA
GMB
UGA
BEN VNM
SEN
TZA
RWA
MWI
MOZ PAK
NPL
ETH BDI MDG
KEN
KHM
LAO
BGD IND

ALB
MAR
GUY
FIN
ZWE
MEX
TUN
FJI
ISL
CAN
CIV
POL
PRY
ISR
SYC
COL
BGR
HND NIC GTM CRI
SWE
BLZ
ROM
BRA URY
KNA
AUT
NZL
SLV
NLD CHE
LKA
MUS ARG
DEU
GBR
PAN
IRL
JPN
DJI
TUR
DOM
ESP FRA
LBN
MYS KOR
HUN GRC
USA
BRBSGP ITA
PRT
CYP
TWN
HTI
HKGDNK
PHL THA
CHN
y = −6.722 + −0.060*x, R−sq = 0.00
(0.774) (0.092)

6

7

8
Log(GDP−per−Capita)

9

10

Notes: Terms-of-Trade Volatility is calculated over 1970–99 using Penn World Tables data. GDP per Capita
is calculated as an average over 1970–99 using Penn World Tables data. The Risk Content of Exports is
constructed using the average trade shares for the period 1970–99.

35

Figure 3. Strength of Comparative Advantage in Risky Sector and Specialization

LR 6

.
..........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
......
..........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
......
..........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.....
..........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
......
..........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.....
..........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.......
.........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.......
.........
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
........
.........
.
.
.
.
.
.
0


pR θ − pS H
1

-

pR θ − pS

Herfx 6

1

1
2

....
.
....
....
.
.
....
..
....
...
.
.
.
.....
....
.....
.
.
.
.
.....
...
......
.....
.
.......
.
.
.
........................................

0

-

pR θ − pS

36

Figure 4. Risk-Weighted Comparative Advantage, the Risk Content of Exports and Specialization

Herfx 6

1

1
2

....
.
....
....
.
.
....
...
....
...
.
.
.....
..
.....
...
.
.
.
.
.....
..
......
.....
.
.
.......
.
.
.........................................

0

-

RiskCA

37

.01

Figure 5. Risk Content of Exports and the Herfindahl of Exports, 1970–99
NGA
QAT
IRN
SAU
OMN
ARE

Risk Content of Exports
.005

AGODZA
GAB KWT
COG
VEN
SYR
BOL
TGO
GIN
TTOEGY
IDNNOR
SLE
ECU
MRT CHL
CMR
PNG
JORZAF
PER
BMU
AUS
JAM
ALB
MAR
CAF ZWE
MNG
GUY
FIN
MEX
TUN
GHA
FJI
GMB
ISL
UGA
CAN
BEN
CIV
SEN
POL
PRY
TZA
ISR
SYC
RWA
VNM
COL
MWI
MOZ
BLX
BDI
NIC
PAK
NPL
MDG
BGR
ETH
KEN
KHM
CRI
MMR
HND
SWE
REU
GTM
BLZ
LAO
ROM
BRA
BGD
KNANZL
AUT
SLV
URY
NLD
IND
LKA
CHE
MUS
ARG
DEU
GBR
PAN
IRL
JPN
FRA
DJI
TUR
DOM
ESP
LBN
MYS
HUN
GRC
KOR
USA
BRB
PRT
CYP
ITA
SGP
TWN
DNK
HTI
HKG
THA
PHL
CHN
NER
BHS BHR
GNQ

0

SOM
TCD BFA SDN
MLI
GNB

.8

.6

.4
Herfindahl of Exports

.2

0

Notes: The Risk Content of Exports and the Herfindahl index of export shares are constructed using the
average trade shares for the period 1970–99.

Figure 6. Risk Content of Exports and Mean Risk of Exports, 1970–99

.01

NGA
QAT
IRN
SAU
OMN
ARE

Risk Content of Exports
.005

AGO
DZA
KWT
GAB
COG

VEN
SYR
BOL
TGO
EGY
TTOGIN

0

IDN
NER
NOR
SLE
BHS BHR
ECU
CHL
MRT
GNQ
CMR
PNG
JOR
ZAF
PER
BMU
AUS
JAM
SOM
TCD
BFA
SDN
ALB
MAR
CAF
MNG
MLI
GNB
GUY
FIN
ZWE
MEX
TUN
GHA
FJI
GMB
ISL
UGA
CAN
BEN
CIV
SEN
POL
PRY
TZA
ISR
SYC
RWA
VNM
COL
MWI
MOZ
BLX
BDI
NIC
NPL
PAK
MDG
BGR
ETH
KEN
KHM
CRI
MMR
HND
SWE
REU
GTM
BLZ
LAO
ROM
BRA
BGD
KNA
AUT
NZL
SLV
URY
NLD
IND
LKA
CHE
MUS
ARG
DEU
GBR
PAN
IRL
JPN
FRA
DJI
TUR
DOM
ESP
LBN
MYS
HUN
GRC
KOR
USA
BRB
PRT
CYP
ITA
SGP
TWN
DNK
HTI
HKG
THA
PHL
CHN

0

.005
.01
Mean Risk of Exports

.015

Notes: The Risk Content of Exports and the Mean Risk of export shares are constructed using the average
trade shares for the period 1970–99.

38

0

0

.2

.2

Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6

Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6

.8

.8

1

Figure 7. Lowess Estimates of the Relationship Between a Country’s Export Specialization and
its Risk-Weighted Comparative Advantage

0

.1
.2
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.3

0

.4

.8
Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6
.2
0

0

.2

Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6

.8

1

(b) All Sectors, Panel

1

(a) All Sectors, Cross Section

.1
.2
.3
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

0

.05
.1
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.15

0

(c) Manufacturing Sectors, Cross Section

.05
.1
.15
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.2

(d) Manufacturing Sectors, Panel

Notes: These graphs present Lowess estimates of the relationship between Herfx and RiskCA for crosssectional (130 obs.) and five-year panels (780 obs.) data. The solid line is the estimated Herfx, and
the ’– –’ lines represent ± two-standard deviation (95 percent) confidence bands, which are calculated by
bootstrapping with 10,000 replications.

39

5
Slope
−10
−25

−15

−20

−10

−15

Slope
−5

−5

0

0

5

Figure 8. Estimated Lowess Slope Coefficients

0

.05

.1
.15
.2
.25
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.3

0

.4

(b) All Sectors, Panel

Slope
−10
−30

−20

−15

−20

−10

Slope

−5

0

0

5

10

(a) All Sectors, Cross Section

.1
.2
.3
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.02

.04

.06
.08
.1
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.12

.14

0

(c) Manufacturing Sectors, Cross Section

.05
.1
.15
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.2

(d) Manufacturing Sectors, Panel

Notes: The graphs plot the estimated Lowess slope coefficients (β̂) for each local linear regression of Herfxct
on RiskCAct : Herfxct = α + βRiskCAct + εct , where α is a constant in the cross-sectional regressions, and
a matrix of country and time dummies in the panel regressions. The thick lines are significantly different
from zero at 95 percent (estimated by two standard deviations via bootstrapping 10,000 times), while the
thin lines are insignificantly different from zero. Figures 8(a)-8(d) correspond to the Lowess estimations in
Figures 7(a)-7(d), respectively.

40

1
.8
Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6
.2
0

0

.2

Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure 9. Semi-Parametric Estimates of the Relationship Between a Country’s Export Specialization and its Risk-Weighted Comparative Advantage

0

.1
.2
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.3

0

.4

(b) All Sectors, Panel

0

0

.2

.2

Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6

Herfindahl of Export
.4
.6
.8

.8

1

1

(a) All Sectors, Cross Section

.1
.2
.3
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

0

.05
.1
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.15

0

(c) Manufacturing Sectors, Cross Section

.05
.1
.15
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.2

(d) Manufacturing Sectors, Panel

Notes: These graphs present semi-parametric estimates of the relationship between Herfx and RiskCA for
cross-sectional (109 obs.) and five-year panels (579 obs.) data. The solid line is estimated Herfx, and
the ’– –’ lines represent ± two-standard deviation (95 percent) confidence bands, which are calculated by
bootstrapping with 10,000 replications.

41

5
−25

−6

−20

−4

−15

Slope
−10

Slope
−2
0

−5

2

0

4

Figure 10. Estimated Semi-Parametric Coefficients

0

.05

.1
.15
.2
.25
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.3

0

.4

(b) All Sectors, Panel

Slope
−20
−50

−15

−40

−10

−30

Slope
−5

−10

0

0

5

10

(a) All Sectors, Cross Section

.1
.2
.3
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.02

.04

.06
.08
.1
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.12

.14

0

(c) Manufacturing Sectors, Cross Section

.05
.1
.15
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.2

(d) Manufacturing Sectors, Panel

\
\ct
Notes: The graphs plot the estimated Lowess slope coefficients (β̂) for each local linear regression of Herfx
\
\
on RiskCAct : Herfx
ct = α + βRiskCAct + εct from the last step of the semi-parametric procedure. The
thick lines are significantly different from zero at 95 percent (estimated by two standard deviations via
bootstrapping 10,000 times), while the thin lines are insignificantly different from zero. Figures 10(a)-10(d)
correspond to the semi-parametric estimations in Figures 9(a)-9(d), respectively.

42

.6
.8
Herfindahl of Exports
.4
.2

0

0

Risk Content of Export
.005

Risk Content of Exports
.005

.01

.01

1

Figure 11. Lowess Estimates of the Relationship Between a Country’s Risk Content of Exports,
Specialization, and its Risk-Weighted Comparative Advantage: Manufacturing Sectors

0

.1
.2
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.3

0

.3

(b) All Sectors, Cross Section

0

.05
.1
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage

.15

.4
.5
Herfindahl of Exports
.2

0

.0005

.3

Risk Content of Exports
.001
.0015
.002

Risk Content of Export
.001
.002
.003

.0025

.6

.004

(a) All Sectors, Cross Section

.1
.2
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

0

(c) Manufacturing Sectors, Cross Section

.05
.1
Risk−weighted Comparative Advantage

.15

(d) Manufacturing Sectors, Cross Section

Notes: These graphs present Lowess estimates of the relationship between RCX, Herfx and RiskCA for
cross-sectional (130 obs.) data. For the two figures in the left column, the solid line is the estimated RCX,
and the ’– –’ lines represent ± two-standard deviation (95 percent) confidence bands, which are calculated
by bootstrapping with 10,000 replications. For the two figures in the right column, the solid line replicates
the estimated RCX from the left column, while the ’– –’ line represents the estimated Herfxs, depicted in
Figures 7(a) and 7(c), respectively.

43

Table A1. Country Summary Statistics by One-Digit Sector for the Growth Rate of Real Value
Added per Worker: 1970–99

Country
Australia
Austria
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
China, P.R.: Hong Kong
China, P.R.: Macao
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cyprus
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Fiji
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Guatemala
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Korea
Luxembourg
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Netherlands

Agriculture
Mean
Std. Dev.
-0.0236
0.1228
0.0137
0.0569
...
...
0.0666
0.1567
...
...
0.0345
0.1197
0.0215
0.1016
0.0526
0.1588
0.0370
0.0676
0.0160
0.1445
...
...
-0.0133
0.1461
0.0039
0.1105
0.0191
0.0864
0.0254
0.1100
...
...
0.0507
0.1245
0.0807
0.0998
...
...
0.0242
0.0824
...
...
0.0502
0.0515
...
...
...
...
0.0164
0.0766
...
...
...
...
...
...
0.0413
0.0903
0.0027
0.0683
0.0240
0.1141
0.0307
0.0532
0.0089
0.0869
0.0102
0.0425
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
-0.0251
0.1360
0.0413
0.2116
0.0205
0.0718

44

Mining
Manufacturing
Mean
Std. Dev.
Mean
Std. Dev.
0.0477
0.1029
0.0272
0.0427
-0.0156
0.1753
0.0225
0.0343
...
...
-0.0122
0.1528
...
...
...
...
...
...
0.0315
0.0413
0.1321
0.6334
...
...
0.0331
0.1598
0.0255
0.0530
0.0467
0.2312
0.0345
0.1343
0.0847
0.0720
...
...
0.1180
0.5845
0.0433
0.0751
...
...
0.0205
0.0608
0.0659
0.3046
0.0270
0.0617
0.0060
0.1905
-0.0151
0.1086
0.0167
0.0736
0.0314
0.0597
0.0445
0.2921
0.0036
0.0629
...
...
0.0351
0.2104
...
...
0.0280
0.1115
-0.0227
0.1645
...
...
...
...
0.0037
0.1429
0.0467
0.1761
0.0320
0.0642
...
...
0.0273
0.0289
0.0108
0.1580
0.0285
0.0363
...
...
0.0155
0.0518
...
...
0.0109
0.0958
0.0431
0.1770
-0.0553
0.1044
...
...
0.0255
0.0928
...
...
0.0304
0.1027
...
...
0.0455
0.0887
-0.0576
0.3505
0.0606
0.1117
0.1966
0.4703
0.0681
0.0531
0.0684
0.1748
0.0249
0.1555
-0.0013
0.0947
0.0162
0.0612
-0.0462
0.2440
-0.0053
0.0795
0.0045
0.1509
0.0235
0.0498
...
...
0.0108
0.1436
...
...
0.0613
0.0574
...
...
0.0011
0.1189
...
...
0.0060
0.1879
...
...
0.0318
0.0509
...
...
0.1009
0.0536
...
...
0.0032
0.0758
...
...
0.0105
0.0587
0.1079
0.3324
...
...
0.0345
0.1938
...
...
continued on next page

continued from last page
Country
New Zealand
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Senegal
Singapore
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan, P.O.C.
Tanzania
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Zimbabwe

Agriculture
Mean
Std. Dev.
...
...
0.0336
0.0733
0.0182
0.0726
0.0250
0.0736
...
...
-0.0028
0.0677
...
...
-0.0190
0.1356
...
...
0.0584
0.2448
...
...
...
...
0.0337
0.1746
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
0.0299
0.1316
0.0021
0.1765
0.0411
0.1247
0.0130
0.0629
0.0070
0.0731
...
...
0.0142
0.1211
...
...

Mining
Mean
Std. Dev.
...
...
0.1584
0.3883
0.1890
0.5821
0.1830
0.8098
...
...
0.0141
0.2497
...
...
0.2015
0.4029
...
...
0.0981
0.4016
...
...
...
...
0.1781
0.5674
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
0.1698
0.5699
0.0377
0.2395
0.0611
0.2558
0.0961
0.1730
0.0239
0.1305
...
...
0.0231
0.2874
...
...

Manufacturing
Mean
Std. Dev.
0.0096
0.0559
0.0159
0.0540
0.0467
0.0860
0.0116
0.0885
-0.0181
0.1347
0.0385
0.2113
0.0179
0.1202
0.0088
0.0752
0.0217
0.2205
0.0556
0.0570
-0.0032
0.0713
0.0300
0.0752
0.0092
0.0733
0.0173
0.0797
0.0307
0.1965
0.0416
0.0476
-0.0386
0.1348
...
...
0.0069
0.1442
0.0363
0.0917
0.0210
0.0585
0.0237
0.0292
0.0310
0.1379
...
...
0.0447
0.0907

Notes: The means and standard deviations (St. Dev.) are calculated on the growth rate of real value added
per worker for 1970–99. A ‘...’ indicates missing data for the country in the given sector for this time period.
These data are used to calculate the Σ matrix in Section 4.1.

45

Table A2. Sector Summary Statistics: 1970–99

ISIC
1
2
311
313
314
321
322
323
324
331
332
341
342
351
352
353
354
355
356
361
362
369
371
372
381
382
383
384
385
390

Sector Name
Agriculture
Mining and quarrying
Food products
Beverages
Tobacco
Textiles
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Leather products
Footwear, except rubber or plastic
Wood products, except furniture
Furniture, except metal
Paper and products
Printing and publishing
Industrial chemicals
Other chemicals
Petroleum refineries
Misc. petroleum and coal products
Rubber products
Plastic products
Pottery, china, earthenware
Glass and products
Other non-metallic mineral products
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Fabricated metal products
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electric
Transport equipment
Professional & scientific equipment
Other manufactured products

Growth
Mean Std. Dev.
0.0222
0.1144
0.0722
0.3566
0.0217
0.1510
0.0348
0.1864
0.0635
0.2442
0.0316
0.1805
0.0249
0.1618
0.0291
0.2132
0.0290
0.2119
0.0312
0.2159
0.0240
0.1822
0.0421
0.2129
0.0351
0.1721
0.0522
0.2658
0.0374
0.1739
0.0648
0.3574
0.0598
0.3285
0.0288
0.1859
0.0323
0.1818
0.0412
0.2210
0.0501
0.2501
0.0389
0.1799
0.0461
0.2566
0.0408
0.2532
0.0267
0.1703
0.0331
0.1853
0.0385
0.1793
0.0455
0.2167
0.0407
0.2080
0.0269
0.1931

Notes: The means and standard deviations (St. Dev.) are calculated on the growth rate of real value added
per worker for 1970–99.

46

47

Country
Angola
Nigeria
Iran, I.R. of
Qatar
Oman
Saudi Arabia
Gabon
Kuwait
United Arab Emirates
Congo, Republic of
Algeria
Syrian Arab Republic
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea
Norway
Mauritania
Egypt
Sierra Leone
Niger
Netherlands
Togo
Papua New Guinea
Trinidad and Tobago
Cameroon
Bahrain, Kingdom of
Central African Rep.
Jordan
Gambia, The
Australia
Bolivia
South Africa
Bermuda
Chile

Risk Content
of Exports
0.0113
0.0108
0.0097
0.0096
0.0089
0.0084
0.0083
0.0080
0.0069
0.0067
0.0067
0.0060
0.0049
0.0037
0.0035
0.0032
0.0032
0.0030
0.0029
0.0028
0.0026
0.0024
0.0020
0.0019
0.0019
0.0018
0.0017
0.0017
0.0016
0.0015
0.0014
0.0014
0.0014
0.0013
Largest export sector
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Industrial chemicals
Petroleum refineries
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture
Petroleum refineries
Mining and quarrying
Industrial chemicals
Agriculture
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Non-ferrous metals

Second Largest Export Sector
Other manufactured products
Agriculture
Agriculture
Industrial chemicals
Transport equipment
Petroleum refineries
Agriculture
Petroleum refineries
Petroleum refineries
Other manufactured products
Petroleum refineries
Agriculture
Petroleum refineries
Agriculture
Industrial chemicals
Agriculture
Agriculture
Petroleum refineries
Other manufactured products
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture
Agriculture
Industrial chemicals
Mining and quarrying
Non-ferrous metals
Other manufactured products
Mining and quarrying
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture
Food products
Non-ferrous metals
Other manufactured products
Agriculture

Share of Top 2
Export Sectors
Herfx
0.9666
0.8791
0.9462
0.8406
0.9070
0.7632
0.9110
0.7317
0.8835
0.7053
0.9066
0.6305
0.9669
0.6812
0.9697
0.5989
0.8055
0.5329
0.8214
0.5291
0.9639
0.5128
0.8519
0.4988
0.7877
0.3668
0.8983
0.4213
0.8029
0.3440
0.5487
0.2513
0.9809
0.4812
0.5785
0.2503
0.7139
0.3011
0.9098
0.5592
0.8563
0.5754
0.8479
0.3652
0.7294
0.3008
0.5228
0.1892
0.7843
0.3204
0.7538
0.3097
0.6722
0.2733
0.6401
0.2230
0.6558
0.3176
0.4963
0.1659
0.4820
0.1761
0.3973
0.1160
0.5781
0.2150
0.5818
0.2003
continued on next page

Table A3. Risk Content of Exports Across Countries for the 1990s

48

continued from last page
Risk Content
Country
of Exports
Mongolia
0.0013
Ecuador
0.0012
Peru
0.0011
Chad
0.0011
Colombia
0.0010
Somalia
0.0010
Indonesia
0.0010
Malawi
0.0009
Burkina Faso
0.0009
Jamaica
0.0008
Mali
0.0008
Guinea-Bissau
0.0007
Benin
0.0007
Sudan
0.0007
Finland
0.0007
Guyana
0.0006
Mozambique
0.0006
Tanzania
0.0006
Iceland
0.0006
Kenya
0.0006
Zimbabwe
0.0006
Ghana
0.0006
Uganda
0.0006
Myanmar
0.0006
Djibouti
0.0006
Nepal
0.0006
Bulgaria
0.0006
Côte d’Ivoire
0.0006
Paraguay
0.0006
Burundi
0.0005
Senegal
0.0005
Pakistan
0.0005
Bahamas, The
0.0005
Rwanda
0.0005
Israel
0.0005
Vietnam
0.0005
Seychelles
0.0005
Largest export sector
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture
Non-ferrous metals
Agriculture
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture
Agriculture
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Paper and products
Food products
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Textiles
Industrial chemicals
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Textiles
Transport equipment
Agriculture
Other manufactured products
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture

Second Largest Export Sector
Non-ferrous metals
Mining and quarrying
Food products
Transport equipment
Agriculture
Food products
Wood products, except furniture
Food products
Food products
Mining and quarrying
Machinery, electric
Mining and quarrying
Textiles
Food products
Machinery, electric
Mining and quarrying
Iron and steel
Food products
Food products
Food products
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Food products
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Food products
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Food products
Food products
Food products
Food products
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Industrial chemicals
Food products
Mining and quarrying
Agriculture
Food products

Share of Top 2
Export Sectors
Herfx
0.4934
0.1876
0.7995
0.3645
0.5131
0.1789
0.9710
0.9002
0.5180
0.1664
0.9354
0.8204
0.3705
0.1120
0.9025
0.7021
0.9014
0.7291
0.4873
0.1837
0.8704
0.6933
0.8221
0.6208
0.8716
0.5998
0.8978
0.5897
0.4190
0.1320
0.5588
0.2290
0.6806
0.3263
0.8005
0.4614
0.7927
0.4209
0.8410
0.4539
0.5821
0.2478
0.5448
0.2138
0.9855
0.4949
0.7589
0.4264
0.4110
0.1315
0.8011
0.3501
0.2433
0.0738
0.8087
0.4194
0.7798
0.3834
0.9577
0.4669
0.7558
0.3171
0.7227
0.3223
0.5270
0.1780
0.9116
0.4324
0.3240
0.1020
0.3933
0.1225
0.8827
0.4019
continued on next page

49

Country
Canada
Belize
Brazil
Cambodia
Lao People’s Dem.Rep
Belgium-Luxembourg
Ethiopia
Reunion
Madagascar
Bangladesh
Honduras
Nicaragua
Guatemala
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Poland
Morocco
Romania
Panama
Sweden
India
Ireland
New Zealand
Switzerland
Mauritius
St. Kitts and Nevis
Austria
Haiti
Uruguay
Germany
Argentina
Albania
Spain
Fiji
France
Mexico
Lebanon

continued from last page
Risk Content
of Exports
0.0005
0.0005
0.0005
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
Largest export sector
Transport equipment
Agriculture
Food products
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Transport equipment
Food products
Food products
Agriculture
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Transport equipment
Machinery, except electrical
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Machinery, except electrical
Food products
Machinery, except electrical
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Agriculture
Machinery, except electrical
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Food products
Machinery, except electrical
Food products
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Transport equipment
Food products
Transport equipment
Machinery, electric
Other manufactured products

Second Largest Export Sector
Mining and quarrying
Food products
Agriculture
Agriculture
Wood products, except furniture
Industrial chemicals
Agriculture
Agriculture
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Agriculture
Agriculture
Food products
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Agriculture
Food products
Agriculture
Iron and steel
Agriculture
Transport equipment
Textiles
Industrial chemicals
Agriculture
Professional & scientific equipment
Food products
Transport equipment
Transport equipment
Agriculture
Agriculture
Transport equipment
Agriculture
Leather products
Agriculture
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Machinery, except electrical
Transport equipment
Agriculture

Share of Top 2
Export Sectors
Herfx
0.3693
0.1170
0.8268
0.3514
0.2932
0.0886
0.8137
0.3945
0.6936
0.2840
0.2922
0.0757
0.8202
0.3434
0.8368
0.4992
0.6715
0.2973
0.8165
0.5138
0.8109
0.3493
0.6807
0.2848
0.6611
0.2841
0.6563
0.2679
0.6976
0.3314
0.1769
0.0581
0.4952
0.1649
0.3335
0.0884
0.6407
0.2175
0.3343
0.1035
0.2877
0.0905
0.4015
0.1212
0.5912
0.2001
0.3454
0.1073
0.8566
0.4090
0.5655
0.2163
0.2928
0.0786
0.6826
0.3619
0.4507
0.1415
0.4023
0.1099
0.5625
0.1763
0.4295
0.1299
0.3579
0.1053
0.6982
0.2820
0.3365
0.0930
0.4199
0.1232
0.4044
0.1140
continued on next page

50

Risk Content
of Exports
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
Largest export sector
Machinery, except electrical
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Machinery, electric
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Machinery, except electrical
Transport equipment
Machinery, except electrical
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electric
Machinery, except electrical
Food products
Machinery, electric
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Food products
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electric
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Machinery, except electrical

Second Largest Export Sector
Transport equipment
Industrial chemicals
Agriculture
Agriculture
Machinery, except electrical
Agriculture
Transport equipment
Agriculture
Machinery, electric
Agriculture
Machinery, electric
Machinery, except electrical
Transport equipment
Machinery, electric
Machinery, except electrical
Transport equipment
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electric
Machinery, electric
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electric

Share of Top 2
Export Sectors
0.3419
0.5348
0.4004
0.7040
0.3661
0.5422
0.4922
0.4506
0.3380
0.3469
0.4712
0.2751
0.3165
0.4818
0.5262
0.2905
0.3550
0.4190
0.6041
0.5401
0.3238
0.3543

Herfx
0.0904
0.2172
0.1243
0.3103
0.1120
0.2500
0.1782
0.1396
0.1024
0.0995
0.1367
0.0822
0.0839
0.1528
0.1823
0.0783
0.0936
0.1308
0.2077
0.1914
0.0921
0.1080

Notes: This table reports the risk content of exports, RCXct , as defined in the text, along with the information on the top two export sectors
and their share in total manufacturing exports. “Herfx” is the Herfindahl index of the export shares. All figures are averages for 1990-99.

Country
United Kingdom
Tunisia
Turkey
Sri Lanka
Korea
Dominican Republic
Japan
Cyprus
United States
Greece
Taiwan, P.O.C.
Hungary
Italy
Barbados
Malaysia
Portugal
Denmark
China, P.R.: Hong Kong
Singapore
Philippines
China, P.R.: Mainland
Thailand

continued from last page

Table A4. Residual Regressions of Specialization of Exports on Controls for Semi-parametric
Estimation

Income per capita
(Income per capita)2 /100
Log(Population density)
Log(Population)
Log(Distantness)
Log(Financial open)
Observations
Countries
R2
Country Effects
Time Effects

All Sectors
Cross Section
Panel
-0.036**
-0.004
(0.006)
(0.006)
0.137**
0.046**
(0.028)
(0.017)
0.026**
4.415
(0.008)
(5.496)
-0.029**
4.565
(0.008)
(5.495)
0.024
0.066
(0.042)
(0.133)
0.007
0.010
(0.019)
(0.012)
111
583
111
0.490
0.838
yes
yes

Mfg. Sectors
Cross Section Panel
-0.032**
0.011
(0.010)
(0.007)
0.121**
0.001
(0.046)
(0.021)
0.004
10.887
(0.013)
(6.719)
-0.019
11.028
(0.013)
(6.717)
0.023
0.024
(0.071)
(0.163)
0.010
0.009
(0.031)
(0.014)
109
583
109
0.161
0.819
yes
yes

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at
1%. This table reports the unbiased linear estimated coefficients, γ̂ c , from the semi-parametric estimation
Herfxct = γ 0c Xct + g (RiskCAct ) + εct . The estimates come from an OLS regression in the second step of
the procedure. The sample period is 1970–99. In the cross-sectional specifications, all variables are period
averages. In the panel specifications, all variables are 5-year averages over 1970–74, 75–79, 80–84, 85–89,
90–94, and 95–99. Income per capita is measured in thousands real PPP-adjusted US dollars (source: Penn
World Tables). Population density is area divided by population. Distantness is defined as GDP-weighted
distance to all potential trading partners. Population, land area, and total USD GDP come from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators, while bilateral distances come from CEPII. Financial openness is
defined as (total external assets + total external liabilities)/GDP, obtained from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2006).

51

Risk Content of Exports −− Common Matrix
.0005
.001
.0015
.002
.0025

Figure A1. Comparison of Risk Content of Exports Computed using Country-Specific and Common Covariance Matrices

NOR

IDN

CHL

AUS

FIN
CAN
COL
PAK SWE
AUTDEU
MUS
PAN
JPN
FRA GBR
KOR
USA TWN
CYP
ITA PRTHKG
DNK

ISR
CRI

0

PHL

0

.005
.01
.015
.02
Risk Content of Exports −− Country−Specific Matrices

.025

Notes: The Risk Content of Exports variables are constructed using the average trade shares for the period
1970–99. On the horizontal axis is the Risk Content of Exports computed using covariance matrices specific
to each country. On the vertical axis is the headline Risk Content of Exports measure used in this paper,
computed using the same covariance matrix for all countries.

52

1975

1980

1985

1990

2
1.5
.5

(mean) riskvcx
1
0

1.5

2

1.5

.5
0

(sum) herfx
1

.5

(mean) meanriskx
1

2
1970

0

2
.5
0

1.5

2
1.5

(mean) riskvcx
1

.5
0

1.5

(sum) herfx
1

.5
0

(mean) meanriskx
1

2

Figure A2. Risk Content of Exports Over Time for a Selection of Countries

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

(c) Chile

1985

1990

1995

1985

1990

1995

4
3
1
0

(mean) riskvcx
2

4
3
(sum) herfx
2
1
0

3
1
0

(mean) meanriskx
2

4
1970

1980

(b) Kenya

2
.5
0

1.5

2
1.5

(mean) riskvcx
1

.5

(sum) herfx
1
0

1.5
.5
0

(mean) meanriskx
1

2

(a) Japan

1975

1970

1975

1980

(d) Norway

Notes: — Risk content of exports, – – Herfx, - - - MeanRisk. Measures based on five-year averages of export
shares.

53

.8

Figure A3. Export Specialization and Domestic Production Specialization

KWT

Herfindahl of Exports
.4
.6

FJI
SEN
TTO
BGD
MWI
ECU
CHL
LKA
PAK
GTM
NZL
HND
TZA
PER

MUS
ISL
JAM

.2

COL
CRISYR
MYS
PAN
SGP
ZWE
JOR
URY
JPN
PHL
AUS
EGY
HKG
CAN
FIN
ZAF
MEX
TUR
DNK
USA
CYP
TWN
DEU
ISRIRL
SWE
IND
KOR
GRC
NOR
ESP
GBR
FRA
IDN
ITA
HUN
PRT
AUT
POL

0

y = 0.033 + 1.718*x, R−sq = 0.59
(0.024) (0.190)

0

.2
.4
Herfindahl of Production

.6

Notes: The Herfindahl Exports variables are constructed using the export shares in the manufacturing sector
for the period 1970–99, while the Herfindahl of Production is constructed using value added shares in the
manufacturing sector for the period 1970–99. The solid line is a 45-degrees line, while the dashed line
represents the regression fitted line.

0

0

.2

.2

Herfindahl of Exports
.4
.6

Herfindahl of Exports
.4
.6
.8

.8

1

Figure A4. The Range of Feasible Outcomes

0

.1
.2
.3
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage
Min/max range

.4

Actual data

0

.05

.1
.15
.2
Risk−Weighted Comparative Advantage
Min/max range

(a) All Sectors

Actual data

(b) Manufacturing Sectors

54

.25

