NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEALS VERSUS RULES:
POLICY IMPLEMENTATION UNCERTAINTY AND WHY FIRMS HATE IT
Mary Hallward-Driemeier
Gita Khun-Jush
Lant Pritchett
Working Paper 16001
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16001

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

We would like to thank the NBER for support via the Africa Project. We would like to thank Bill
Battaile, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Ahmed Galal, Ricardo Hausmann, Marialisa Motta, Stephen O’Connell,
Rita Ramalho, James Robinson, Dani Rodrik, Luis Serven, Andrei Shleifer, Sylvia Solf and David
Weil for conversations that were, perhaps unbeknownst to them, helpful and to Dan Willey for motivation
on this topic. Mamadou Bady Balde provided the materials on Rwanda. The views expressed here
do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Gita Khun-Jush, and Lant Pritchett. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deals versus Rules: Policy Implementation Uncertainty and Why Firms Hate It
Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Gita Khun-Jush, and Lant Pritchett
NBER Working Paper No. 16001
May 2010
JEL No. D81,H32,J23,K2,O17
ABSTRACT
Firms in Africa report "regulatory and economic policy uncertainty" as a top constraint to their growth.
We argue that often firms in Africa do not cope with policy rules, rather they face deals; firm-specific
policy actions that can be influenced by firm actions (e.g. bribes) and characteristics (e.g. political
connections). Using Enterprise Survey data we demonstrate huge variability in reported policy actions
across firms notionally facing the same policy. The within-country dispersion in firm-specific policy
actions is larger than the cross-national differences in average policy. We show that variability in
this policy implementation uncertainty within location-sector-size cells is correlated with firm growth
rates. These measures of implementation variability are more strongly related to lower firm employment
growth than are measures of "average" policy action. Finally, we show that the de jure measures such
as Doing Business indicators are virtually uncorrelated with ex-post firm-level responses, further evidence
that deals rather than rules prevail in Africa. Strikingly, the gap between de jure and de facto conditions
grows with the formal regulatory burden. The evidence also shows more burdensome processes open
up more space for making deals; firms may not incur the official costs of compliance, but they still
pay to avoid them. Finally, measures of institutional capacity and better governance are closely associated
with perceived consistency in implementation.

Mary Hallward-Driemeier
World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
mhallward@worldbank.org
Gita Khun-Jush
University of Chicago
5416 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60615
gkhunjush@uchicago.edu

Lant Pritchett
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
lant_pritchett@harvard.edu

Deals versus Rules:
Policy Implementation Uncertainty and Why Firms Hate it
For my friends, anything; for my enemies, the law.
Oscar R. Benavides, President of Peru, 1933-1940

Introduction
The Investment Climate Enterprise Surveys have conducted detailed face-to-face
interviews of over 80,000 entrepreneurs in over 100 countries, including 11,150 in 34
Sub-Saharan countries. The issue firms most frequently identify as an obstacle to their
growth is “regulatory and economic policy uncertainty” (Smith and Hallward-Driemeier
2005). In Africa, 60 percent of surveyed firms regard “economic and regulatory policy
uncertainty” as an obstacle to their firms’ growth and almost 40 percent regard it as a
“severe” or “major” obstacle (figure 1). This finding creates a puzzle. The other
obstacles in the top 5 of Figure 1 are easy to understand: lack of electricity creates
obvious production problems, macro-economic instability has its obvious consequences,
firms everywhere and always complain about taxes, and “access to finance” as been
widely investigated as a limit to firm expansion. Moreover, these other obstacles-infrastructure, macroeconomic instability, access to finance--are relatively easily linked
to related literatures on country aggregate growth and to programmatic activities. But
until we understand what “regulatory and policy uncertainty,” is, such that firms hate it
so, we cannot investigate its impacts at the aggregate level nor what could be done about
it.

1

Figure 1: “Policy Uncertainty” is commonly identified by firms as a “severe”
or “major” obstacle to firm growth in Africa
Major/Severe

Moderate

Minor

Electricity
Policy Uncertainty
Tax Rate
Macroeco. Instability
Access to Finance
Anticompetitive
Crime
Transportation
Tax Administration
Corruption
Skills Availability
Licenses
Access to Land
Customs Clearance
Telecoms
Labor Availability
0

20

40

60

80

100

Percent of firms reporting constraint

Source: Author’s analysis using Enterprise Surveys in 2002-20051

One view is that firms are concerned about a lack of political and policy making
stability which leads to frequent and unpredictable changes in the formal rules and de

1

“Policy uncertainty” as one of the potential constraints was not included in the later surveys; it was
changed to “political uncertainty” which gets much lower ratings. This chart reflects the responses of 3317
firms in 13 countries. Data presented in the rest of the paper uses the full sample of firm responses in SubSaharan Africa.

2

jure policies2. We argue for a different interpretation of firms’ complaints. Firm
profitability is not directly affected by “policy” but rather by policy actions taken by
agents of the state in the course of policy implementation. In the weak organizational and
institutional environments for policy implementation which are common across Africa,
policy does not predict policy implementation actions at the firm level. Even when
policy is unchanging and even when there is macroeconomic stability, firms face massive
risk and uncertainty about their operations and profitability due to variability in policy
actions that result from the weak capability for implementation of regulatory and
economic policy.
The evidence of variation in the implementation of policy is striking. We show
for a number of specific policy outcomes – getting an operating license, getting a
construction permit, clearing goods through customs – that the variation within country is
much greater than the variation across countries. Studies that focus on measures of
country averages are thus missing where most of the action is.
This variation in implementation in turn is associated with greater activities on the
part of firms to influence the outcomes (e.g. paying bribes or spending time with
officials). Rather than coping with the application of (more or less favorable) rules, the
evidence indicates firms in Africa face deals. The policy actions actually taken are
influenced by actions (e.g. bribes) and characteristics (e.g. political connections) of the
firm. However deals do not assure a certain outcome. Deals themselves create ex ante or
ex post uncertainty to a differing extent depending on whether deals are ordered or

2

Another view is that firms are complaining about the inter-temporal uncertainty and volatility in overall
economic conditions created by poor macroeconomic policy—but “macroeconomic instability” is a
separately identified obstacle.

3

disordered, and whether these deals are open to all firms or deal-making opportunities are
closed (i.e. only open to firms with certain characteristics).
The firm level evidence also shows why firms hate uncertainty. Variations in
policy outcomes are correlated with lower firm employment growth. In fact, it is the
variations themselves rather than the average level of policy outcome that is associated
with firm performance. We then use a “differences in differences” approach to show
policy implementation uncertainty has a greater relative effect on firms that are more
susceptible to policy uncertainty.
Finally, we show that, in Africa, there is almost no connection between firm
reported policy actions and de jure policies (e.g. as measured by Doing Business) across
countries. Knowing the Doing Business measure, i.e. how long a procedure is formally
supposed to take, provides no power in explaining how long it will actually take a firm to
complete the procedure. Doing Business is not aiming to measure what actually happens,
but what is supposed to happen. That there is little relationship between the two is
further evidence of the role of deals in shaping the conditions firms actually face. And,
telling, the gap between the de jure and de facto measures grows with the burdens or
delays implied in the formal rules. The space for deals thus grows with the burden of the
regulatory requirements.
This finding, however, raises questions about whether reforming the formal rules
will have much impact.3 If a rule is not being applied, changing it may have little impact.
But it could still reduce costs if the space for deals shrinks and firms need to incur lower

3

The Doing Business project rightly points out that the regulatory requirements can be excessively
burdensome in some countries. Simplification of the regulations can remain a worthy goal – with added
benefits of reducing the institutional capacity needed for implementation and likely helping close some of
the opportunities for bribes.

4

costs of avoiding the less burdensome formal requirements. Simplifying the rule could
even be associated with longer times reported by firms if compliance actually goes up in
the wake of reforms.4 In looking for impact, the role of institutional quality appears to
help predict the range of reported firm outcomes. Where institutional quality is higher,
rules are more likely to be implemented, and so changes in rules will more likely be
reflected in the conditions firms face. This insight helps reconcile the “institutions rule”
evidence on aggregate performance with the mixed success of “policy reform.”
The paper is organized as follows. The second section elaborates on the
distinctions between policy, policy implementation and policy actions. The third section
then develops in greater detail the framework for thinking about policy uncertainty,
focusing on the gap between de jure rules and actual implementation, and the behaviors
firms engage in to shape the actions taken by agents of the state.
The third and fourth sections of the paper look at the evidence provided by firm
surveys of 11,150 firms in 34 countries in Africa. It looks at the variation in policy
outcomes as reported by firms, and relates that variation to deal making activities and to
firm performance. Section four focuses on three specific regulatory areas: getting a
construction permit, getting an operating license and clearing customs. It shows the lack
of relationship between the de jure and de facto policies indicating the prevalence of
deals, and that this gap grows with the de jure delays and burdens of the regulations. It
also relates the findings to broader debates about institutional capacity and discusses
possible avenues for reducing implementation uncertainty.

4

In additional work we are testing the impact using the time series data; here the results are based on crosssectional variation. (Hallward-Driemeier and Pritchett 2010).

5

I)

Policy, Policy Implementation and Policy Actions
The conceptual distinction can be illustrated with the example of a seemingly

simple policy, like an import tariff. With strong capability for implementation a firm’s
import tax payments actually collected (the policy action) are well-predicted by the firm’s
import value (a factual state of the world) and the tariff code (the rule or mapping
between states of the world (sales) and policy actions (tax to be collected)). In a study of
Kenya’s import tariff revenues Pritchett and Sethi (1994) compared the ad valorem
collected rate (ratio of revenue collected to declared import value) to the actual ad
valorem rate for the 3,392 separate items of the tariff code. There was surprisingly little
connection as items with the same official rate had very different collected rates5. For
instance, of the 435 items in the tariff code with an ad valorem tariff of 40 percent (which
recorded positive imports) the 25th percentile of the collected rate was zero, the mean was
20 percent and the 75th percentile was 24 percent. An item’s tariff rate had very little
predictive power for the tariff actually paid due to a large number of officially sanctioned
deviations due to exemptions for certain purposes, exemption of certain importers, etc.
which meant that even if two firms were importing exactly the same item they might pay
completely different rates.6
A recent study of the acquisition of driver’s licenses in Delhi, India (Bertrand,

5

While naively one might imagine a regression of ad valorem revenue on ad valorem rates might yield a
coefficient of 1 and an R-squared near one (e.g. items with a 20 percent rate would have 20 percent
collection rates and items with 30 percent would have a 30 percent collection rate (this is not about demand
elasticity as this is normalized by import value). Instead, across a variety of functional forms the official
rate could only explain about a fifth of the observed variation across items in the collected rate. Of course
this potentially vastly overstates the connection between the official tariff and tariff collected on the actual
import of specific items as it does not include smuggling or mis-declaration.
6
If exceptions are formally recognized and there are enough of them, then the lack of correlation on the
non-exempted tariffs and actual revenue could be an example of the rules actually being applied. However,
the variations within narrow ranges of goods are too great. Rather, the existence of such exemptions
themselves indicates that deals were sought – and granted.

6

Djankov, Hanna and Mullainathan 2007) also illustrates nicely the conceptual
distinctions between policy, policy implementation and a policy action. The policy in
Delhi stipulates the standard requirements for a driver’s license: proof of identity, age,
residence, and demonstrated competence in driving. The policy also stipulates the formal
procedures for implementation: the organization responsible for issuing driver’s licenses
and the criteria they are to use in assessing whether or not an individual meets the
requirements, e.g. the standards of proof for age, and the contents of the examination to
assess driving competence. Actual policy implementation was investigated by asking
people on their way into the building to get a driver’s license to cooperate in a study of
the process. The subjects were divided into a control group and two treatment groups
(one of which was given a bonus if they got their license faster and one of which was
given free driving lessons to improve their driving skills). The control group results are
interesting in their own right. First, most people in the control group hired a private agent
to handle the process for them. Second, only 12 percent of the control group who hired
an agent took the driver’s examination required by policy--but the policy action was that
they received a license anyway. In contrast, 94 percent of control group people who did
not hire an agent were required to take the driving exam and many were failed7. Clearly
in the process of policy implementation states of the world that mattered according to the
policy rule (knowing how to drive) did not matter in determining the policy action for
individuals while states of the world that did not matter in the policy rule (paying a tout)

7

At least in their first attempt, many then learned and hired an agent and got their license that
way. The study also documents that the public policy purpose of the driving examination was subverted
by the exemption from the exam. They hired a firm that teaches driving in Delhi to independently assess
the driving competence of those who received licenses and found that, of those in the control group that
hired an agent and got a license 69 percent were “automatic” failures in a driving test.

7

did matter in determining the policy action8.
In an idealized “rules” world policies are predictive of policy actions as the
implemented policy action is in each instance the result of the application of the policy
mapping between factual states of the world and the actions stipulated by the policy and
nothing else—the rules are the rules. In a “deals” environment policy actions are the
result of not just the policy rule but also potentially the lack of organizational capability
for enforcement, inadequate technical capacity of front-line implementers, self-interest of
the agents of the government at all levels (politicians and bureaucrats), as well as actions
and characteristics of firms. In a sufficiently weak environment everything is potentially
uncertain and/or negotiable. While negotiated firm specific deals have some positive
effects in freeing firms from the worst consequences of unreasonable rules, the nature of
the environment for deals can potentially create the types of policy implementation
uncertainty that inhibits transactions, investments, firm growth, and productivity.

II)

The Varieties of “Policy Uncertainty”?
Things should be as simple as possible, but no simpler.
Albert Einstein
Firm outcomes, such as profitability, revenue growth, and hence firm choices are

affected by the actual and anticipated policy actions taken by agents of the state. Policy
actions are choices made by the agents responsible for policy implementation. We call
the way firms form their expectations of future policy actions a positive model of
implemented policy (PMIP). If firms have, and complain of, policy uncertainty this
8

Another interesting finding of the study is that not all elements of the policy were equally subverted:
hiring a tout could easily get you out of taking the driving exam but not so easily get you out of having the
right documentation.

8

implies that firms have, at least implicitly, probability distributions over future policy
actions. Economic agents make both business decisions (e.g. investments, product
choice, technique of production, number of workers to hire, who to contract with,
whether to comply with regulations) and policy implementation influence decisions (e.g.
how much to offer as a bribe, which politician to befriend, whether to register or remain
informal) based on their PMIP, which maps from states of the world to distributions of
policy actions, distributions which naturally both central tendencies and dispersions. We
are not going to impose much structure (e.g. rationality, optimality, completeness) on
firms’ PMIPs, rather we only use the concept to provide distinctions needed to
distinguish the relevant types of policy uncertainty, which we then attempt to illustrate
and disentangle empirically in section II and document the impacts of policy uncertainty
on one dimension of firm performance, job growth, in section III9.
A notional policy mapping (NPM) is one element of a PMIP. We define this as
the officially declared mapping from specified contingent factual conditions about the
world to actions by an agent of the state10. With perfect enforcement “rules are the
rules” and hence the predicted policy action for any firm is a function only of the
administratively relevant state of the world. Under perfect enforcement (and perhaps
therefore full compliance as an equilibrium choice of firms)11 there is a natural conflation

9

Pritchett (2005) has a much fuller discussion of the elements of positive models of implemented policy.
A completely fixed action that is not contingent is just a special case in which the mapping is from all
states of the world into the same policy action (e.g. a k percent money growth).
11
Given the PMIP each firm also makes compliance decisions. With additional assumptions about
probabilities of detection one can produce an equilibrium in which the optimizing calculation of all agents,
both agents of the state in implementation and economic agents, is compliance and firm voluntary truthful
disclosure and compliance is the equilibrium strategy. But even if the rules are not susceptible to influence
firms might try to avoid the rules, even with the expectation that if detected the rules (including penalties
for non-compliance) will be enforced. We often get parking tickets but never try and bribe the meter maid.
But, without explicit limitations on implementation capacity one can nearly always specify an enforcement
mechanism that induces compliance as an equilibrium strategy.
10

9

of “policy” with the notional policy mapping in that it is assumed all firms have the same
PMIP and that each firms PMIP is the NPM, all firms share the positive prediction that
the NPM predicts policy actions conditional on states of the world independently of the
firm’s influence activities or characteristics. This assumption is common, such as the
seemingly innocuous expression of a firm’s net of sales tax revenue as their sales less
their sales times the sales tax rate:
Revenuei = Salesi – * Salesi
This simple equation assumes that the actually tax rate paid is common across all firms
and that reported sales and actual sales are equal.
“Rules are the rules” is not a terrible first approximation in many policy domains
for many firms in countries with strong implementation capability. Firms expect their
property tax to determined by the administratively declared valuation and the property tax
rate, their feasible land-use to be determined by zoning, their labor contracts (e.g.
minimum wage) to be determined by the labor law—and expect this with relatively little
variation12. Of course, even in strong implementation countries there is regulatory
capture (including “intellectual capture”) in some policy domains that influences
implementation for favored firms or industries13. Moreover, in many policy domains
even in countries with “good” implementation environments there is often substantial
uncertainty in determining the “state of the world” creating ample room for both
extended regulatory disputes, civil lawsuits, and scope for deals—there are after all
12

Or at least expect variation of predictable types. I may think the probability of getting a speeding ticket
might be low, even if I drive above the limit, but have essentially zero expectation of getting a speeding
ticket if I am factually driving exactly the speed limit. So while there is “uncertainty” about enforcement it
is of a predictable type.
13
Johnson (2009) argues both the financial crisis in the United States and the responses to that crisis are an
illustration of garden variety control of segment of elites over the policy process seen in many developing
countries.

10

850,000 lawyers in the USA.
In the idealized “rules are the rules” world, conditional on the NPM and the states
of the world, there is little policy action uncertainty from implementation. In this case
the major form of “policy uncertainty” would be inter-temporal uncertainty in the
notional policy mapping.
In Sub-Saharan Africa the NPM or de jure rules are only one element of a firm’s
PMIP. We define a policy deal as firm specific policy implementation (in one or more
policy domains) that results in policy actions that differ from what would have happened
under perfect enforcement and/or full compliance.14 A deal might explicitly create
separate conditions for a firm or project—e.g. waiving compliance with certain
regulations, creating special definitions. Deals can be across policy domains for a
specific firm, such firms with politically powerful patrons who are then treated
differently in all regulations (e.g. with the tax collector, the safety regulation, land use,
labor, etc.). Deals might just allow the firm to do in a timely manner what is allowed
under the rules so the deal simply avoids a delay that might be longer than perfect
enforcement. Some policies essentially require deals, as when the policy is conditioned
on subjective or non-verifiable characteristics or intended to achieve policy goals for
which there is no consensus model (e.g. land use for which zoning waivers are available
for certain purposes, “high bandwidth” industrial policies to promote innovation).
Influencing deals may take the form of pure persuasion, meeting with government agents
14

This is analogous to descriptions of transactions between private individuals. Completed transactions
between individuals that are routine and hence involve no specificity are not typically referred to as
“deals”—if I buy a dozen eggs from the grocery store it would be odd to say I completed a “deal” with the
grocery store of money for eggs. There is another entire literature about Africa how weak environments for
transactions (including the inability to rely on government for disinterested and objective third party
enforcement of private deals) lead greater portions of economic activities to be carried out as “deals”
involving specific characteristics rather than as routine arms-length transactions (e.g. Fafchamps 2004).

11

to induce a favorable decision even without illicit consideration of any type. Deals can
also be the result of illicit collusion, paying direct bribes, donations, favors. Deals can be
large—between a firm and the president of the country or small between a person running
a tortilla stand on the side of the road and the local police officer/precinct or anywhere in
between. We also consider subterfuge as a type of deal, altering the policy action
through attempting to avoid the implementing agents, hide sales or assets, or remain
entirely unregulated through “informal” status, particularly if the agents are willing to
play along or avoid investigations. We intend the word “deal” as descriptive of the firm
level hyper-specific nature of the implemented policy actions and do not intend the
contrast with “rules” to necessarily have pejorative connotations (“getting a deal” or
“reaching a deal” are usually positive).
In modeling, simple is good, but too simple is bad and “rules are the rules” is far
too simple understand why African firms say they hate “policy uncertainty.” Firms
operating in countries with weak implementation capability must have PMIPs (mappings
from states of the world to distributions of policy actions) that are more complex than
“rules are the rules” (or alternatively that the NPM is the PMIP) in three ways. First,
firms pursue actions to influence policy actions and hence their PMIP must provide a
mapping not just between factual states of the world and policy actions but also between
influence activities of the firm (e.g. lobbying, bribes, evasion, meeting with officials,
hiring facilitators) and policy actions, even conditional on the “facts”15. Second, policy
implementation may depend not just on the actions of the firms but also their
characteristics, so that a PMIP is, at least potentially, heterogeneous across firms, even in
15

This is distinct from the usual discussion of the changes in behavior induced by the regulation, along the
lines of the tax aversion (avoiding taxed activities) versus tax evasion (avoiding tax on activities)
distinction.

12

the same country and sector. Third, firms face a variety of regulations and hence have to
consider the connections across regulatory domains (e.g. becoming a legally recognized
firm may bring the attention of tax authorities, getting a bank loan may require land-use
registration) which may not share PMIPs.
To discuss how deals translate into policy implementation uncertainty for firms
we need two further distinctions in the policy domain specific environment for deals.
The first is whether the deals environment is “ordered” or “disordered.”16 The second is
whether deals environment is “open” (available to all firms) or “closed” (deals are
available depending on firm characteristics and/or a limited number of deals are
available). The distinction between rules and deals and the distinctions among deal
environments (discussed more fully below) creates five possible categories: rules, open
ordered deals, closed ordered deals, open disordered deals, closed disordered deals.
These produce conceptually different sources of “regulatory and economic policy
uncertainty” and potentially distinct magnitudes of this as a concern to firms (Table 1).

16

This is closely related to the distinction of Shleifer and Vishny (1993) between “organized” and
“disorganized” corruption.

13

Table 1: Relationship between rules, types of deal environments (open versus
closed, ordered versus disordered) and the associated type of “regulatory and
economic policy uncertainty”
Rules
Uncertainty of type (a) inter-temporal changes in the notional policy mapping (formal
rules)
Deals
(Implemented policy actions depend on factors, including characteristics or actions of the
firm, not specified in the notional policy mapping)
Open
Closed
(deals are available to all
(deals are available only to
firms)
favored firms)
(a) and
(a) and (b) and (c) and
Ordered
(small ex-post uncertainty
(b) uncertainty about the (d) uncertainty about which
about policy
“influence function” and
type of treatment a firm will
implementation—deals stay
(c) uncertainty about the
receive depending on its
done)
reliability and durability
characteristics
of deals
(firms have differential ex
ante (type b) and ex post
(type c) uncertainty
depending on
characteristics)
Disordered
(large ex-post uncertainty—
deals cannot secure
predictability)

(a) and Type b
uncertainty is much larger
as the “influence
function” is less known
and type c uncertainty is
much larger as deals do
not stay done (as other
parties may intervene)

(a) and Type b uncertainty
is much larger as the
“influence function” is less
known and type c
uncertainty is much larger
as deals do not stay done (as
other parties may intervene)
and type d is larger as who
are the “favored” firms may
change dramatically over
time due to political
instability

Keep in mind these types of deals environments are not characterizations of
“countries” but rather are firm specific and policy domain specific, interactively (some
firms may have favorable deals in one policy domain but not another). Kaufmann,

14

Mastruzzi, and Zavaleta (2003) in Bolivia show large differences in the implementation
capability across public sector organizations so firms in some policy domains may face
“rules are the rules” while in others face disordered deals. This extends to firm specificity
as well as firm may have a closed ordered deal in one domain (say, capture of their
industry’s regulatory body) but face open ordered deals in others, say land use,
disordered deals in another, say tax collection and face “rules are the rules” in yet
another, say environmental regulation. Firms, even in the same activity in the same
country do not face some common abstract “policy” or even “environment” rather they
form their own positive model specific to each policy domain.
Open Ordered Deals. One possibility, as illustrated in the driver’s license
example above is a deviation from the formal rules (hiring a facilitator exempts one from
the driving exam) but one that is open to all comers and one with a predictable outcome
(hiring the facilitator does result in the license). In this case there may be very little
policy implementation uncertainty—the deals environment resulting from weak
organizational capability for policy implementation takes the form of thwarting the public
policy purpose of the regulation (ensuring competent drivers) but does not create
uncertainty. That is, while there might be variation (across regions or countries) in how
costly or onerous a barrier the deal constitutes to getting a driver’s license it need not
create much additional uncertainty. One might even argue that the “rules” versus “deals”
distinction does not hold as this is just a contrast of “formal rules” with “informal rules”
but we prefer the distinction between formal rules and deals when the policy deal is in
explicit violation of the formal rule and hence not legally enforceable in principle17.

17

Some of the literature on “institutions as rules” takes a very broad view of a rule as a pattern of “beliefs
norms and practices” and hence view “rules” and implemented formally or informally. However, we

15

An important distinction for open ordered deals versus other types is often is
between deviations in two conceptually distinguishable steps of policy implementation: a
“findings” or determination step, in which the state of the world is administratively
established, and a policy action step, in which the agent of the state (of the designated
organization) takes an action. While conceptually distinct, these steps may be taken by
the same person simultaneously (e.g. health inspector inspects the premises and issues a
rating), but they may also done by different agents in the same organization (e.g. one
agent gives the driving exam and another issues the licenses), or undertaken by separate
organizations at distinct times (e.g. a policeman issues a citation, a court adjudicates the
claim and issues a fine). Table 2 gives examples from a variety of common functions of
the state: tax collection, regulation, and program implementation/service delivery just to
emphasize the conceptual distinction between findings and actions. This distinction is
important because many deals are not about violating the rules but rather about altering
the administratively declared state of the world—irrespective of the factual state of the
world--such that application of the rule produces the desired policy action. This tends to
produce more ordered deals: once legally granted, even if in violation of the procedures
for doing so, the determination is often difficult to revoke.

maintain there is an important difference between “informal institutions” that arise outside of formal rules
that may provide quite stable environments for deals between private actors (Greif 2006) and practices,
even common widespread practices, that are explicitly forbidden by formal rules between agents of the
state and private actors.

16

Table 2: Policy implementation has “determination” and an “action” steps, examples
Determination phase,
Action phase
Notional Policy
declaration of administratively
mapping
relevant state of the world
Tax Collection
What type of good is it in the
Apply the specified rate to
Import Duties:
Tariff code from types
tariff code classification? Is it in the category from the
of goods to tariff rates
an “exempt” category? What is
tariff code and collect
the import value?
appropriate tax
What is the taxable value of the
Collect the tax resulting
Property Tax
Value of property to
property? Is it exempt?
from applying rate to
amount owed
assessed value
Regulation
Urban Zoning/
Is the activity of the designated
Issue zoning certificate for
Planning Specification
type, Residential? Commercial? the designated activity
of spatially allowed
Industrial?
types of activities
Does the applicant meet the
Issue driver’s license
Driver’s license
Personal qualifications
specified criteria (e.g. age,
to type of license
residence, competence) for the
type of license?
What is the value of the installed Allow charges sufficient
Allowable Rate of
capital?
to generate the stipulated
Return Utility
return on the capital
Regulation
Conditions of firm
providing to allowable
rates/services
Service Delivery/Program Implementation
Is the person eligible? What
Issue a check in the
Old Age Pension
From characteristics
were their total
appropriate amount
(e.g. contributions) to
contributions/relevant earnings?
eligibility and amount
Contracting for public works/service provision
Who are the qualified bidders?
Issue the contract to the
Road Construction
From “lowest cost
Which is the “best” bid on the
chosen bidder.
qualified bid” to contract specified criteria?

Closed Ordered Deals. The distinction with open ordered deals are deals that are
ordered—in that they are roughly predictable both ex ante and ex post—but which are

17

“closed” in that they are only available to some firms18. In a “closed ordered deals”
environment characteristics of the firm may alter the scope of deals available. There may
be implicit or explicit “regulatory forbearance” for firms owned by the government, or by
members of the President’s family, or firms owned by powerful families or business
groups or the military, or special deals for some international firms. Fisman (2001) has
shown for instance that the stock market value of firms owned by people related to the
Indonesian ruler Suharto were substantially higher than otherwise because of their
connections to Suharto19. In this case there is a different set of available deals for the
connected firms as the influence is done “wholesale” rather than “retail.” These firms get
deals that are closed in that the same deal may not be available to other firms. In fact, as
documented in Hellman, Jones and Kaufmann (2000) Seize the State to Seize the Day
dominant firms may use their influence over governments not only to improve the policy
actions they face but actively worsen the policy and policy actions their competitors face
(both formally and informally)20 Similarly, Slinko, Yakolev, and Zhuravaskaya (2005)
show that politically connected firms receive specific differential treatment that both
improves their performance and lowers the performance of other firms in the same region
that are not politically connected.
This distinction implies that the “policy environment” varies across firms so that one
would expect policy action variability (even conditional on a state of the world) so that
18

Although we had made this open/closed distinction prior to reading North, Wallis and Weingast (2009)
our distinction is obviously similar to their distinction between “open access” societies in which something
like the same set of rules applies to all actors versus what they term as “natural” states in which there are,
explicitly or implicitly, one set of rules for the “elite” and another for others.
19
A month or so after Suharto was replaced by Megawati a businessman saw Megawati’s husband in a
restaurant with prominent private sector figures. He said to his lunch companion “I didn’t know
Megawati’s husband was a business man.” The response: “He is now.”
20
Again, a process not at all exclusive to developing countries as “raising rival’s costs” through regulatory
actions that favor incumbent firms (such as imposing the adoption of techniques or standards costly to
entrants or licensing procedures) is an integral part of regulatory capture.

18

the goods of connected firms may clear customs faster, their licenses approved more
rapidly, their taxes audited less often, etc. This creates differential policy action
uncertainty across different firms as the non-connected firms may face an “open
disordered” deals environment, which is not a notion of “dualism” not necessarily
between “informal” and “formal” firms but between “favored formal” firms and all
others, including non-favored firms in the formal sector21.
Disordered Open Deals. Not all “open” deals environments are “ordered” in that the
mapping between the influence actions of firms and the policy action outcome are known
with reasonable precision up front and the policy action taken ex post of the firm’s
influence actions will stay done. As Shleifer and Vishny (1993) argue, the distinction
between “organized” and “unorganized” corruption can make a difference in its impact.
In a disordered deals environment firms feel the need to use deals but still have large
residual inter-temporal uncertainty about future policy actions. Bribing an official today
may not mean I don’t face a different official tomorrow. Or, across policy domains,
bribing an official to get a land-use permit may not help getting an operating license or
protect me from police extortion or a rapacious tax collector.
Disordered Closed Deals. A “closed” deal environment also may be uncertain, in
two dimensions. First, it is inter-temporally uncertain if the underlying power that
structures the “order” in the deals is itself inter-temporally uncertain. So, it may well be
the only way to do business is to have the President’s brother-in-law as a partner but that
same connection may prove to be a negative when that President is replaced by another.

21

De Soto’s Mystery of Capital describes this as those firms inside a bubble in which they could count on
their property rights being protected by the formal apparatus of government and those that cannot. This
should not be elided with the notion of access to the “rule of law” or not as the protection of property rights
inside the bubble need not be the operation of the “rule of law” open to all but rather a different order.

19

This isn’t to conflate the order with a particular political administration, this varies
widely as some closed power structures may persist across political administrations
(when “elites” have a common interest) while others may not. This distinction has been
made in various ways, identifying regimes that are “patrimonial” or the focus on the lack
of constraints on the executive, which combined with inter-temporal uncertainty about
regime duration, can create substantial firm level uncertainty, even for those firms inside
“closed” deals.

III)

How to interpret firms’ aversion to “Policy Uncertainty”
Rules? In a knife fight? No rules.
Harvey Logan to Butch Cassidy
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid

The Enterprise Surveys implemented by the World Bank contains both subjective
assessments by firms about the obstacles to their growth, but also quantitative
information about how long it takes to get various things done and how much they cost –
including actions to influence policy implementation, like bribes or gifts or meeting with
government officials. Using these data we show six overlapping pieces of evidence that
firms complaints of “policy uncertainty” are mainly about policy implementation
uncertainty.
First, to show uncertainty we start by showing firm level variability. The
Enterprise Surveys have been used to document differences in the investment climate
across countries or regions within countries (Dollar, Hallward-Driemeier, and Mengistae
2005) by looking at the averages or central tendency across firms and, at times, the
differences in averages across types of firms, such as small versus large. Here we focus
20

directly on the variability of the firms’ response to the same questions in the same
country about how long accomplishing various regulatory tasks take to show that there is
indeed enormous variability, which we will then show is related to policy implementation
uncertainty. Figure 2 shows the 90th, 50th and 10th percentiles for the most recent
Enterprise Survey data for each Africa country for all countries with more than 30 firm
respondents for each question. Figure 2a shows the distribution of the number of days to
get an operating license and Figure 2b the number of days for imports to clear customs.
What is striking is that the variation across firms within a country is, in many
instances, enormously larger than the differences across countries. Of the 24 countries
the country with the lowest median time is Rwanda, at just 1 day and many others report
low median times—the median in Ghana is only 4 days. The slowest are Zambia and
South Africa at 21 days. Clearly the “typical” firm gets a license much faster in Rwanda
or Ghana than Zambia or South Africa. However, 25 percent of firms in Zambia or South
Africa report they get their license in 7 days or less while 25 percent of firms in Ghana
report it took them 14 days or longer. Taking the 90th-10th or 75th-25th percentile spread
as a measure of dispersion across firms shows that in all but one country (Rwanda) the
90th-10th spread is as large as or larger than the maximum range (21 days) across
countries. The median 90th-10th spread in these countries is 46 days and the median 75th25th spread is 21 days. The implication is that firms that get licenses quickly get them
almost instantaneously while firms that get them slowly get them very slowly. The same
is true of spreads across firms of the time reported to get goods through customs. The

21

median 90th-10th spread across countries is 14 days, so that firms in the 20th percentile
report 1 to 2 days while firms in the 90th percentile typically report two weeks or more22.

Figure 2: Variability in policy actions across firms….
2a: Variability in days to get an operating license across firms (90th-10th
percentile difference) within countries

22

Obtaining construction permits is reported by fewer firms so only 12 countries had more than 30 firms
reporting times but there again the median 90th-10th percentile across firms in the same country was 84 days
compared the maximum cross country range of 68 days.

22

2b: Variability in days to clear customs across firms (90th-10th percentile
difference) within countries

Of course this reported variability is potentially the result of many sources of
heterogeneity and hence represents different types of firm uncertainty. One is the
possibility of measurement error in the firms’ responses. Another is that not all firms are
in the same sectors and there may be true “rules are the rules” variability if the rules
require different times for implementation (one would expect a construction permit to
take longer for a nuclear plant than a restaurant). But there are also other sources of firm
level variation from deals. Some of this firm level variability could reflect differences in
treatment of favored and disfavored firms by their characteristics (e.g. ownership). As
these policy implementation realizations are conditional on firms chosen influence
activities, some of the firm level variability could reflect firm’s uncertainty about the
influence function and some got a good deal and some a bad deal. Alternatively, some of
the variability could reflect firms’ differential willingness to trade off influence activities
23

for delay. Finally, some variability could just reflect randomness in implementation,
even after firms’ influence activities.
One piece of evidence that the variability is the result of unpredictable policy
implementation is that firms were asked if they believed that implementation of
government rules is “consistent and predictable.” Figure 3 shows the association
between the fraction of firms who believe implementation is “consistent and predictable.”
Across the countries, at least 40 percent of firms in Africa report that their positive
expectation (PMIP) of policy implementation is that it will have substantial
“unpredictable” uncertainty. Moreover, as can be seen in Figure 3 this is reasonably
associated with the 90th-10th percentile gap for days to get an operating license (Figure
3a) and days to clear customs (Figure 3b). For instance, in Mauritius where the intra-firm
variability is clearing customs only 8 days around two-thirds of firms believe rules are
predictable, whereas in Mozambique where the spread between the 25th and 75th
percentile is 28 days only 21 percent of firms agree that the implementation of the rules is
predictable.

24

Figure 3: Variability in policy actions across firms and beliefs in the
“consistency and predictability” of implementation
…3a: 90th-10th spread in days to get an operating license and fraction of firms
reporting implementation is “consistent and predictable”

…3b 90th-10th spread in days to clear customs across firms and fraction of firms
reporting implementation is “consistent and predictable”

25

A second piece of evidence that the firm variability is not simply random but is
related to firms’ perceived policy implementation uncertainty is that there are often
differences across firms in whether or not the implementation of rules is “consistent and
predictable” consistent with differences in whether firms face ordered versus disordered
implementation and how open or closed it is to all firms. Table 4 shows that in Nigeria,
which all agree is a weak overall implementation environment, small firms are much
more likely to believe that the government is not “consistent and predictable” than are
large firms (64 percent versus 39 percent). In Ghana, although firms are much more
likely in general to believe implementation is consistent and predictable, capital intensive
firms are much more likely to think implementation is consistent and predictable than
labor intensive firms (24 versus 39 percent). In the average of all firms in the Africa
sample it is the case that small firms are less likely to believe implementation is
consistent and predictable than large firms (54 versus 46 percent). While all evidence is
subject to multiple interpretations, these results are consistent with differences in the
policy implementation even when firms facing the same de jure policy.23 In an
environment of closed deals, firms would be more likely become large or capital
intensive if they have preferential access to deals to accommodate the uncertainty of
policy implementation, hence for those firms implementation is consistent and
predictable.

23

It is true that in some countries the de jure rules may vary by size. For example, large firms may need to
provide financial statements in calculating tax payments, while small firms may be assessed a ‘presumptive
tax’. This of course leaves more room for arbitrariness – and something over which to make a deal.

26

Table 3: Share of firms that disagree with the statement that implementation of
rules is “consistent and predictable” across types of firms
Type
Nigeria
Uganda
Ghana
Unweighted
average of
all firms
Small (Employees<6)
63.9%
43.4%
32.2%
53.9%
Medium(6<employees<21)
60.2%
47.6%
34.1%
50.6%
Large (Employees>21)
38.6%
41.5%
31.3%
46.4%
Labor Intensive
Capital Intensive
Services

59.5%
56.2%
61.2%

51.4%
40.1%
41.7%

39.0%
24.6%
30.7%

51.9%
50.3%
52.6%

Capital City
Medium/large
Small city

65.9%
55.5%
75.1%

46.2%
42.1%
35.5%

28.7%
40.9%
34.1%

53.2%
49.4%
60.5%

Total
59.7%
44.4%
32.1%
Source: Authors’ calculations with Enterprise Survey data.

51.90%

A third piece of evidence that policy implementation is uncertain is that firms engage
in actions aimed at influencing policy implementation, including actions, such as paying
bribes, that are not a part of the de jure policy implementation or the notional policy
mapping. The extent of policy influence activity firms report varies across countries and
across firms within a country. Table 4 shows the fraction of management time spent with
government officials, the fraction of firms who report paying bribes and the proportion of
revenue paid as bribes for those who do pay bribes. Obviously if the rules were followed
irrespective of whether a bribe was paid the fraction paying bribes would be small, but in
half of the countries half of the firms report paying bribes. The fraction reporting paying
bribes varies from ubiquitous, over 80 percent, in Burkina Faso, DRC, Guinea to 20
percent or less in Rwanda and South Africa.

27

Table 4: The extent to which firms take actions to influence policy implementation vary
across countries and across firms within countries
Country and year of
Percent of management
Bribes
survey
time spent dealing with
officials
Average
Standard
Percent Amount as a percent of sales
Dev.
paying Average Std dev Std dev
of those of those
of all
paying
paying
firms
a bribe
BurkinaFaso2006
11.01
15.30
97.7%
8.23
8.73
8.59
Guinea2006
3.74
6.84
92.4%
5.34
7.98
7.80
Cameroon2006
14.06
15.42
91.6%
3.88
8.87
8.44
Mauritania2006
6.10
12.70
90.4%
4.83
7.58
7.31
DRC2006
6.83
10.63
87.1%
5.13
6.67
6.45
Niger2005
13.20
19.39
86.2%
6.53
6.92
6.56
GuineaBissau2006
3.20
5.98
75.5%
4.66
5.38
4.98
Kenya2007
6.84
7.63
75.0%
3.82
4.46
4.20
Burundi2006
5.90
9.14
67.2%
8.89
7.01
7.07
Gambia2006
7.52
12.28
64.3%
6.62
8.49
7.15
Uganda2006
5.56
7.34
63.7%
6.20
6.80
6.08
Benin2004
8.29
14.39
57.6%
8.65
7.29
6.99
Tanzania2006
4.89
7.89
55.7%
5.83
6.86
5.87
Swaziland2006
4.66
7.08
55.3%
3.57
5.69
4.51
Angola2006
7.94
8.75
51.4%
6.21
7.43
6.04
Nigeria2007
6.63
9.43
46.9%
3.94
5.19
4.06
Botswana2006
5.42
9.10
45.7%
3.31
7.00
4.55
CapeVerde2006
14.06
18.55
33.3%
2.17
2.32
0.87
Ghana2007
3.69
6.27
33.3%
5.90
7.12
4.96
Lesotho2003
22.11
24.77
33.3%
1.79
3.06
1.93
Malawi2005
7.89
13.35
33.3%
6.73
8.43
5.78
Rwanda2006
4.99
9.43
29.1%
7.34
10.59
6.52
Mali2007
2.43
3.61
28.1%
4.07
5.06
3.24
Namibia2006
4.12
7.55
25.3%
4.96
7.63
3.65
Senegal2007
3.68
6.81
24.8%
6.30
8.19
4.90
Madagascar2005
22.19
23.00
24.2%
6.18
9.75
5.45
Zambia2007
5.56
8.32
20.1%
5.95
8.01
4.30
SouthAfrica2007
6.46
7.49
17.5%
4.97
9.07
4.23
Mauritius2005
11.28
14.94
17.1%
3.31
3.68
1.95
Mozambique2007
4.05
6.50
16.8%
8.71
9.07
4.93
Cross Country median
6.28
9.12
49%
5.58
7.21
5.22

28

Table 5 examines the variation across firms of the types of actions that could be
undertaken to influence policy implementation outcomes by examining the correlates of
(admitting to) deal making, measured as ‘bribes paid to ‘get things done’’. To investigate
if bribe paying is associated with policy implementation uncertainty we need a measure
of the policy uncertainty a firm faces. We proxy this by using the both the observed
levels and variability of similarly situated firms. We do this by forming summary
statistics of the level and variability of observations in the same “cell” (country, city,
sector, size) as any given firm.24 For instance, firms are asked what percent of
management time is spent with government officials. We can calculate not only how
much time firm i spent with government officials, but also the average of all other firms
in the same cell as firm i and the standard deviation of those firms. This captures the
differences across firms. We do the same thing for whether firms consider policy
implementation is “consistent and predictable”; how much firms disagree with the extent
of consistency and predictability there is in policy implementation might actually be a
good proxy for implementation uncertainty overall.
Table 5 shows that including the cell standard deviations, the average levels of
management time and consistency are not significant except in the case of the size of
bribes paid. While these associations are obviously subject to a variety of interpretations,
it is striking that whether a firm pays a bribe is associated with how much disagreement
there is among firms in the firm’s same location, sector, and size about whether
regulations are “consistent and predictable.” Similarly, paying a bribe is not associated

24

We exclude cells without at least 6 or more responses. We also ran robustness checks only using cells
with 30 or more responses and the results were similar.

29

with the average time similar firms spend with officials but with the differences across
firms in the same cell in the amount of time spent.25

25

Variation in the “cell” of firms in the assessment of consistency does not necessarily imply ex ante
uncertainty; some firms, for instance, the politically well connected, could know in advance the differential
treatment they would receive. The point is that deals involving bribes appear more likely not just when
firms think there is less consistency but where there is a difference across firms with respect to the extent of
consistency, i.e. when some firms report consistency and some do not, which means firms are uncertain and
this condition appears to be more favorable to try to influence policy actions via firm specific deals.

30

Table 5: Is paying bribes associated with policy implementation uncertainty?
Dependent variable: Firms reports paying a bribe, Probit regressions
(1)
(2)
(3)
‐0.147
Average: Share report consistent implementation
(0.101)
0.125**
STD: Reported consistency in implementation
(0.057)
Average: Management time
‐0.005
(0.006)
STD: Management time
0.012**
(0.005)
Average: Size bribe paid by others
0.088***
(0.011)
STD: Size bribe paid by others
‐0.027***
(0.007)
Firm Characteristics
Age_middle
‐0.031*
‐0.034**
‐0.033**
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.017)
Age_old
‐0.039**
‐0.042**
‐0.032
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.021)
Small
0.026
0.022
0.030*
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.017)
Medium
‐0.026
‐0.036
0.010
(0.026)
(0.027)
(0.034)
Large
0.034
0.032
0.052
(0.036)
(0.036)
(0.044)
Very large
0.005
0.004
‐0.002
(0.053)
(0.054)
(0.065)
Foreign
‐0.003
‐0.006
‐0.016
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.018)
Government
‐0.095**
‐0.088**
‐0.091*
(0.040)
(0.042)
(0.052)
Large city
‐0.083*** ‐0.102***
‐0.040*
(0.023)
(0.026)
(0.021)
Small city
‐0.092**
‐0.075*
0.024
(0.045)
(0.038)
(0.038)
Observations
12393
12088
10652
Chi2
2

Prob > Chi
Pseudo R2

3156

2800

2104

0.00
0.20

0.00
0.20

0.00
0.17

Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Cells defined by location‐sector‐size; country and sector dummies included

31

One difficulty in parsing the evidence about why firms reporting disliking “policy
uncertainty” is disentangling whether it is the fact of deviation per se or whether it is the
uncertainty created by “disordered” deals or whether firms are expressing resentment at
the uneven access to deals. An interesting finding comes from several of the surveys,
which asked a question meant to elicit whether the practice of bribery, if it was regular
and predictable, in and of itself constituted an obstacle to business. The firms were given
the following vignette:
Musyoka needs to renew a small business license from a local government office each
year. Bribes are welcomed. Musyoka usually includes an additional bribe with his
applications. When Musyoka had not included bribes, his application was sometimes
lost or there were long delays such that the firm had to re-file.
Firms were then asked “Does corruption represent an obstacle to the operation and
growth for Musyoka's business?”
Table 6: Are predictable bribes considered an obstacle?
Zambia
Mozambique
No obstacle
42.5
32.31
Minor
23.33
22.31
Moderate
24.17
23.08
Major
10
18.46
Severe
0
3.85
N
120
130

Mali
32.31
22.31
23.08
18.46
3.85
130

Nigeriaa
3.15
4.86
11.9
42.14
37.96
(1800)

Source: Author's calculations using Enterprise Survey extension modules
a) In Nigeria, the question was posed after a series of questions asking about corruption, while in the
other 3 countries it was part of extension module looking at issues of gender and the prior experience of
the entrepreneur.

Consistently more than half of firms in the three countries in which this was asked in
a specialized module about entrepreneur experience regarded this as either no or a minor
obstacle to business (Nigeria’s results are quite different but this may be the result of
“priming” as it was asked in a module about corruption and hence following a larger
32

number of questions about corruption). This suggests that firms are distinguishing
between “having to pay bribes” per se which in an open ordered deal environment creates
a predictable “tax” and policy uncertainty.
Another piece of evidence supports this conclusion. Firms in Cote d’Ivoire, Kenya,
Nigeria and Senegal survey responded to whether ‘policy uncertainty’ was related to
concerns about how existing laws and regulations would be applied to them as opposed to
intertemporal changes in the laws themselves. Just over 60 percent agreed it was a
moderate to severe constraint (similar to the rate given in figure 1). But even more
tellingly, firms who report “knowing a bribe will get something done” is not a constraint,
were less likely to see uncertainty in implementation as a constraint.
Table 6b:
Concern about how formal policies will be applied in practice is widespread -- but less so if you see deals as not
constraining

How large a constraint to the operation
of your business is "uncertainty about
how official, formal policies will actually
be applied to my business in practice"?

No/Minor constraint
Moderate constraint
Major/Severe
Total

All firms
39.5%
28.3%
32.2%
494

Of firms who rank 'knowing a bribe will
get something done' is not a constraint
52.3%
26.6%
21.1%
104

Supplemental survey of firms in Cote d'Ivoire, Kenya, Nigeria and Senegal

IV. Impact of Deals
As a final step, we turn to examine the impact of uncertainty and the extent of
deals on firm behavior. We look at firm employment decisions and employment growth
over a three year time period. The focus is not whether or not a particular firm benefits
from participating in a deal, but rather the effect of the ‘deals environment’ on firm

33

growth.26 Does the prevalence of deals affect firm growth? Does the orderliness of such
deals affect firm growth? This is a new question as while many studies have examined
the impacts of various dimensions of the policy environment on firm performance they
have focused on the average not the uncertainty. A very recent exception is Sequira and
Djankov (2010) who, in a detailed study of ports in Southern Africa find that firms will
ship to a much more distant port in order to avoid corruption. Their estimates suggest
that firms will incur additional shipping costs that are eight times the average bribe paid,
suggesting a very large willingness to pay to avoid the uncertainty induced by (coercive)
bribes.
To measure the ‘deals environment’, we again use the location-sector-size cells of
the firms. The regressions include both a measure of the average level of the deals
indicator and the standard deviation of that indicator within the cell. To the extent there
is greater variability within the cell, this is an indication of the disorderliness of the deals
– not everyone is able to get the same deal on the same terms. This variation could also
be an indicator of uncertainty about whether the deal struck will in fact be honored. If
uncertainty is the underlying concern, we would expect the results on the variation
measures to be particularly strong.
The dataset includes information on employment at the time of the survey and
three years prior to the survey. In calculating employment growth, we follow
Haltiwanger’s (2009) approach of using the difference divided by the average. This gives

26

Firm level regressions would also raise concerns about possibility endogeneity – whether expanding
firms attract the attention of officials and become targets for officials seeking additional payments. Using
location-sector-size averages has been used as a technique to address this concern (Dollar et al 2006,
Aterido et al. forthcoming). Here, our interest is different, how the averages and extent of variation
themselves affect firms’ decisions.

34

a value that is between plus and minus two and minimizes the role of large outliers that
can be present, particularly for smaller firms.
Again, a number of firm characteristics are controlled for, including the average
size of the firm over the time period, the age of the firm, its ownership (foreign-domestic,
state-private), its sector, and location within the country. The average size of the firm is
used rather than the initial size to minimize the effects of transitory changes in
employment (Haltiwanger 2009). Country dummies are included to absorb country
characteristics, so the variation is between firms within a country.
Another question regards the appropriate size to use in constructing these
averages. Most of the questions were made in reference to conditions at the time of the
survey, for which current size might be appropriate. However, if firms’ size has varied,
the responses may better be reflections of the experience of firms like what they had been
over a longer period. We opted for using average size. This has the added advantage that
it is not necessary to rematch firms to the measured location-sector-size indicators, which
would be necessary if firms changed size categories such their responses on deals
indicators would be used for, say, large firms, but the conditions they faced at the outset
were those of small firms.27
_

_

_

_

Our two principle measures of ‘deals’ are used: overall management time with
officials and the size of bribe payments made to ‘get things done.’ Standard errors are
then clustered by cell.
27

An alternative would be to exclude size as one of the dimensions in constructing cells; the results are
very similar although the significance levels are somewhat lower.

35

Table 7: Prevalence of uncertain deals discourages employment growth
Dependent variable: 3 year growth rate of permanent employees
Cell average meeting
time with officials
Cell Std. Dev. meeting
time with officials

(1)
0.014***
(0.003)
‐0.007**
(0.003)

‐0.078***
(0.012)
‐0.167***
(0.014)
‐0.027**
(0.011)
‐0.065***
(0.016)
‐0.099***
(0.021)
0.012
(0.012)
‐0.081***
(0.020)
‐0.005
(0.015)
0.004
(0.035)
0.116
(0.107)

0.006
(0.008)
‐0.010*
(0.006)
‐0.074***
(0.013)
‐0.161***
(0.016)
‐0.032***
(0.012)
‐0.070***
(0.018)
‐0.147***
(0.028)
0.006
(0.013)
‐0.094***
(0.029)
0.001
(0.022)
0.022
(0.036)
0.305***
(0.042)

Yes
13097
0.077

Yes
10419
0.066

Cell average pays
bribes
Cell Std. Dev. pays
bribes
Age: medium
Age: old
Medium
Large
Very large
Foreign
Government
Large city
Small city
Constant
Country, sector
dummies
Observations
R‐squared

(2)

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

The first result is that spending time with officials is indeed associated with better
firm outcomes. In areas where firms are able to make deals, growth is higher. To the

36

extent the time represents efforts to make deals with officials, on average, it appears to be
worth the effort. However, the inclusion of the standard deviation is also significant –
and negative. While securing a deal may be advantageous, to the extent there is
uncertainty regarding what is required to secure the deal, the benefits are reduced.
The average size of the bribe is not associated with higher growth. However, the
standard deviation of bribes paid is. Greater variation in the size of bribes paid in a
location-sector-size cell is associated with lower employment growth. Again, this would
be consistent with greater uncertainty about whether the deal, once struck, will actually
stick.
As a second approach to examine the issue of variability in deal making, we use a
difference-in-difference methodology. The approach tests whether the degree of
openness and orderliness of the system of deals matters, whether deals can be had by
anyone willing to pay, or whether the system is largely closed to all but those with the
right (political) connections. If the system is relatively open, the average level of bribe
may be high or low, but there should be relatively little variation in the size of bribes paid
or in the time managers spend with officials. However, if the system is less open, the
variation in bribes paid or the time spent with officials working out deals or seeking
compliance with regulations will likely be higher. If only some firms are benefitting
from the deals, the greater variation in bribes and/or management time should be
associated with relatively larger gaps in opportunities between the two groups.
As a first step we need to construct a measure of the extent to which sectors vary
in the degree to which they interact with officials. For firms in sectors that have a higher
underlying rate of interaction, the relative openness of making deals is likely to matter

37

more. To construct a measure of a sector’s intensity of interactions with officials, we use
the time spent in inspections, using Germany as the benchmark. Of all the countries that
have conducted an ES, it is the one whose measures of rule of law, control of corruption
and government effectiveness are strongest. To measure the orderliness of deals in a
location, we use two measures: the variation in the size of bribes paid and the variation in
the time managers spend with officials in that location.
In determining firms that are more or less likely to have access to orderly deals,
information on connections to officials would be desirable, but unfortunately is not
available to us. Rather, we use two proxies: size and age. Larger firms and older firms
are more likely to have developed close relationships with officials and to benefit from
the existing system of deals than smaller firms or newer firms still trying to get
established. Several papers have found that smaller firms are more likely to be adversely
affected by red tape and corruption (Aterido et al. forthcoming; Beck et al.2005). It is not
that small firms or young firms don’t try to get a deal – it is that the terms of the deal and
the security of the deal are likely to be more uncertain.
Thus the specification is the following:
,

where yls is the gap in growth rates between large and small firms in a given sectorlocation cell. Thus the regressions are testing whether the gap between large and small
firms performance is relatively larger in those sectors that would have more interactions
with officials and where deals are less open (i.e. greater variability in the bribe payments
made and the time spent with officials.).

38

As table 8 shows, the gap between large and small firms’ growth is relatively
higher in sectors with more interactions with officials and in locations where deals are
less orderly. This is particularly true when looking at firms by size. And the effects are
more significant for bribes paid than for management time spent with officials.
Table 8: Growth outcomes are relatively more disparate when disordered deals are
prevalent, particularly in sectors where more interactions with officials are needed
Difference-in-difference at the location-sector cell level

Dependent variable:
Std_Bribeslocation * Intensity of Govt Interactionssector

Gap in growth of large
versus small firms
(1)
(2)
0.0133**
(0.0066)

Std Management Timelocation *Intensity of Govt Interactionssector
Location dummies
Sector dummies
R2
N

Yes
Yes
0.33
260

Gap in growth of old
versus young firms
(3)
(4)
0.0065
(.0074)

0.0053*
(0.0029)
Yes
Yes
0.31
260

Yes
Yes
0.24
285

0.0047
(.0036)
Yes
Yes
0.28
285

Prevalence of disordered deals: i) std dev. of bribes paid in a location (metropolitan areas within countries)
ii) standard deviation of management time spent with officials in a location
Sectors are ranked by their 'intensity of interactions with officials', using Germany as the benchmark
Robust standard errors are reported; * ** significant at the 10 and 5 percent levels

Overall, these results underscore that just looking at the average level of deals
does not capture the story and that uncertainty about the policy implementation
environment is itself an important dimension affecting firms’ behavior.

39

V) “Send Lawyers, Guns and Money”: Doing Business with Deals
I was gambling in Havana,
I took a little risk,
Send Lawyers, Guns, and Money
Dad, get me out of this
Warren Zevon
Most of the self-reported obstacles to their own firms’ growth have both been
recognized in the macroeconomic literature as inhibitors of growth and have had clear
programmatic responses. While we cannot do full justice to the complex topics of how to
relate policy implementation uncertainty to economic growth and programmatic
responses, in this final section we hoped to at least point in some potentially promising
directions.
V.A) Policy implementation uncertainty and growth
The Hausmann, Rodrik, Velasco (2004) “growth diagnostics” framework starts
heuristically from the firm level first order condition for investment (marginal benefits
versus marginal costs) to develop a diagnostic tree to identify the contextually most
“binding” constraints. Figure 4 (Hausmann, Klinger, Wagner 2008) shows a simple
version of the growth diagnostic tree, in which the correspondence between a growth
framework and the firm’s complaints about obstacles to growth is easily seen: “high cost
of finance” to firms’ complaints of “access to finance”; “bad infrastructure” to firms
identification of “electricity” or “transport” or “telecoms”; “low human capital” to firms’
“skills availability” as a constraint). One major branch of the growth diagnostic is
“appropriability,” that, although investments would be productive, they would not be
reliably profitable to individual forms because of “low appropriability” from either
market failures (e.g. informational externalities, too little “self discovery” (Hausmann
40

and Rodrik (2002)) or coordination issues) or government failures. Government failures
can be macroeconomic risks, which are identified by firms as “macroeconomic
instability.” But government failures also play out in microeconomic risks, from either
government agents themselves or from other private agents with unreliable contracting.
Our interpretation is that firm complaints of “policy uncertainty” reflect concerns that
policy implementation uncertainty creates risks to the appropriability of the gains from
firm level investment or innovation28.
We argue that a number of the firm reported obstacles in Figure 1 are related to
appropriability risks created by policy implementation uncertainty. In addition to
“economic and regulatory policy uncertainty” firms identify not just “policy” variables
like the tax rate but also tax administration. Firms commonly identify customs
clearance as an obstacle, which is arguably more an implementation than a policy issue.
Firms’ expressed concerns with “licenses” and “access to land” combine both the policy
(is it de jure difficult) but also the de facto concerns about implementation. We believe
the broader lens of policy implementation uncertainty also provides a lens into
complaints about corruption, both in that it can be disordered and it can create obstacles
to firms when corruption is “closed” and is used to close off market competition.

28

Bigsten and Soderbom (2005) review the research based on a first round of firm surveys in Africa
and concluded the uncertainty, paired with irreversibility, explains low investment in African firms not low
productivity.

41

Figure 4: Growth diagnostic decision tree

Source: Hausmann, Klinger, Wagner 2008.
The focus on policy implementation uncertainty also draws a link between the
mainstream growth literature and firm level “policy uncertainty.” A substantial branch of
the growth literature argues that measures of “institutional quality” are related to
economic growth (e.g. Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson 2001). Even more strikingly,
several recent papers have argued that when “institutions” and measures of “policies”
(usually policy outcomes like budget deficits or inflation) are jointly included it is
institutions not measured “policies” that matter for long-run economic growth (Rodrik,
Subramanian and Trebbi 2004, Easterly and Levine 2003). As argued by Acemoglu,
Johnson, Robinson and Thaicharoen 2003 at the macroeconomic level this is because
macroeconomic symptoms like inflation are the result of institutional weaknesses, which
results in both poor policy and poor policy implementation. Our argument is the
microeconomic counterpart, low appropriability can inhibit growth and innovation not
42

necessarily as the result of bad policy (e.g. tax rates that are “too high”) but as the
combination of policy with weak implementation so that the implementation of complex
taxes results in substantial uncertainty.
The policy implementation interpretation links firms’ concerns about policy
uncertainty and the suggestive evidence about the impact of uncertainty on firm
employment growth with the growth literature, both the standard growth regression
literature and the literature on episodic growth, generally (e.g. Hausmann, Pritchett,
Rodrik 2005) and its application to Africa (Abarcha and Page 2007, Patillo et al. 2005)29.
V.B) Programmatic responses: de jure “Policy Reform”
As raising economic growth rates in Africa has been a development priority for
decades, there have been clear responses, both programmatic and in overall reform
efforts, to the major growth obstacles identified in the macroeconomic and
microeconomic literature. Obviously addressing “macro instability”—reducing inflation,
macroeconomic imbalances, exchange rate crises, debt—has been a major agenda for
decades. “Access to finance” has been addressed through both big picture reforms of the
financial sector and through programmatic attention to micro-credit and SME financing.
Infrastructure and its shortages as obstacles to growth are also again attracting enormous
attention and investments. Our argument is that inadequate conceptualization of the
problem of policy implementation has hindered effective response to the problem of
policy uncertainty30. It is not at all obvious that the typical approach to “policy reform” of

29

For instance, Abarcha and Page (2007) find that a variety of indicators of “institutional quality” (the
World Bank’s CPIA and all six components of the KKM indicators) are lower during growth decelerations.
30
One reaction to the empirical finding of consistently high levels of firms complaining of “policy
uncertainty” is that the question was dropped from the standard Enterprise Survey instrument precisely
because it was difficult to interpret the results and translate them into programmatic action.

43

modest, incremental, reductions to policy barriers without quite dramatic changes in
implementation can be effective in reducing policy uncertainty.
The Doing Business project has attempted to identify obstacles to private sector
firms’ growth by examining the de jure regulatory environment that firms face. The
existence of (reasonably) common indicators in both the Doing Business (derived from an
examination of the regulations) and Enterprise Surveys (from firm responses) allows a
comparison of the de jure notional policy mappings and reported de facto policy
actions.31 Figure 5 shows the results for three indicators: time to get a construction
permit (5a), days to start a business (5b), and time to import goods (5c). While there is
not an exact correspondence of the respective concepts, there are nevertheless three
striking points from these figures. One, there is almost no increase in the average
enterprise survey reported days with respect to the Doing Business days. Clearly deals
are prevalent. Two, there is, as documented above, large firm specific variability in the
reported days but, even the reported delays de facto at the 95th percentile are far lower
31

E.g. The Enterprise Surveys ask the “average time to clear goods through customs”, while Doing
Business covers all the steps from the paperwork to port-handling and customs to delivery of the imported
goods. The Enterprise Surveys ask “the number of days to get a construction permit”, while Doing
Business asks for all the days for all the procedures needed to comply with getting permission to construct
a warehouse. It is possible that some of the gap between the ES and DB is due to additional procedures
being covered in the DB than the ES. However, it is difficult to see how this could account for the lack of
correlation of the variation in ES and the DB indicators across countries. We tested for the sensitivity using
the time to import goods, subtracting off the time for inland transportation within the DB indicator. While
the distribution shifted slightly to the left, there was little change in overall pattern.
Looking at the sub-indicators within each Doing Business indicator, there are some that are not
just based on the interpretation of regulations on the books, e.g. inland transportion withing ‘trading across
borders’. For these sub-indicators, the lawyer or accountant that is making the evaluation provides an
estimate, assuming that no intermediaries (legitimate or not) are used and no additional payments or bribes
are paid. The size of the gap between the two sources of data illustrates how costly it would be not to try to
strike a deal – and that assuming no deals are made does not reflect what in fact firms do given how far
below the 45 degree line most observations are.
Another difference in methodology between the two datasets that should be kept in mind is that
DB has a precisely defined firm conducting the transaction, e.g. 50 employees, domestically owned private
company. The ES are a sample of firms – both larger and smaller than 50 employees. It is possible that
some of the variation within country in the ES is that the regulatory requirements themselves vary by firm
size. Only using firms close to the DB case could help improve the comparison, but the size of the samples
is reduced dramatically – but will little change in the basic patterns reported.

44

than the de jure days (around which, in the naïve positive model of complete compliance,
one might expect to find the observations clustered).32 In Figure 5b on days to start a
business the top end (90th percentile) appears to be about 60 days—whether the de jure is
60, 100, 150, or over 200—as the DB days grow, the gap between DB and ES just grows
one for one; the space for deals rises with the DB indicators. Three, the explanatory
power of the reported Doing Business days for the realized policy action for a specific
firm is very near zero. That is, whether a firm is in a country where the time to get a
construction permit is 100 days or 500 days, there is almost no change in either the
“expected value” or actual time nor much reduction in the observed variation. But there is
evidence suggesting that the deals are more costly where the de jure rules are more
burdensome; firms cannot fully escape the costs of greater regulatory burdens.

32

The graphs exclude ‘outside values’ or outliers (approximately 5% of the distribution.) In fact, not all
countries have such outliers, and for those that do, many of them are below their DB measure. However,
there are some firms whose reported experiences are greater than the Doing Business measures. Including
them extends the scale, making it hard to see the inter-quartile ranges. Versions of these figures are
available in the appendix with the outliers included.

45

Figure 5: Variation across and within countries comparing the Doing Business days
(on horizontal axis with each country observation on the 45 degree line) with the
Enterprise Survey distribution of days (a box plot for each country)

Days to get construction permit (Enterprise Surveys)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600

5a) Time to get a construction permit (Doing Business) versus days get construction
Permit (Enterprise Survey)

0

45 degree line
Gap between de jure and
de facto

150

300
450
Time to get Construction Permit (DB)

600

excludes outside values

46

0

Days to obtain operating license (ES)
50
100
150
200
250

5b) Days to Start a business (DB) versus Days to Obtain an Operating License (ES)

0

50

100
150
Days to start a business (DB)

200

250

excludes outside values

Days to clear import customs (Enterprise Surveys)
0
20
40
60
80
100

5c) “Time to Import Goods” (DB) versus “Days to Clear Customs” (ES)

0

25

50
75
Time to Import Goods (DB)

100

excludes outside values

47

Table 9 shows the regression counter-part of the graphs in Figure 5 by asking, how
much of a firms reported policy action is associated with the cross-national differences in
the de jure reported policies. The country average of “policy” has almost exactly no
explanatory power for the firm reported policy actions. Whether it took your firm a long
time or a short time to get a construction permit or operating license or have imports clear
customs has next to nothing to do with what the Doing Business survey reports about
your country. This is not just a low-powered “failure to reject” as the hypothesis that the
firm reported average increases one to one with the DB reported days can be decisively
rejected for each indicator.33
Table 9: Correlation between firm's reported experience in the Enterprise Surveys and the de
jure times in Doing Business
Enterprise Survey

Doing Business
Time to get construction permit

Time to get a
construction
permit
(1)
0.0458*
(0.023)

Time to get
operating
license for new
firms
(2)

-0.099
(0.0663)

Doing Business
Time to start a business

15.22***
(2.63)
5401

65.63***
(16.26)
1013

0.0315
(0.0364)
6.928***
(1.899)
1759

0.003

0.0134

0.002

0.0567

0.146

0.39

0.000

0.000

0.000

Doing Business:
Time to get imports through customs
Constant
N
R2
Pr (H0:β=0, Firm reported days no
association with de jure days)
Pr (H1: β=1, Firm reported days increase
one for one with de jure days)

Time to get
imports
through
customs
(3)

33

The results are the same if one uses the Enterprise Survey country average or country median in the
regressions.

48

This complete lack of association raises questions about both the efficacy and
political economy of the de jure “policy reform” approach to improving the investment
climate. What is the expected aggregate firm response (in investment, in innovation, in
output) to changes in the notional policy mapping about taxes, labor regulations, land use
regulation, licensing requirements, import procedures, etc.? All existing firms have
accommodated themselves to the existing environment and have made deals to do
business (whether they are favored or disfavored in the deals process and whether the
deal was expected to stay done or not). The question of the impact of de jure reform on
firm performance may be like asking how much faster submarines will go if the wind
blows harder: once you are under water (doing deals) changing the speed of the wind
might have little impact.
On the other hand, there is evidence that while there appears to be little impact on the
times firms report, there could be effects on the costs of the deals they have to strike.
These relationships reported here are all in the cross-section, and a true test of the impact
of a reform requires time series or panel data. But they are still telling: as the Doing
Business indicator rises, both the average and the standard deviation of bribes paid rises
(see Table 10). Thus reforming may not impact the days needed to comply with the
regulation, but it could lower the cost of having to make a deal to avoid a less
burdensome rule.

49

Table 10: Deals are more costly where de jure rules are more burdensome.
Bribes
Paid
(Av.)

Doing Business
Time to get construction
permit

Constant
R2

Bribes
Paid
(Av.)

Std of
Bribes
Paid

0.087

0.039

(0.083)

(0.035)
0.086*
(0.050)

Doing Business
Time to start a business
Doing Business:
Time to get imports
through customs

Number of observations

Bribes
Paid
(Av.)

-0.147
(0.446)
31
0.037

0.016
(0.190)
40
0.072

Std of
Bribes
Paid

Std of
Bribes
Paid

0.040*
(0.023)
0.172**

0.079**

(0.078)

(0.033)

-0.298
(0.281)
31
0.145

0.191
(0.189)
31
0.041

0.262***
(0.087)
40
0.074

0.120
(0.118)
31
0.168

One example on which there was detailed study is revealing. A comparison of the de
jure processes of registering a new export business in Chile and Brazil revealed that the
regulations in Brazil were complex and time consuming compared to the simpler process
in Chile. This might have suggested reforming the rules in Brazil would lead to much
greater exports. However, a detailed study (Stone, Levy, and Paredes, 1991) of the de
facto processes of business registration in Brazil found that in practice businesses hired
facilitators who made registration no more complex or time-consuming in Brazil than in
Chile, and only moderately more expensive. The environment of open ordered deals—all
firms could hire facilitators, the facilitators made the process predictable with little ex
post uncertainty about the durability of the deal—actually replicated in many respects a
regime of favorable rules—but perhaps at the expense of the policy purpose of the
regulations.
We are not proposing that the impact of notional policy mapping reform on firm
growth is zero, but it is far from obvious that modest (or even quite major) policy
50

reforms, independently of changes in policy implementation, would have any impact on
firm expectations of the policy actions that would result from implementation.34 The
impact would depend critically on the previous situation—if it were one of open ordered
deals this would have a very different impact than if the initial situation is disordered to
which the policy reform is able to bring order. Of course, radical policy reform could
drive the de jure regulation to zero or to the levels compatible with the existing
organizational capability for implementation (which may be close to zero (Pritchett
(2010)) and hence eliminate implementation uncertainty entirely (at least in that policy
domain) but this is very different story as this requires sacrificing whatever policy
purpose the regulation intended to accomplish.
A naïve view of the political economy of reform is that there is a broad coalition
between agents interested in promoting economic growth: (economists, external
assistance groups, potential foreign investors) and the domestic “business community” to
improve the investment climate. However, in a deals environment this is far from
obvious. Worse, in a closed ordered deals environment the economically and political
powerful firms may have differentially favorable treatment in deals which gives them a
competitive advantage over other firms, an advantage that would disappear in a rules
environment. At least since Schumpeter’s Can Capitalism Survive? economists have
realized that successful capitalists were not reliable supporters of capitalism, not
34

On the other hand, the results can be interpreted as further evidence of the importance of streamlining
and simplifying regulations. Excessive or burdensome requirements aren’t being complied with or
implemented consistently. Keeping them on the books only encourages deals and undermines the
credibility of the regulations and the public interest goals they are ‘supposed’ to be protecting. Changing
the formal rules may not result in much change in firm behavior if the earlier rules were not being
implemented, but if the reforms themselves are a signal that the implementation regime will also be
changing, then there could be effects. In further work we explore the relationship between the distribution
of policy action outcomes pre and post-reform episodes for a wider set of countries. Within Africa, there
are only a few examples of panel datasets that capture pre and post reform periods. Looking at the
Cameroon and Uganda, we find the dispersion actually increases post reform.

51

particularly caring for the “destruction” half of creative destruction. Rajan and Zingales
(2003) for instance emphasize that incumbent firms often favor a weak financial sector,
unable to reallocate resources into new (potentially threatening) innovations. Hellman,
Jones, and Kaufmann (2000) argue that in the transition to “better” policies in the
transition countries the shift in the institutional environment create opportunities for
massive “closed” deals in which forces “seized the state” and then used it to favor their
economic interests in both policy implementation and policy formulation. And even
worse than these problems with favored firms, even among the disfavored firms there is
the problem of coalition formation to lobby to change a rule when in a deals environment
one can buy/lobby/influence policy implementation35.
V.C) Reducing policy uncertainty
Given the variation across firms in the reported predictability of implementation and
the associated spreads in actual policy outcomes across firms in the same location, it is
not surprising any given firm’s outcome is uncorrelated with measures of the formal
rules. Of interest is to know if the individual outcomes are correlated with other
dimensions of regulations, namely assessments of the ability to implement rules. Figures
6a and 6b show the correlation of the share of firms reporting implementation is
consistent and the standard deviation within the location-sector-size cells with measures
of Government Effectiveness and Control of Corruption (Worldwide Governance
Indicators, World Bank). If Government Effectiveness or Control of Corruption provides
35

Moving beyond this naïve political economy there may be reasons for external actors (e.g. donors,
foreign firms) to push for more favorable de jure rules rather than focus on policy implementation. Official
external agencies are more comfortable dealing with rules as focusing on implementation would have to
confront the massive deviation of de jure and de facto and its causes, which is a more awkward topic that
technically neutral “policy reform.” Foreign firms might prefer rules to deals if they have a competitive
disadvantage in local deals. Administrative simplification of large enough magnitude to make compliance
a feasible option might level the playing field for foreign firms.

52

greater certainty, one would expect a positive association with the average level of
consistency reported and a negative association with the variation. Indeed, this is what
we find. So building institutional capacity may well be one way to address policy
uncertainty.
While policy implementation uncertainty is related institutional performance and
government efficacy, these evolve slowly. Are there ways to shift expectations about
policy uncertainty in the short run? We wish to address two, definitive policy shifts
(often associated with clear political shifts) or the use of a selective reduction of policy
obstacles for favored firms.

53

Figure 6a: Reported Consistency (Share that report implementation is consistent,
and the standard deviation in degree of consistency) and Government Effectiveness

54

Figure 6b: Reported Consistency (Share that report implementation is consistent,
and the standard deviation in degree of consistency) and Control of Corruption

Source: Authors calculation, Enterprise Surveys and Worldwide Governance Indicators

Decisive shift to a “pro-business” environment. As Shleifer and Vishny (1993) have
pointed out, it is not obvious that compliance with “rules” or a lack of corruption is either

55

a necessary or sufficient condition for rapid growth. Many of the world’s episodes of
extremely rapid growth have occurred in environments in which corruption was
pervasive and “closed ordered deals” was the basic structure of the formal economy (with
smaller firms exposed to mostly to a dual economy with “open ordered deals” as long as
their operations were not a threat). The economic successes of Indonesia from 1966 to
1997 or of South Korea in the 1960s (Haggard, Kim, and Moon, 1990)—among others-were clearly not the result of an absence of corruption. The rapid growth of countries
today such as China, India (or even more strikingly the more modest but still impressive
growth of Bangladesh) can hardly be attributed to a lack of corruption. In fact, one could
argue that “closed ordered deals” environment in which the interests of certain large
industrial enterprises are well represented in policy making and policy implementation,
whether officially (as in the large industrial groups of Japan and Korea (Wade 1990,
Evans 1995)) or unofficially (with the preferred conglomerates in Indonesia) can lead to
more responsive government action on key dimensions, a de facto “high bandwidth”
policy making (Hausmann 2008).
There are African examples of dramatic turn around in policy implementation
uncertainty. After the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, the country experienced a rapid
recovery to pre-conflict levels of investment (Figure 6), which is typical in post-conflict
countries. But in Rwanda another investment boom followed and capital formation is
now at roughly twice the pre-conflict level. Even more remarkable for a small,
landlocked nation in an unstable region it has also managed to attract significant foreign
direct investment. They did this not only by fighting corruption very aggressively,
which increased the credibility of government policy implementation, but also by

56

prioritizing specific deals. Rwanda’s success in sequencing its reforms was in part due to
a long-term vision of policy framework and development goals outlined by the
government. Rwanda Vision 2020 provides a policy framework to reform that allows for
consistency and reduces the inter-temporal policy risk faced by private investors.
Figure 6: Evolution of investment in Rwanda following the conflict and

200

400

600

800

1000

Evolutio n of G ross C ap ital Fo rm a tio n

0

GDP Index (constant LCU, last year of conflict = 100)

genocide

-5

0

5

10

15

Ye a r si n ce e nd o f co n fl ict
Buru ndi
Sierra Leo ne
C ape Verde

R w and a
M oz am biqu e
Gh ana

U ga nda
C on go, D e m . R ep .

Sou rc e: W D I

In the past 10 years, Rwanda has made significant progress in both simplifying the
rules and in enforcing them effectively, as can be seen in the cross-national tables above.
In Rwanda 90 percent of firms believe regulations are enforced “consistently and
predictably” (Figure 3), the level and variability of days to get an operating license are
among the lowest (Figure 2a and 2b), and in Rwanda, less than 5% of the firms identify
corruption as a constraint, according to the World Bank Enterprise Survey 2006,

57

compared to 73% of firms in Kenya or 50% of firms in neighboring Tanzania and only 20
percent report paying bribes (fourth lowest).
Rwanda prioritized enforceable policies, avoiding the common practice ignoring
enforcement capability and promulgating a long list of complex laws that are not reliably
enforced opening space for deals and uncertainty. Rwanda’s judicial system reform since
2001 is an example improving institutions while maintaining stability. The country
transitioned from its colonialist inherited civil law system to common law, in the process
both reducing the length of procedures (from 5 to 10 years down to only 2 to 3) 36 and
increase the reliability of the court system. In the 2006 Enterprise Survey data 67% of
firms believed their court system is fair, impartial, and uncorrupted (compared to only
16% in Mozambique or 22% in Kenya and 25% on average).
Rwanda did more than improving the overall climate, the government also made
specific deals with mostly US-based multi-national companies and were able to rapidly
increase its exports significantly (mainly with the US). The increase in trade due to these
targeted agreements was bigger than multi-lateral trade agreements, such as the African
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). The most prominent deal was in Rwanda’s coffee
sector. Recognizing the importance of the coffee sector for its economy (especially
exports) as well as providing stable income for farmers, Rwanda conducted high-level
talks and negotiated special agreements with big importers of coffee from the United
States. These specific deals achieved a bigger result than a traditional bilateral countryto-country trade agreement. On one hand, the government addressed the basic needs of
the coffee importers, such as security and reliability, and on the other hand, it helped

36

Overhauling Contract Enforcement: Lessons form Rwanda BIZCLIR: Business Climate Legal &
Institutional Reform, Issue 17, March 2007

58

coffee growers meet quality standards for export. Rwanda’s highest-level government
leaders approached directly the heads of specific coffee-roasting companies in the US,
such as Starbucks, and CostCO. Rwanda has attracted unlikely investors such as Better
Place, a California-based start-up company that produces batteries for electric cars.
Given that Rwanda imports electricity itself, the presence of such companies is testament
to the country’s gain in credibility and improved business environment.
Special initiatives to reduce policy uncertainty. The risk of country-wide approaches
to improving credibility is that they often hinge on the credibility of a specific regime or
individual, such as Kagame in Rwanda, and experience has shown that this credibility is
often very difficult to depersonalize and institutionalize (not to mention the political
ramifications). An alternative to either across the board de jure reform or across the
board agendas is to pursue the creation of reliable implementation incrementally. That is,
while the goal is to reduce policy uncertainty overall, one can start by focusing on
specific spaces, specific policy domains, or specific types of firms.
For instance, the traditional approach to special economic zones was to create
enclaves strictly for production for export. However, the Chinese appear to have used
them on a much larger scale as a device to introduce different policy sets and
expectations about implementation that did not require taking on entrenched interests
immediately. The idea of “charter cities” (Romer 2009) is in some sense a natural, if
audacious, extension of this notion that policy implementation is important in creating an
environment capable of sustaining high productivity firms and dense economic
transactions but at the same time policy implementation is difficult to reform wholesale
in situ.

59

An alternative approach is to focus on particular policy domains and attempt a
simultaneous reform of policy and policy implementation, something like an “island of
integrity” approach. One could begin with a policy domain that firms find particularly
egregious. However, if firms are caught up in multiple regulatory domains it may be that
the policy incremental approach will be limited. Certainly the litany of failures with the
introduction of special economic zones of various types suggests special zones are not
intrinsically special. Governments that lack the credibility to commit to good policy
implementation may also lack the credibility to commit to good policy implementation
even in a “special” zone.
The final alternative is to identify firms engaged in prioritized activities and rather
than pursue traditional “industrial policy” instruments such as subsidies or credit or
privileged tax status make them the focus of implementation reform. In reality this is just
making the de facto situation of closed deals more ordered and hopefully creating some
degree of transparency and rationality to the selection of the firms/industries/sectors for
which policy implementation reform is a priority.
VI. Conclusion
Firms hate “regulatory and policy uncertainty.” We argue this is more than just
disliking “bad policy” and more than inter-temporal changes in the rules. We argue that
what firms dislike is that doing business in countries with weak capability for policy
implementation consists of a set of specific, potentially complex, inter-related, deals with
the various agencies of the state. As we document, this results in huge ex post variability
in policy actions that are not predicted by policy. Many firms face a closed environment,
in which deals are limited to firms with favored characteristics and/or a disordered

60

environment in which it is difficult to reliably predict policy action outcomes, even when
firms undertake influence activities. This conceptual shift to thinking about the firm
specificity for the space for deals—rather than an abstract country “environment” of
better or worse general rules—helps both in reconciling the micro-economic and macroeconomic literatures on institutions and policies, and, more importantly, in thinking
through innovative ways of addressing policy uncertainty, even with institutions that are
capable only of gradual change.

61

References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J. Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 91,
No. 5 (Dec., 2001), pp. 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. Robinson and Y. Thaicharoen, 2003. “Macroeconomic
Volatility, Institutional Causes: Volatility, Crises, and Growth.” Journal of Monetary
Economics. 50(1), pp 49-123.
Arbache, J. and J. Page. 2007. “More growth or fewer collapses? A new look at long-run
growth in Sub-Saharan Africa,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #4384.
Aterido, R., M. Hallward-Driemeier and C. Pages. Forthcoming. “Big Constraints to
Small Firms’ Growth?” Economic Development and Cultural Change.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2005. “Financial and
Legal Constraints to Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of Finance 60(1):

131-177.
Bertrand, M, S. Djankov, R. Hanna, S. Mullainathan. 2007. “Obtaining a Driver’s
License in India: An Experimental Approach to Studying Corruption.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 122(4). Pp. 1639-1676.
Bigsten, Arne and Måns Söderbom. 2006. “What Have We Learned from a Decade of
Manufacturing Enterprise Surveys in Africa?” World Bank Research Observer 21(2).
Pp. 241-265.
Dollar, David, M. Hallward-Driemeier and T. Mengistae. 2005. “Investment Climate and
Firm Performance in Developing Economies.” Economic Development and Cultural
Change 54. pp. 1-31.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine. 2003. “Tropics, Germs and Crops: How Endowments
Influence Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics. 50(1), pp. 3-39.
Evans, Peter. 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation.
Princeton University Press.
Fafchamps, Marcel. 2004. Market Institutions in Sub-Saharan Africa: Theory and
Evidence. MIT Press: Cambridge MA.
Fisman, Raymond. 2001. “Estimating the Value of Political Connections.” American
Economic Review. 91(4). Pp 1095-1102.

62

Gonzalez, Alvaro, Ernesto Lopez-Cordova, and Elio Valladares. 2007. “The incidence
of graft on developing-country firms”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
4394.
Greif, Avner. 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy. Cambridge
University Press.
Hallward-Driemeier, M. and L. Pritchett. 2010. “Water in the Regulations.”
Forthcoming.

Hausmann, R. 2008. “The Other Hand: High Bandwidth Development Policy.” HKS
Working Paper 08/060.
Hausmann, R., B. Klinger, and R. Wagner. 2008. “Growth Diagnostics: A Mindbook.”
Hausmann, R., L. Pritchett, and D. Rodrik. 2005. “Growth Accelerations.” Journal of
Economic Growth. 10(4), pp. 303-329.
Hausmann, R. and D. Rodrik. 2002. “Economic Development as Self-Discovery.”
NBER Working Paper 8952.
Johnson, Simon. 2009. “The Quiet Coup.” The Atlantic (May).
Kaufmann, Daniel, M. Mastruzzi, and D. Zavaleta. 2003. “Sustained Macroeconomic
Reform, Tepid Growth: A Governance Puzzle in Boliva?” in In Search of Prosperity:
Analytical Narratives on Economic Growth. D. Rodrik ed. Princeton University Press:
Princeton NJ.
North, Douglas, John Joseph Wallis, and Barry Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social
Orders. Cambridge University Press: New York New York.
Pressman, Jefferey L. and Aaron Widlavsky. 1973. Implementation. University of
California Press. Berkeley CA.
Patillo, C., S. Gupta and K. Carey. 2005. “Sustaining Growth and Pro-Poor Growth
Accelerations in Sub-Saharan Africa,” IMF Working Papers WP/05/195.
Pritchett, Lant. 2005. “Reform is Like a Box of Chocolates.” Mimeo.
Pritchett, Lant. 2010. “The Dangers of Paper Tigers.” in Frances Fukuyama and Nancy
Birdsall, eds. Lessons of the Financial Crisis for Developing Countries.
Pritchett, Lant and Geeta Sethi. 1993. “Tariff Rates, Tariff Revenue and Tariff Reform:
Some New Facts.” World Bank Economic Review 8:1, pp 1-16.

63

Rodrik, Dani, A. Subramanian, and F. Trebbi. 2004. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
Institutions over Integration and Geography in Economic Development.” Journal of
Economic Growth. 9(2), pp. 131-165.
Romer, Paul. 2009. Charter Cities.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1942. Can Capitalism Survive? Harper and Row.
Sequeira, S. and S. Djankov. 2010. “An Empirical Study of Corruption in Ports.”
Forthcoming.
Shliefer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1993. “Corruption.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108(3). Pp. 599-617.
Slinko, I, E. Yakolev, and E. Zhuravaskaya. 2005. “Laws for Sale: Evidence from
Russia.” American Law and Economics Review. 7(1), pp 284-318.
Smith, Warrcik and Mary Hallward-Driemeier. 2005. “Understanding the Investment
Climate.” Finance and Development (March).
Wade, Robert. 1990. Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of
Government in East Asia. Princeton University Press.
World Bank. 2008. Worldwide Governance Indicators.

64

5a -II) Construction Permit

Days to clear import customs (Enterprise Surveys)
0
200
400
600
800 1,000 1,200

Appendix: Enterprise Surveys and Doing Business – including the outliers
These figures reproduce figures 5a-5c in the text, but include the outside values. The 45
degree line is included to show that the vast majority of firms face conditions less
burdensome than the formal requirements (the solid lines represent at least 95% of the
firms in a country).

600

0

DB<100) a firm reported having
delays of over a year in getting their
license; they were included but
capped at 1 year to keep the scale
from becoming too large.

300
450
Time to get Construction Permit (DB)

Days to obtain operating license (ES)
50 100 150 200 250 300 350

5b II) Operating License
(Note: In two countries (with

150

400

0

5c-II) Clearing customs

50

100
150
Days to start a business (DB)

200

250

Days to clear import customs (Enterprise Surveys)
0
20
40
60
80
100

0

0

25

50
75
Time to Import Goods (DB)

100

65

