NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COLLAPSE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE DURING THE 2008-2009 CRISIS:
IN SEARCH OF THE SMOKING GUN
Andrei A. Levchenko
Logan T. Lewis
Linda L. Tesar
Working Paper 16006
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16006

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

Preliminary version of a paper prepared for the IMF/Banque de France/PSE Conference on “Economic
Linkages, Spillovers and the Financial Crisis” and IMF Economic Review. We are grateful to Lionel
Fontagn e, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Ayhan Kose, David Weinstein, two anonymous referees, and
workshop participants at the University of Michigan, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Dartmouth
College, and the Paris conference for helpful suggestions. C ag atay Bircan provided excellent research
assistance. Financial support from Cepremap is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Andrei A. Levchenko, Logan T. Lewis, and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Collapse of International Trade During the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking
Gun
Andrei A. Levchenko, Logan T. Lewis, and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 16006
May 2010
JEL No. F41,F42
ABSTRACT
One of the most striking aspects of the recent recession is the collapse in international trade. This paper
uses disaggregated data on U.S. imports and exports to shed light on the anatomy of this collapse.
We find that the recent reduction in trade relative to overall economic activity is far larger than in
previous downturns. Information on quantities and prices of both domestic absorption and imports
reveals a 40% shortfall in imports, relative to what would be predicted by a simple import demand
relationship. In a sample of imports and exports disaggregated at the 6-digit NAICS level, we find
that sectors used as intermediate inputs experienced significantly higher percentage reductions in both
imports and exports. We also find support for compositional effects: sectors with larger reductions
in domestic output had larger drops in trade. By contrast, we find no support for the hypothesis that
trade credit played a role in the recent trade collapse.

Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu
Logan T. Lewis
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
ltlewis@umich.edu

Linda L. Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu

1

Introduction

A remarkable feature of the recent crisis is the collapse in international trade. This collapse is
global in nature (WTO 2009), and dramatic in magnitude. To give one example, while U.S. GDP
has declined by 3.8% from its peak to the current trough, real U.S. imports fell by 21.4% and real
exports fell by 18.9% over the same period. Though protectionist pressures inevitably increased
over the course of the recent crisis, it is widely believed that the collapse is not due to newly erected
trade barriers (Baldwin and Evenett 2009).
While these broad facts are well known, we currently lack both a nuanced empirical understanding of the patterns and a successful economic explanation for them. This paper has three main
parts. The first uses high-frequency (quarterly and monthly) foreign trade data for the United
States to document the patterns of collapse at a disaggregated level. We focus on the U.S. in part
due to its central role in the global downturn and because it offers up-to-date, detailed monthly
data. The second part uses data on domestic absorption, domestic price levels, as well as quantities
and prices of imports to perform a simple “trade wedge” exercise in the spirit of Cole and Ohanian
(2002) and Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2007). It allows us to assess whether the evolution of
trade volumes is in line with overall domestic demand and relative prices. Finally, the third part
uses monthly sector-level data to examine a range of potential explanations for the trade collapse
proposed in the policy literature.
Our main findings can be summarized as follows. The recent collapse in international trade
is indeed exceptional by historical standards. Relative to economic activity, the drop in trade is
an order of magnitude larger than what was observed in the previous postwar recessions, with the
exception of 2001. The collapse appears to be broad-based across trading partners: trade with
virtually all parts of the world fell by double digits. Across sectors, the sharpest percentage drops
in trade are in automobiles, durable industrial supplies and capital goods. Those categories also
account for most of the absolute decrease in trade. Another way to assess whether the recent
trade collapse is exceptional is to use information on prices and examine the wedges. The time
series behavior of the international trade wedge exhibits a drastic deviation from the norm during
the recent episode. In the second quarter of 2009, the overall trade wedge has reached −40%,
revealing a collapse in trade well in excess of what is predicted by the pace of economic activity
and prices. This is indeed exceptional: over the past 25 years the mean value of the wedge is only
1.6%, with a standard deviation of 6.6%. We conclude from this exercise that the recent trade
collapse does represent a puzzle, in the sense that any import demand function derived from a
standard international real business cycle model would predict a far smaller drop in imports given

1

observed overall economic activity and prices.1 Finally, using detailed trade data, we shed light
on which explanations are consistent with cross-sectoral variation in trade flow changes. We find
strong support for the role of vertical linkages, as well as for compositional effects. Sectors that
are used intensively as intermediate inputs, and those with greater reductions in domestic output,
experienced significantly greater reductions in trade. By contrast, trade credit does not appear to
play a significant role: more trade credit-intensive sectors did not experience greater trade flow
reductions.
We begin by presenting a comprehensive set of stylized facts about the trade collapse, across
time, sectors, and destination countries, as well as separating movements in prices and quantities
to examine whether the fall is mainly real or nominal. Moving beyond the stylized facts, our
next goal is to establish whether the collapse in trade is indeed “extraordinary” relative to what
we should expect. In order to do that, we need a benchmark. The starting point of the second
exercise is the canonical international real business cycle model of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland
(1995). It assumes that domestic agents value a CES aggregate of domestic and foreign varieties in
a particular sector – a common feature of virtually every model in international macroeconomics.
In this setup, we derive an import demand equation that expresses total imports as a function of
overall domestic absorption, domestic prices, and import prices. The “trade wedge” is then defined
as the deviation between actual imports and the imports as implied by these variables. Using this
simple optimality condition allows us to explore two questions: first, is the recent trade collapse
truly a puzzle? That is, the wedge exercise that accounts for both domestic and foreign prices and
quantities is the appropriate benchmark to evaluate whether the recent decrease in international
trade is in any sense extraordinary. Second, by pitting against the data conditions that would have
to hold period-by-period in virtually any quantitative model of international transmission, we can
offer a preliminary view on whether – and which – DSGE models can have some hope of matching
the magnitude of the recent collapse in international trade.
The analysis of wedges indeed reveals a large shortfall in imports relative to what would be
expected based on the pace of economic activity and relative prices. In the third exercise, we test
a series of hypotheses about the nature of the trade collapse using highly disaggregated trade data.
We record the percentage changes in exports and imports during the crisis at the 6-digit NAICS
level of disaggregation (about 450 distinct sectors), and relate the variation in these changes to
sectoral characteristics that would proxy for the leading explanations. The first is that trade may
1
Chinn (2009) estimates an econometric model of U.S. exports, and shows that the recent level of exports is
far below what would be predicted by the model. Freund (2009) analyzes the behavior of trade in previous global
downturns, and shows that the elasticity of trade to GDP has increased in recent decades, predicting a reduction
in global trade in the current downturn of about 15%. Our methodology looks at U.S. imports rather than U.S. or
global exports, and takes explicit account of domestic and import prices at the quarterly frequency.

2

be collapsing because of the transmission of shocks through vertical production linkages. When
there is a drop in final output, the demand for intermediate inputs will suffer, leading to a more
than proportional drop in trade flows.2 To test for this possibility, we build several measures of
intermediate input linkages at the detailed sector level based on the U.S. Input-Output tables, as
well as measures of production sharing based on data on exports and imports within multinational
firms. The second explanation we evaluate is trade credit: if during the recent crisis, firms in
the U.S. are less willing to extend trade credit to partners abroad, trade may be disrupted.3 We
therefore use U.S. firm-level data to construct measures of the intensity of trade credit use in each
sector. Finally, the collapse in trade could be due to compositional effects. That is, if international
trade happens disproportionately in sectors whose domestic absorption (or production) collapsed
the most, that would explain why trade fell more than GDP. Two special cases of the compositional
story are investment goods (Boileau 1999, Erceg, Guerrieri and Gust 2008) and durable goods
(Engel and Wang 2009). Since investment and durables consumption are several times more volatile
than GDP, trade in investment and durable goods would be expected to experience larger swings
than GDP as well. Thus, we collect measures of domestic output at the most disaggregated available
level, and check whether international trade fell systematically more in sectors that also experienced
the greatest reductions in domestic output. In addition, we build an indicator for whether a sector
produces durable goods.
This paper is part of a growing literature on the features of the 2008-2009 global crisis in
general, and on the collapse in international trade in particular. Blanchard, Faruqee and Das (2010)
and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2010) analyze the crisis experience in a large sample of countries
to establish which country characteristics can best explain the cross-sectional variation in the
severity of downturns. Imbs (2009) documents the remarkable synchronicity of the crisis across a
large set of countries. Chor and Manova (2009) demonstrate that credit conditions in exporting
countries affected international trade during the current crisis. Bricongne, Fontagné, Gaulier,
Taglioni and Vicard (2009) and Behrens, Corcos and Mion (2010) use detailed firm-level data to
document the changes in trade at the micro level for France and Belgium, respectively. Alessandria,
Kaboski and Midrigan (2010), Bems, Johnson and Yi (2010), and Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and
Romalis (2010) assess whether particular channels, such as input-output linkages or inventory
adjustment, can account for the trade collapse in quantitative models. Our approach is deliberately
2

Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001) and Yi (2003) document the dramatic growth in vertical trade in recent decades,
and di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) demonstrate that greater sector-level vertical linkages play a role in the
transmission of shocks between countries.
3
Raddatz (2009) shows that there is greater comovement between sectors that have stronger trade credit links,
while Iacovone and Zavacka (2009) demonstrate that in countries experiencing banking crises, export fell systematically more in financially dependent industries. Amiti and Weinstein (2009) show that exports by Japanese firms in
the 1990s declined when the bank commonly recognized as providing trade finance to the firm was in distress.

3

agnostic, testing empirically a wide range of hypotheses proposed in the literature. Our results thus
complement quantitative modeling efforts, by highlighting which of the mechanisms appear most
relevant empirically.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a set of stylized facts on
the recent trade collapse using detailed quarterly data on U.S. imports and exports. Section 3
describes the construction of the international trade wedges, and presents the behavior of those
wedges over time and in different sectors. Section 4 uses detailed data on sectoral characteristics
to assess whether the variation across sectors is consistent with the main explanations proposed in
the policy literature. Section 5 concludes.

2

Facts

This section uses disaggregated quarterly data on U.S. imports and exports to establish a number
of striking patterns in the data. We discuss three aspects of the recent episode: (i) its magnitude
relative to historical experience; (ii) the sector- and destination- level breakdown; and (iii) the
behavior of prices and quantities separately. Total imports, exports, and GDP data come from the
U.S. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). The trade flows and prices disaggregated by
sector are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Trade in Goods and Services Database, while
trade flows disaggregated by partner are from the U.S. International Trade Commission’s Tariffs
and Trade Database.
Fact 1 As a share of economic activity, the collapse in U.S. exports and imports in the recent
downturn is exceptional by historical standards. Only the 2001 recession is comparable.
Figure 1(a) plots quarterly values of imports and exports normalized by GDP over the past 63 years,
along with the recession bars. Visually, the 2008-09 collapse appears larger than most changes
experienced in the past.4 It is also clear, however, that a similar drop occurred in 2001, a fact
that appears underappreciated. Table 1 reports the change in the ratios of imports and exports
to GDP during the 2008 and 2001 recessions, as well as the average changes in those variables
during the recessions that occurred between 1950 and 2000. For the 2008 and 2001 recessions, the
total declines are calculated both during the official NBER recession dates, and with respect to the
peak value of trade/GDP around the onset of the recession. It is apparent that both imports and
exports to GDP decline by 14 to 30% during the last two recessions, depending on the measure.
By contrast, in all the pre-2000 recessions, the average decline in exports is less than 1 percentage
4
The concurrent change in the exchange rate is relatively subdued. Appendix Figure A1 plots the long-run path
of the nominal and real effective exchange rates for the United States. Over the period coinciding with the trade
collapse, the U.S. dollar appreciated slightly in real terms, but the change has been less than 10%.

4

point, and the average change in imports is virtually nil. As an alternative way of presenting the
historical series, Figure 1(b) plots the deviations from trend in real imports, exports, and GDP
over the same period. To detrend the series, we use the Hodrick-Prescott filter with the standard
parameter of 1600. The recent period is characterized by large negative deviations from trend for
both imports and exports. We can see that these are greater in magnitude than the deviation from
trend in GDP.5
An important question is how large is the contribution of the collapse in the price of oil, and
the consequent reduction in the value of oil imports. The dotted line in Figure 1(a) reports the
evolution of non-oil imports as a share of GDP.6 It appears that non-oil imports experience a
similar percentage decline as a share of GDP as total imports do. This conclusion is confirmed in
Table 1, which reports the change in non-oil imports as a share of GDP in the 2008-2009 and 2001
recessions. While the overall imports to GDP ratio does decline more than non-oil imports during
the current crisis, non-oil imports to GDP still decline by more than 20%.
Fact 2 For both U.S. exports and imports, the sharpest percentage drops are in the automotive
and industrial supplies sectors, with consumer goods trade experiencing a far smaller percentage
decrease. For imports, the decrease in the petroleum category alone accounts for one third of the
total decline.
Panel A of Table 2 reports the reductions in exports and imports by sector for the recent trade
collapse. While the overall reduction in nominal exports is about 26%, exports in the automotive
sector (which comprises both vehicles and parts) drop by 47%, and in industrial supplies by 34%.
By contrast, exports of consumer goods (−12%), agricultural output (−19%), and capital goods
(−20%) experience less than average percentage reductions. The table also reports the share of
each of these sectors in total exports at the outset of the crisis, as well as the absolute reductions
in trade. It is clear that industrial supplies and automotive sectors accounted for almost 40% of all
U.S. goods exports, and their combined decrease accounts for more than half of the total collapse
of U.S. exports.
5

How much of this decline in international trade is due to the extensive margin, that is, disappearing import
categories? While we do not have up-to-date information on the behavior of individual firms, we can use highly
disaggregated data on trade flows to shed light on this question. To that end, we examined monthly import data
at the Harmonized Tariff Schedule 8-digit classification, which contains about 10,000 sectors. The number of HTS
8-digit categories with non-zero imports does decline during this crisis, but the change is very small: while the U.S.
recorded positive monthly imports in 9,200-9,300 categories during the year leading up to June 2008, in the first
half of 2009 that number fell to about 9,100. These disappearing categories account for less than 0.5% of the total
reduction in imports over this period. Thus, when measured in terms of highly disaggregated import categories, the
role of the extensive margin in the current trade collapse appears to be minimal.
6
This series starts in 1967, as the breakdown of imports into oil and non-oil is not available for the earlier period.

5

Total imports decline by 34%. The petroleum and products category has the largest percentage
decrease at −54%. It also accounts for some 20% of the pre-crisis imports, and about 1/3 of the
total absolute decline. Total non-oil imports decline by 29%. As with exports, the next largest
percentage declines are in the automotive (−49%) and industrial supplies (−47%) sectors. By
contrast, consumer goods decrease by only 15%, and agricultural products by 9%.
Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the collapse in real trade over time. Figure 2 displays the trade in
real goods and services separately. We can see that goods trade is both larger in volume, and the
decrease is more pronounced than in services. Figure 3 breaks total goods trade into real durables
and non-durables, to highlight that the reduction in the trade categories considered durable is more
pronounced, for both imports and exports. These figures indicate that in order to understand the
collapse in real trade flows, it is reasonable to focus on goods trade and examine durable goods
more closely. We follow this strategy in Sections 3 and 4.
Fact 3 The collapse in U.S. foreign trade is significant across the major U.S. trading partners, all
of whom register double-digit percentage reductions in both imports and exports.
Panel B of Table 2 reports the reduction, in absolute and percentage terms, of exports and imports
to and from the main regions of the world and the most important individual partners within those
regions. To be precise, the first three columns, under “Exports,” report the exports from the U.S.
to the various countries and regions. Correspondingly, the columns labeled “Imports” report the
imports to the U.S. from these countries. The broad-based nature of the collapse is remarkable.
With virtually every major partner, U.S. exports are dropping by more than 20% (with China and
India being the notable exceptions at −15% and −13%), while imports are dropping by 30% or
more (with once again China and India as the main exceptions at −16% and −21% respectively).
Fact 4 Both quantities and prices of exports and imports decreased, with changes in real quantities
explaining the majority of the nominal decrease in trade.
Figure 4 plots both nominal and real trade, each normalized to its 2005q1 value. While nominal
exports fall by 26% from its peak, the fall in real exports accounts for about three quarters of that
decline, 19%. For imports, the role of declining import prices is greater. In addition, the peak in
real imports occurred 3 quarters earlier than the peak of nominal imports, due largely to the timing
of the oil price collapse. Nonetheless, real quantities account for about 60% of the total nominal
decline in imports. In order to abstract from the role of oil in the evolution of total imports, the
dotted lines report real and nominal non-oil imports. The evolution of non-oil trade is similar to
the total, though the run-up in nominal trade and the subsequent reduction are less pronounced.

6

Table 3 presents the nominal, real, and price level changes in each export and import category.
It is remarkable that in some important sectors, such as automotive, capital goods, and consumer
goods, prices did not move much at all, and the entire decline in nominal exports and imports is
accounted for by real quantities. By contrast, prices moved the most in industrial supplies and
especially petroleum. Figure 5 presents the contrast between nominal and real graphically. It plots
the nominal declines in each sector against the real ones, along with the 45-degree line. For points
on the 45-degree line, all of the nominal decrease in trade is accounted for by movements in real
quantities, with no change in prices. For points farther from the line, price changes account for
more of the nominal change in trade. There are several things to take away from this figure. First,
we can see that some important sectors are at or very near the 45-degree line: all of the change
in nominal trade in those sectors comes from quantities. Second, petroleum imports is by far the
biggest exception, as the only sector in which most of the change comes from prices. Finally, in
most cases import and export prices experienced a drop – the bulk of the points are below the
45-degree line. This implies that in the recent episode, trade prices and quantities are moving in
the same direction.

3

Wedges

The discussion of nominal and real quantities foreshadows the exercise in this section. In particular,
we ask, is there any way to assess whether the trade changes during the recent crisis are in some
sense “exceptional” or “abnormal”? That is, how would we expect trade flows to behave in the
recent recession? To provide a model-based benchmark for the behavior of trade flows, we follow
the “wedge” methodology of Cole and Ohanian (2002) and Chari et al. (2007). We set down an
import demand equation that would be true in virtually any International Real Business Cycle
(IRBC) model, and check how the deviation from this condition, which we call the “trade wedge,”
behaves in the recent crisis relative to historical experience. As the derivation is standard, we detail
it in Appendix A.
The import demand relationship, in log changes denoted by a caret, is given by:


\
ybf = ε Pb − pbf + (C
+ I),

(1)

where y f is demand for imports, C + I is overall aggregate demand (consumption plus investment),
P is the overall domestic price level, and pf is the price of imports. This equation provides
a benchmark for evaluating whether the recent trade collapse represents a large deviation from
business as usual.7 They will hold exactly in any model that features CES aggregation of foreign
7

Our approach is related to another benchmark for analyzing trade volumes: the gravity equation. Starting from

7

and domestic goods, a quite common one in the IRBC literature. Economically, it ties real import
demand to (i) overall real domestic absorption (C + I); (ii) the overall domestic price level (P );
and (iii) import prices pf . Since all of these are observable, we proceed by using equation (1) to
compute the log deviation from it holding exactly, calling it the “trade wedge.” On the left-hand
\
side is the log change in real imports. The term (C
+ I) is captured by the log change in the sum
of real consumption and real investment in the national accounts data; Pb is the change in the GDP
deflator,8 and pbf is the change in the import price deflator. We must also choose a value of the
elasticity of substitution ε. We report results for two values: ε = 1.5, which is the “classic” IRBC
value of the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods (Backus et al. 1995); and
ε = 6, which is a common value in the trade literature (Anderson and van Wincoop 2004).9
We use quarterly data and compute year-to-year log changes in each variable. Column 1 in
Table 4 presents the value of the year-to-year wedge for 2009q2 (computed relative to 2008q2) for
the two elasticities. We choose to report the values for 2009q2 because it represents the trough in
both international trade and the wedges during the current trade collapse episode. The wedge is
indeed quite large, at −40% for the more conservative choice of ε. The negative value indicates,
not surprisingly, that imports fell by 40% more than overall U.S. domestic demand and price
movements would predict. To get a sense whether the current level of the wedge is out of the
ordinary, Figure 6 plots the quarterly values of the year-on-year wedge for the period 1968 to the
present. The recent period is indeed exceptional. Over the entire sample period going back to 1968,
the long-run average of the wedge is actually slightly positive, at 2.9%, with a standard deviation
equation (A.2), the total nominal trade volumes can be expressed in terms of prices and the nominal output as:
„ «ε−1
pft ytf = (1 − ω) Pft
Xt , where Xt ≡ Pt (Ct + It ) is nominal GDP. The gravity approach proceeds to express pft
pt

as a function of trade costs and the source country characteristics, usually the source country nominal GDP, Xt∗ .
The advantage of the gravity approach is that it uses less information, as it does not rely on knowing domestic and
import prices. The main disadvantage is that it imposes additional assumptions on the supply side, by taking a
stand on what determines pft . This leads to an unnecessarily restrictive interpretation of the current experience: any
shortfall of actual imports from what is implied by the evolution of nominal GDPs must be attributed to an increase
in trade costs (see, e.g., Jacks, Meissner and Novy 2009). In a sense, by subsuming domestic prices and making
strong assumption on import prices, the gravity approach forces actual trade to be on the model-implied demand and
supply curves exactly. By contrast, our approach uses explicit information on domestic and import prices to gauge
how far we are from the model-implied demand curve.
8
We also constructed a price index for just consumption and investment based on the consumption and investment
prices in the National Income and Product Accounts, and used that instead of the GDP deflator. The results were
virtually unchanged.
9
Throughout this section, we assume that the taste parameter ω is not changing. If ω is thought of as a taste shock
in the demand for foreign goods, an alternative interpretation of the wedge would be that it reveals what this taste
shock must be in each period to satisfy the first-order condition for import demand perfectly. In the IRBC literature,
the parameter ω is sometimes thought of as a trade cost, and its value calibrated to the observed share of imports
to GDP. Under this interpretation, it may be that during this crisis trade costs went up, thereby lowering imports.
While we do not have comprehensive data on total trade costs at high frequencies, anecdotal evidence suggests that if
anything shipping costs decreased dramatically in the course of the recent crisis, due in part to the oil price collapse
(Economist 2009). Thus, taking explicit account of shipping costs would make the wedge even larger.

8

of 10.2%.10 After 1984 – a year widely considered to be a structural break, also evident in Figure
6 – the average wedge is 1.6%, with a standard deviation of 6.6%. Thus, the current value of the
wedge is more than 6 standard deviations away from the mean, and from zero, when compared to
the post-1984 period. Note that a more muted instance of the “collapse in the wedge” occurred in
the 2001 recession. However, in that episode the wedge reached −20%, well short of the current
value.11
We can also determine whether price or quantity movements make up the bulk of the current
wedge. Real imports (the left-hand side of equation 1) fell by 21%, while the total final demand
\
(C
+ I) fell by 6.7%. This implies that in the absence of any relative price movements, the wedge
would have been about −14%. The price movements conditioned by the elasticity of substitution
make up the rest of the difference: the GDP deflator went up by 1.5%, while import prices actually
fell by 16%.
The second column of Table 4 repeats the exercise for non-oil imports. Abstracting from oil
reduces the wedge to −28%, a value that is still quite exceptional. The post-1984 standard deviation
in the non-oil wedge is 5.2%, with a mean of 1.3%. Thus, the 2009q2 value of the non-oil wedge is
more than 5 standard deviations away from either its historical mean or zero.

3.1

Durable Goods

Beyond the simple structure of the canonical IRBC model, this methodology can be applied to
construct a wedge for any sector that would be modelled as a CES aggregate of domestic and
foreign varieties. The key data limitation that prevents the construction of wedges for disaggregated industries is the availability of domestic absorption and price levels at the detailed level. We
can make progress, however, for one important sector: durable goods. Engel and Wang (2009)
demonstrate that both imports and exports are about 3 times more volatile than GDP in OECD
countries, and propose a compositional explanation. It is well known that durable goods consumption is more volatile than overall consumption, and that much of international trade is in durable
goods. Putting the two together provides a reason for why trade is more volatile than GDP: it is
composed of the more volatile durables. This hypothesis can be extended to apply to the recent
10

We conjecture that the positive long-run average value over this period may reflect a secular reduction in trade
costs, which we do not incorporate explicitly into our exercise.
11
In the baseline analysis we compute the wedges based on log changes over time – in our case, year-on-year changes
in quarterly data. An alternative would be to compute them based on deviations from trend in each variable. To do
this, we HP-detrended each series, and built a wedge using equation (1) such that the caret means the log deviation
from trend. This procedure yields qualitatively similar results. In 2009q2 the overall wedge stands at −20%. This
is considerably smaller in magnitude than the baseline value we report. However, it is still quite exceptional by
historical standards. In the post-1984 period, the standard deviation of the deviation-from-trend wedge is 4.8%, and
its mean is very close to zero. This implies that the value of 2009q2 wedge is 4.3 standard deviations away from the
historical average.

9

crisis. It may be that imports and exports fell so much relative to GDP because their composition
is different from the composition of GDP.
The wedges methodology can be used to shed light on the potential for this explanation to
work. If the reason for the fall in trade is compositional, then the wedges should disappear (or at
least get smaller) when we compute them on the durable goods separately. By standard CES cost
minimization, the “durable trade wedge” has the familiar form:


b
bfD + D,
dbf = ε Pc
D −p

(2)

where, as above, PD is the domestic price level of the durable spending, and pfD is the price of
the foreign durables. To construct the durable wedge, we use the BEA definition of durable goods
imports.12 Using sector-level price and quantity import data, we construct the log change in real
b we
durable imports dbf and in the prices of durable imports pbf . To proxy for real durable demand D
D

combine domestic spending on consumer durables and fixed investment, building the corresponding
domestic durable price level.13
The third column of Table 4 reports the 2009q2 (to-date trough) value of the year-to-year wedge.
It is clear that the compositional explanation does have some bite: for ε = 1.5 the durable wedge
stands at −21%, or about half of the overall wedge value. At the same time, even the durable
wedge’s value is exceptional in this period: it is about 4 standard deviations away from its post1984 mean. Relative to the overall wedge, the contribution of the real quantities to the durable
wedge is greater. Real durable imports fell by 34%, while the real durable domestic spending fell by
18%. This implies that in the complete absence of relative price movements, the “quantity wedge”
would be about 16%. The rest of the wedge comes from relative prices.

3.2

Final Goods

We can make progress in shedding light on the compositional explanations in another way. It may
be that equation (A.1) is not a good description of the production structure of the economy. One
immediate possibility is that consumption and investment goods are very different. Indeed, Section
2 shows that consumption and capital goods experienced different price and quantity movements.
We can glean further where the data diverge from the model by positing a production structure
in which investment and consumption goods are different, but both are produced from domestic
12
This roughly corresponds to the sum of capital goods; automotive vehicles, engines, and parts; consumer durables;
and durable industrial supplies and materials.
13
b structures and residential investment in addition to machinery and equipment.
Our calculation includes in D
This inclusion tends to make the durable wedge smaller, as real estate prices fell more than overall investment goods
prices, shrinking the price component of the durable wedge.

10

and foreign varieties (see, e.g., Boileau 1999, Erceg et al. 2008). Going through the same cost minimization calculation, we obtain import demand for consumption and investment goods expressed
in log changes:


b
b
cf = ε PbC − pbfC + C,


b
bif = σ PbI − pbf + I.
I

(3)
(4)

These equations now relate the real reduction in consumption goods imports to overall domestic real
consumption, the consumption price index, and the price index of imported consumption goods,
and do the same for investment. Provided that we have data on all of these prices and quantities,
we can calculate the “consumption trade wedge” and the “investment trade wedge,” and determine
which one reveals greater deviations from the theoretical benchmark.
To construct these, we isolate imports of consumer goods (about 20% of total U.S. imports
at the outset of the crisis), and compute the real change in consumer goods imports b
cf , and the
corresponding import price change pbfC . We then match these up to the change in real consumption
b and the domestic consumption price index. Column 4 of Table 4 reports
expenditures on goods C,
the results. The consumption wedge is much smaller, at −6.4%. Figure 7 displays the time path
of the year-on-year consumption wedge since 1968. It is clear that the recent episode is completely
unexceptional if we confine our attention to consumer goods trade. The consumption wedge has a
post-1984 mean of 4.4% and a standard deviation of 5.6%.
To construct the investment trade wedge, we isolate imports of capital goods (also about 20% of
U.S. imports at the outset of the crisis), and match them up with investment data in the National
Accounts. Column 5 of Table 4 presents the results. The investment wedge is also quite small, at
−10%. As Figure 7 shows, it is unexceptional by historical standards: the mean investment wedge
post-1984 is 2.5%, with a standard deviation of 5.9%. This implies that the current level of the
investment wedge is about one and a half standard deviations away from the historical mean, or
from the model implied value of zero.
These results tell us that the puzzle in the recent trade collapse is not in final goods, be it
consumption or investment. Instead, the discrepancy between the large overall wedge and the
small consumption and investment wedges appears to be in the intermediate goods sectors, and
these partially overlap with durable goods. This suggests that modeling exercises that focus on
movements in the final domestic demand are unlikely to match the data well. Instead, explanations
that focus on trade in intermediates appear potentially more fruitful.

11

3.3

Other Countries

Figure 8 reports the overall trade wedge, (1), for other major developed countries: Japan, Germany,
U.K., France, Italy, and Canada. Within this group, there is a fair bit of variation in the current
behavior of the wedge.14 In only one country, Japan, the current wedge has reached the level
comparable to that or the U.S., exceeding −60%. Germany, France, and Italy all experience large
negative wedges, of about −25%. While this does point to a shortfall in imports relative to what
would be predicted by the simple model, it is clearly much less drastic when compared to both the
current shortfalls in the U.S. and Japan, as well as these countries’ historical variation in the wedge.
By contrast, Canada and the U.K. exhibit only a small departure from the norm in the current
crisis, suggesting that the behavior of imports in these countries is easily rationalized simply by
movements in aggregate demand and relative prices. Figure 9 reports the overall trade wedges for
selected emerging markets. Here, the experiences are just as diverse: while Korea, Turkey, and the
Czech Republic record wedges in the range of −20% to −30%, in Mexico, for instance, the wedge
is very close to zero.
To summarize, in both developed countries and emerging markets, there appears to be a great
deal of heterogeneity in the behavior of the trade wedges. This is in spite of the fact that international trade itself collapsed in all of these countries to a similar degree. This suggests that behind
the superficial similarity in country experiences, there is important heterogeneity in the underlying
shocks and transmission mechanisms. Sorting out this variation remains a fruitful direction for
future research.

4

Empirical Evidence

The framework set out in Section 3 is useful for framing a set of possible explanations for the trade
collapse and of hypotheses to test. When we focus on overall trade, we uncover a large shortfall in
real imports, relative to what would be implied by final demand (C +I). What could be responsible
for this large divergence between the model and the data? The first possibility is that the model
is not rich enough. For instance, confining our attention to final goods imports reveals that for
consumption and investment goods, the shortfall is far less dramatic. Thus, one of the potential
explanations is trade in intermediate inputs and vertical linkages. Second, it may be that the
model is adequate, but agents – be it households or firms – face additional constraints that prevent
them from being on their demand curve. This suggests that another potential explanation for the
increase in the wedge is a tightening of a financial constraint. Finally, it may be that when we
14

All the data used in this subsection come from the OECD.

12

compare the total imports to total domestic demand, we are not comparing the same bundle of
goods, and thus it is important to examine the composition of trade. This last hypothesis also
points to the importance of looking at this phenomenon at a more disaggregated level.
This is what we do in this section. In order to carry out empirical analysis, we collect monthly
nominal data for U.S. imports and exports vis-à-vis the rest of the world at the NAICS 6-digit level
of disaggregation from the USITC. This the most finely disaggregated NAICS trade data available
at monthly frequency, yielding about 450 distinct sectors. To reduce the noise in the monthly trade
data, we aggregate it to the quarterly frequency. For each sector, we compute the percentage drop
in trade flows over the course of a year ending in June 2009, and estimate the following specification:
γitrade = α + βCHARi + γXi + i .
In this estimating equation i indexes sectors, γitrade is the percentage change in the trade flow, which
can be exports or imports, and CHARi is the sector-level variable meant to capture a particular
explanation proposed in the literature.15
We include a vector of controls Xi in each specification. Because we do not have the required
data at this level of disaggregation to construct the sector-level wedges and their components, our
regression estimates do not have a structural interpretation. However, the functional form of the
import demand equation, (1), is informative about the kinds of variables we should control for.
First, we control for the elasticity of substitution between goods within a sector, sourced from
Broda and Weinstein (2006). Second, we must try to proxy for the movements in domestic demand
and sector-level prices. To control for sector size, we include each industry’s share in total imports
(resp. exports) over the period 2002-2007, as well as labor intensity computed from the U.S.
Input-Output table. These are indicators available for both non-manufacturing and manufacturing
industries. To check robustness, we also control for skill and capital intensity sourced from the
NBER productivity database, and the level of inventories from the BEA, which are unfortunately
only available for manufacturing industries.16
Our strategy is to exploit variation in sectoral characteristics to evaluate three main hypotheses:
vertical production linkages, trade credit, and compositional effects/durables demand. We now
describe each of them in turn. The vertical linkages view, most often associated with Yi (2003),
15

The change in trade is computed using the total values of exports and imports in each sector, implying that it
is a nominal change. As an alternative, we used import price data from the BLS at the most disaggregated available
level to deflate the nominal flows. The shortcoming of this approach is that the import price indices are only available
at a more coarse level of aggregation (about 4-digit NAICS). This reduces the sample size, especially for exports, and
implies that multiple 6-digit trade flows are deflated using the same price index. Nonetheless, the main results were
unchanged.
16
We also re-estimated all of the specifications while dropping oil sectors: NAICS 211111 (Crude Petroleum and
Natural Gas Extraction), 211112 (Natural Gas Liquid Extraction), and 324110 (Petroleum Refineries). All of the
results below were unchanged.

13

suggests that since much of international trade is in intermediate inputs, and intermediates at
different stages of processing often cross borders multiple times, a drop in final consumption demand
associated with the recession will decrease cross-border trade in intermediate goods. This can
matter for the business cycle: di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) show that trade in intermediate
inputs leads to higher comovement between countries, both at sectoral and aggregate levels. The
simplest way to test the vertical linkage hypothesis is to classify goods according to the intensity
with which they are used as intermediate inputs. We start with the 2002 benchmark version of the
detailed U.S. Input-Output matrix available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and construct
our measures using the Direct Requirements Table. The (i, j)th cell in the Direct Requirements
Table records the amount of a commodity in row i required to produce one dollar of final output
in column j. By construction, no cell in the Direct Requirements Table can take on values greater
than 1. To build an indicator of “downstream vertical linkages,” we record the average use of a
commodity in row i in all downstream industries j: the average of the elements across all columns
in row i. This measure gives the average amount of good i required to produce one dollar’s worth
of output across all the possible final output sectors. In other words, it is the intensity with which
good i is used as an intermediate input by other sectors.
We build two additional indicators of downstream vertical linkages: the simple number of sectors
that use input i as an intermediate, and the Herfindahl index of downstream intermediate use. The
former is computed by simply counting the number of industries for which the use of intermediate
input i is positive. The latter is an index of diversity with which different sectors use good i: it
will take the maximum value of 1 when only one sector uses good i as an input, and will take the
minimum value when all sectors use input i with the same intensity.
A related type of the vertical linkage story is the “disorganization” hypothesis (Kremer 1993,
Blanchard and Kremer 1997). In a production economy where intermediate inputs are essential,
following a disruption such as the financial crisis, shocks to even a small set of intermediate inputs
can create a large drop in output. For instance, Blanchard and Kremer (1997) document that
during the collapse of the Soviet Union, output in more complex industries – those that use a greater
number of intermediate inputs – fell by more than output in less complex ones. This view suggests
that we should construct measures of “upstream vertical linkages,” that would capture the intensity
and the pattern of intermediate good use by industry (in column) j. The three indices we construct
parallel the downstream measures described above. We record the intensity of intermediate good
use by industry j as total spending on intermediates per dollar of final output. We also measure
an industry’s complexity in two ways: by counting the total number of intermediate inputs used

14

by industry j, and by computing the Herfindahl index of intermediate use shares in industry j.17
Burstein, Kurz and Tesar (2008) propose another version of the vertical linkage hypothesis.
They argue that it is not trade in intermediate inputs per se, but how production is organized.
Under “production sharing,” inputs are customized and the factory in one country depends crucially
on output from a particular factory in another country. In effect, inputs produced on different sides
of the border become essential, and a shock to one severely reduces the output of the other. To
build indicators of production sharing, we follow Burstein et al. (2008) and use data on shipments
by multinationals from the BEA. In particular, we record imports from foreign affiliates by their
U.S. parent plus imports from a foreign parent company by its U.S. affiliate as a share of total U.S.
imports in a sector. Similarly, we record exports to the foreign affiliate from their U.S. parents plus
exports to a foreign parent from a U.S. affiliate as a share of total U.S. exports. In effect, these
measures of production sharing are measures of intra-firm trade relative to total trade in a sector.
We use the BEA multinational data at the finest level of disaggregation publicly available, which
is about 2 or 3 digit NAICS, and take the average over the period 2002-2006 (the latest available
years).
The second suggested explanation for the collapse in international trade is a contraction in
trade credit (see, e.g., Auboin 2009, IMF 2009). Under this view, international trade is disrupted
because importing domestic companies no longer extend trade credit to their foreign counterparties.
Without trade credit, foreign firms are unable to produce and imports do not take place. Indeed,
there is some evidence that sectors more closely linked by trade credit relationships experience
greater comovement (Raddatz 2009). To test this hypothesis, we used Compustat data to build
standard measures of trade credit intensity by industry. The first is accounts payable/cost of goods
sold. This variable records the amount of credit that is extended to the firm by suppliers, relative
to the cost of production. The second is accounts receivable/sales. This is a measure of how much
the firm is extending credit to its customers. These are the two most standard indices in the trade
credit literature (see, e.g., Love, Preve and Sarria-Allende 2007). To construct them, we obtain
quarterly data on all firms in Compustat from 2000 to 2008, compute these ratios for each firm in
each quarter, and then take the median value for each firm across all the quarters for which data
are available. We then take the median of this value across firms in each industry.18 Since coverage
is uneven across sectors, we ensure that we have at least 10 firms over which we calculate trade
credit intensity. This implies that sometimes the level of variation is at the 5-, 4-, and even 3-digit
level, though the trade data are at the 6-digit NAICS level of disaggregation.19
17

For more on these product complexity measures, see Cowan and Neut (2007) and Levchenko (2007).
We take medians to reduce the impact of outliers, which tend to be large in firm-level data. Taking the means
instead leaves the results unchanged.
19
Amiti and Weinstein (2009) emphasize that trade credit in the accounting sense and trade finance are distinct.
18

15

Finally, another explanation for the collapse of international trade has to do with composition. It
may be that trade fell by more than GDP simply because international trade occurs systematically
in sectors that fell more than overall GDP. A way to evaluate this explanation would be to control
for domestic absorption in each sector. While we do not have domestic absorption data, especially
at this level of aggregation, we instead proxy for it using industrial production indices. These
indices are compiled by the Federal Reserve, and are available monthly at about the 4-digit NAICS
level of disaggregation. They are not measured in the same units as import and export data,
since industrial production is an index number. Our dependent variables, however, are percentage
reductions in imports and exports, thus we can control for the percentage reduction in industrial
production to measure the compositional effect. Two special cases of the compositional channel are
due to Boileau (1999), Erceg et al. (2008), and Engel and Wang (2009). These authors point out
that a large share of U.S. trade is in investment and durable goods, which tend to be more volatile
than other components of GDP. In order to explore this possibility, we classify goods according to
whether they are durable or not, and examine whether durable exports indeed fell by more than
nondurable ones.20
Appendix Table A1 reports the summary statistics for all the dependent and independent
variables used in estimation.

4.1

Vertical Linkages

Table 5 describes the results of testing for the role of downstream vertical linkages in the reduction
in trade. In this and all other tables, the dependent variable is the percentage reduction in imports
(Panel A) or exports (Panel B) from 2008q2 to 2009q2.21 All throughout, we report the standardized beta coefficients, obtained by first demeaning all the variables and normalizing each to have a
standard deviation of 1. Thus, the regression coefficients correspond to the number of standard deviations change in the left-hand side variable that would be due to a one standard deviation change
in the corresponding independent variable. We do this to better gauge the relative importance of
the various competing explanations, especially since the right-hand side variables of interest have
very different scales. In addition, in each column we report the partial R2 associated with the
Trade credit refers to payments owed to firms, while trade finance refers to short-term loans and guarantees used to
cover international transactions. We are not aware of any reliable sector-level measures of trade finance used by U.S.
firms engaged in international trade.
20
We created a classification of durables at the 3-digit NAICS level. Durable sectors include 23X (construction)
and 325-339 (chemical, plastics, mineral, metal, machinery, computer/electronic, transportation, and miscellaneous
manufacturing). All other 1XX, 2XX, and 3XX NAICS categories are considered non-durable for this exercise.
21
The peak of both total nominal imports and total nominal exports in the recent crisis is August 2008. An
alternative dependent variable would be the percentage drop from the peak to the trough. However, that measure is
more noisy because of seasonality. Therefore, we consider a year-on-year reduction, sidestepping seasonal adjustment
issues.

16

variable(s) of interest. This allows us to assess how successful each explanation is at accounting for
the cross-sectoral variation.
There is evidence that downstream linkages play a role in the reduction in international trade,
especially for imports into the United States. Goods that are used intensely as intermediates
(“Average Downstream Use”) experienced larger percentage drops in imports and exports. In
addition, other proxies such as the number of sectors that use an industry as an intermediate input
as well as the Herfindahl index of downstream intermediate use, are significant for imports, though
not for exports. The most successful indicator of downstream linkages has a beta coefficient of −0.2,
implying that a one standard deviation increase in Average Downstream Use leads to a reduction
in trade that is 0.2 standard deviations larger. There is also some evidence that the measure of
production sharing based on trade within multinational firms is significantly correlated with a drop
in imports, though not exports. In terms of accounting for the variation in the data, the best
downstream indicator has a partial R2 of 0.04, same as the R2 that can be accounted for by the
rest of the controls: sector size, elasticity of substitution, and labor intensity.22
Table 6 examines instead the role of upstream vertical linkages, with more mixed results. While
some of the measures are significant for either imports or exports, and all have the expected signs,
there is no robust pattern of significance. The beta coefficients are lower than the downstream
coefficients, and the partial R2 ’s are on the order of 1% in the best of cases.

4.2

Trade Credit

Table 7 examines the hypothesis that trade credit played a role in the collapse of international trade.
In particular, it tests for whether imports and exports experienced greater percentage reductions in
industries that use trade credit intensively. As above, Panel A reports the results for imports, and
Panel B for exports. There appears to be no evidence that sectors that either use, or extend, trade
credit more intensively exhibited larger changes in trade flows. For imports, the beta coefficients
are all less than 5%, and the partial R2 ’s are virtually zero.
Chor and Manova (2009) use monthly U.S. import data disaggregated by partner country and
sector, and a difference-in-differences approach to show that trade from countries that experienced
a greater credit contraction fell disproportionately more in sectors that rely on external finance,
have fewer tangible assets, or use more trade credit. However, the question remains whether
the differential effect of the credit conditions emphasized by those authors translates into greater
22

Another feature of the vertical linkage hypothesis is that imports and exports will be positively correlated within
a sector. To check whether this affects the results, we estimated a Seemingly Unrelated Regression model on the
imports and exports equations jointly. The coefficients and the standard errors were very similar to the simple OLS
estimates reported in the Tables.

17

average reductions in trade from countries hit especially hard by the credit crunch. To check
whether this is the case, we calculated the trade-weighted increase in the interbank lending rate,
Chor and Manova’s preferred indicator of the severity of credit contraction, in each sector:
T W CCitrade

=

N
X

∆IBRAT Ec × atrade
,
ic

(5)

c=1

where ∆IBRAT Ec is the change in the interbank lending rate over the period of the crisis in
country c, and aic is the pre-crisis share of total U.S. trade in sector i captured by country c. In the
import equation, aic is thus the share of total U.S. imports coming from country c in sector i, while
in the export equation, aic is the share of total U.S. exports in sector i going to country c. The
variable name T W CCitrade stands for “trade-weighted credit contraction.” In case of imports, its
value will be high if in sector i, a greater share of U.S. pre-crisis imports same from countries that
experienced a more severe credit crunch. Correspondingly, its value will be relatively low if U.S.
imports in that sector are dominated by countries that did not experience a credit crunch during
this period. The logic is similar for the export-based measure.23
Table 7 reports the results of using these measures. There is no evidence that imports into
the U.S. fell by more in sectors dominated by countries that experienced largest credit crunches.24
Paradoxically, for U.S. exports the coefficient is statistically significant but has the “wrong” sign,
implying that U.S. sectors that export predominantly to countries with larger credit contractions
grew more (fell by less) than other sectors, all else equal. Our results are not in direct contradiction
with those of Chor and Manova (2009), as the bulk of that paper estimates the differential effects
of the credit crunch across sectors depending on their characteristics, such as external finance
dependence. The difference-in-differences approach adopted by those authors can only answer
the question of whether trade changed differentially across sectors depending on their reliance on
trade credit or external finance. It does not answer whether trade from countries experiencing
greater credit contractions fell by more or not. Thus, it is perfectly plausible that while changing
credit conditions affect sectors differentially, the average effect is nil – which is what we find. This
point is underscored by the fact that over the period during which trade collapsed – mid-2008 to
mid-2009 – the interbank rates used by these authors actually fell in most countries, reflecting
aggressive monetary policy easing (see Figure 2 in Chor and Manova 2009). If one believes the
credit contraction hypothesis, this should have increased overall trade rather than reduced it, ceteris
23

We are grateful to Davin Chor and Kalina Manova for sharing the interbank lending rate data used in their
paper. Their sample of countries does not cover all of the U.S. imports and exports in each sector, but it comes close,
with the mean of 95% and medians of 97% for exports and 98% for imports in our sample of 6-digit NAICS sectors.
24
These results could be sensitive to the timing of the credit contraction. The Table reports the estimates in which
∆IBRAT Ec is taken over the 12 month period from April of 2008 to April 2009 (the end point of the Chor-Manova
dataset). The results are unchanged if we instead lag ∆IBRAT Ec by a further 6 or even 12 months.

18

paribus.
We can also examine the time evolution of trade credit directly. The Compustat database contains information on accounts payable up to and including the first quarter of 2009 for a substantial
number of firms. While there are between 7,000 and 8,000 firms per quarter with accounts payable
data in the Compustat database over the period 2007-2008, there are 6,250 firms for which this
variable is available for 2009q1. While this does represent a drop-off in coverage that may be nonrandom, it is still informative to look at what happens to trade credit for those firms over time.
With this selection caveat in mind, we construct a panel of firms over 2000-2009q1 for which data
are available at the end of the period, and trace out the evolution of accounts payable as a share
of cost of goods sold. The median value of this variable across firms in each period is plotted in
Figure 10(a). The dashed line represents the raw series. There is substantial seasonality in the raw
series, so the solid black line reports it after seasonal adjustment. The horizontal line plots the
mean value of this variable over the entire period.25 There is indeed a contraction in trade credit
during the recent crisis, but its magnitude is very small. The 2009q1 value of this variable is 55.2%,
just 1.3% below the period average of 56.5%, and only 3 percentage points below the most recent
peak of 58.1% in 2007q4. We conclude from this that the typical firm in Compustat experienced
at most a small contraction in trade credit it receives from other firms.26
Figure 10(b) presents the median of the other trade credit indicator, accounts receivable/sales
over the period 2004q1-2009q1. The coverage for this variable is not as good: there are very few
firms that report it before 2004, and there are only around 6,000 observations per quarter in 20072008. In 2009q1, there are 4,967 firms that report this variable, and we use this sample of firms
to construct the time series for the median accounts receivable. Once again, the decrease during
the recent crisis is very small: the 2009q1 value of 56.3% is only 1 percentage point below the
period average of 57.3%, and just 2 percentage points below the 2007q4 peak of 58.5%. Indirectly,
accounts receivable may be a better measure of the trade credit conditions faced by the typical firm
in the economy, as it measures the credit extended by big Compustat firms to (presumably) smaller
counterparts. But the picture that emerges from looking at the two series is quite consistent: there
is at most a small reduction in trade credit during the recent downturn.
25

It is suggestive from examining the raw data that there is no time trend in this variable. We confirm this by
regressing it on a time trend: the coefficient on the time trend turns out to be very close to zero, and not statistically
significant.
26
It may be that while the impact on the median firm is small, there is still a large aggregate effect due to an uneven
distribution of trade credit across firms. To check for this possibility, we built the aggregate accounts payable/cost
of goods sold series, by computing the ratio of total accounts payable for all the firms to the sum of all cost of goods
sold for the same firms. The results from using this series are even more stark: it shows an increase during the crisis,
and its 2009q1 value actually stands above its long-run average.

19

4.3

Composition

Finally, Table 8 tackles the issue of composition and durability. There appears to be robust evidence
that compositional effects play a role. Both exports and imports tend to collapse more in industries
where industrial production contracted more. The beta coefficients are relatively high (0.34 and
0.21 for industrial production, 0.20 and 0.11 for the durable dummy), and the partial R2 ’s are also
high relative to other potential explanatory variables. The coefficient on the durable 0/1 dummy
implies that on average imports in durable sectors contracted by 9.2 percentage points more than
non-durable ones, and exports in durable sectors contracted by 4.8 percentage points more. These
results further support the conclusions of Section 3.1, which shows that accounting explicitly for
the durables sector reduces the magnitude of the wedge considerably.
There is an alternative way to examine how much composition may matter. We can compare
the data on percentage reductions in exports and imports with data on industrial production at
sector level. According to the compositional explanation, imports and exports will drop relative to
the level of overall economic activity if international trade flows are systematically biased towards
sectors in which domestic absorption fell the most. Composition will account for all of the reduction
in imports and exports relative to economic activity if at sector level, reductions in trade perfectly
matched reductions in domestic absorption, and all that was different between international trade
and economic activity was the shares going to each sector. By contrast, composition will account for
none of the reduction in trade relative to output if there are no systematic differences in the trade
shares relative to output shares, at least along the volatility dimension. Alternatively, composition
will not explain the drop in trade if imports and exports simply experienced larger drops within
each sector than did total absorption.
With this logic in mind, we construct a hypothetical reduction in total trade that is implied
purely by compositional effects:
γ̃ trade =

I
X

atrade
γiIP .
i

i=1

In this expression, i = 1, ..., I indexes sectors, atrade
is the initial share of sector i in the total trade
i
flows, and γiIP is the percentage change in industrial production over the period of interest. That
is, γ̃ trade is the percentage reduction in overall trade that would occur if in each sector, trade was
reduced by exactly as much as industrial production. Following the rest of the empirical exercises
in this section, we compute γiIP over the period from 2008q2 to 2009q2, and apply the trade shares
as they were in 2008q2.
atrade
i
Table 9 reports the results. For both imports and exports, the first column reports the percentage change in nominal trade, the second column the percentage change in real trade, and the

20

third column reports γ̃ trade , the hypothetical reduction in trade that would occur if in each sector,
trade fell by exactly as much as industrial production. Because goods trade data are available for a
greater range of sectors than industrial production data, the last column reports the share of total
U.S. trade flows that can be matched to industrial production. We can see that we can match 88%
of exports and 94% of imports to sectors with IP data. Nonetheless, the fact that this table does
not capture all trade flows explains the difference between the values reported there and in Table
2. For ease of comparison, the last line of the table reports the percentage change in the total
industrial production. By construction, the actual and implied values are identical.
We can see that industrial production fell by 13.5%, while the matching nominal imports and
exports fell by 34.3% and 35.0%, respectively. Comparing the actual changes in nominal trade
to the implied ones in column 3, we can see that composition “explains” about half: the implied
reduction in exports is 18.1%, and the implied reduction in imports 16.1%. As expected, both of
these are larger than the fall in industrial production itself. The real reductions in trade (column
2) are smaller, as we saw above. Thus, γ̃ trade is about two-thirds of the real change in exports, and
83% of the change in real imports.
We conclude from this exercise that the actual pattern of trade is consistent with the presence
of compositional effects: it does appear that international trade is systematically biased towards
sectors with larger domestic output reductions. The simple assumption that trade in each sector
fell by the same amount as industrial production can “account” for between 50% and almost 85%
of the actual drop in trade flows. Several caveats are of course in order to interpret the results.
First and foremost, this is an accounting exercise rather than an economic explanation. We do not
know why trade flows are systematically biased towards sectors with larger falls in domestic output,
nor do we have a good sense of why some sectors had larger output reductions than others.27 It
also does not explain why the trade collapse during this recession is so different from most previous
recessions. Second, it is far from clear that trade falling by the same proportion as output is an
accurate description of what happened. Indeed, as evidenced by columns 1 and 3 of Table 8, the
percentage change in IP as a dependent variable explains only 11% of the variation in imports, and
4.4% of the variation in exports.28 Finally, industrial production may not be an entirely appropriate
benchmark, since it captures domestic output, while a more conceptually correct measure would be
domestic absorption. Nonetheless, our exercise does provide suggestive evidence of compositional
27

Indeed, benchmarking the trade drop to the drop in industrial production leaves open the question of why the
reduction in industrial production itself is so much larger than in GDP: while total GDP contracted by 3.8% in the
recent episode, industrial production fell by 13.5%.
28
While the table reports the standardized beta coefficient, the simple OLS coefficient on the change in industrial
production is about 0.58, implying that a given change in IP is associated with a change in trade of just over half the
magnitude. While this coefficient may be biased due to measurement error in IP data, taken at face value it implies
a less than one-for-one relationship between IP and trade changes.

21

effects.
To combine the above results together, Table 10 reports specifications in which all the distinct
explanations are included together. The first column presents results for all sectors and the baseline
set of control variables. The second column reports the results for manufacturing sectors only,
which allows us to include additional controls such as capital and skill intensity. The bottom line is
essentially unchanged: both downstream linkages and compositional effects are robustly significant
for imports, while upstream linkages and trade credit are not.29 When it comes to magnitudes, it
appears that the downstream linkage variable and the durable indicator are roughly of the same
magnitude, on both on the order of 0.2-0.3. All together, the regressors of interest – downstream
and upstream linkages, trade credit, and composition – explain about 9% of the cross-sectoral
variation in the full sample, and 12% in the manufacturing sample. For exports, there is also
suggestive evidence that downstream linkages and compositional effects continue to matter, but
the results are less robust.
In the subsample of the manufacturing sectors in columns 2 and 4, we also control for inventories.
We use monthly inventory data for 3-digit NAICS sectors from the BEA. Unfortunately, this coarse
level of aggregation implies that we only have 20 distinct sectors for which we can record inventory
levels. The particular variable we use is the ratio of inventories to imports (resp., exports) at the
beginning of the period, 2008q2.30 The initial level of inventories is not significant, and its inclusion
leaves the rest of the results unchanged. In addition, it appears to have the “wrong” sign: sectors
with larger initial inventories had smaller reductions in imports, all else equal. These estimates are
not supportive of the hypothesis that imports collapsed in part because agents decided to deplete
inventories as a substitute to buying more from abroad.31

4.4

Aggregation

How much of the aggregate reduction in trade can be accounted for by the leading explanations
evaluated above? The magnitude and significance of the coefficients of interest are informative
29

Indeed, in the manufacturing-only sample, the trade credit variable is significant but with the “wrong” sign for
both imports and exports: it implies that trade in credit-intensive industries fell by less.
30
Alternatively, we used the average level of inventories to imports (resp., exports) over the longer period, 2001-2007,
and the results were unchanged. We also used the percentage change in inventories that happened contemporaneously
with the reduction in trade, and the coefficient was insignificant: it appears that there is no relationship between
changes in inventories and changes in trade flows over this period.
31
Alessandria et al. (2010) argue for the importance of inventory adjustment as an explanation for why trade fell
by more than output. The quantitative exercise in that paper focuses on the auto sector. As evident from Table 2,
while the auto sector experienced large reductions in cross-border trade, it is far from the only sector that did so.
In addition, at the outset of the crisis the automotive vehicles, engines, and parts sector accounted for 9% of U.S.
exports and 11% of U.S. imports. At a purely mechanical level, the auto sector accounted for at most one-sixth of
the total reduction in either imports and exports, and thus it is important to consider other sectors in quantitative
assessments of the inventory hypothesis.

22

about how successful they are in explaining the cross-sectoral variation. However, it is not clear
whether these explanations have an appreciable impact on changes in the aggregate trade. For
instance, it may be that goods with greatest downstream linkages – that fell systematically more,
as indicated by our estimates – are also responsible for a tiny share of the overall imports. In
this case, downstream linkages, though statistically significant, would not account for much of the
aggregate reduction in trade.
To shed light on these issues, we perform an aggregation exercise in the spirit of di Giovanni
and Levchenko (2009, 2010). The aggregate reduction in total trade flow (imports or exports), γ A ,
can be written as:
I
X

γA =

i=1
I
X

=

ai γi

ai (b
γi + i )

i=1

where, once again, i indexes sectors, ai is the share of sector i in the aggregate trade flow, and γi
is the actual percentage reduction in trade in sector i. The second line writes the actual reduction
in trade in sector i as the sum of the predicted reduction γ
bi and the residual – an equality that
holds by construction. Since the predicted change in trade in sector i can be expressed in terms of
the actual values of the right-hand side variables and the estimated coefficients, the actual change
in aggregate trade can be decomposed as:
γA =

I
X

|i=1
I
X

ai βbDU R ∗ Durablei +
{z

Composition Effect

|i=1

}

ai βbU S ∗ Upstreami +

I
X

ai βbDS ∗ Downstreami +
{z

}

Downstream Effect

I
X
ai βbT C ∗ TradeCrediti +

(6)

i=1

i=1

{z

|

Upstream Effect

}

|

{z

Trade Credit Effect

}

I
X

I
X
b C ∗ Xi + |{z}
ai γ
α
b +
ai i .
i=1
i=1
|
{z
} Constant | {z }
Controls

Residuals

Note that the last term, Residuals, equals zero by construction. In order to perform this
decomposition, we use the coefficient estimates in columns 1 and 3 of Table 10, in which all of
the explanations are included together in the full sample of sectors. The point estimates and the
standard errors are reported in Table 11. For imports, the Composition Effect can account for
a 6.9% reduction in trade, out of a total 29.9% drop.32 The Downstream Effect accounts for a
32

Once again, the total reductions in imports and exports reported in this table are different from what appears

23

further 4% reduction. By contrast, the Trade Credit Effect goes the “wrong” way, showing a 5.9%
increase in trade, though of course it is not statistically significant. The remaining controls together
imply a 10.2% reduction. Surprisingly, the Upstream Effect is the largest, showing a 13.4% drop in
trade. However, as evident from the regression table, the coefficient on the Upstream variable is not
robustly statistically significant. For exports, both the Composition and the Downstream Effects
are smaller, at 3.4 and 2.2%, respectively. Controls account for more than half of the observed
reduction, 18.5%.
We conclude from this exercise that the two robustly statistically significant explanations –
composition and downstream linkages – are also relevant quantitatively, together accounting for
some 40% of the observed reduction in imports, and nearly 20% of exports.

4.5

Is the 2008-2009 Crisis Different?

We can use our estimation approach to examine the changes in international trade during previous
economic downturns. To that end, we assembled monthly data on imports and exports, as well
as the data on sectoral characteristics, for the two previous recessions, 1991 and 2001. Since the
NAICS classification did not exist in 1991, all of the data are recorded in the SIC classification for
that episode. For the 1991 recession, the indicators of intermediate input linkages (both downstream
and upstream) were re-calculated based on the 1987 Benchmark Input-Output Table, and trade
credit variables were computed from the pre-1990 data in Compustat. Similarly, measures of factor
intensity were calculated based on the I-O Table and the NBER Productivity Database for the pre1990 period. Finally, we also collected data for inventories and industrial production for the 1980s
and early 1990s.33 For the 2001 recession, we continue to use the intermediate input indicators
based on the 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Tables that were used in the main analysis, as it
is unlikely that the I-O structure would have experienced noticeable changes between 2001 and
2002. The other variables – trade credit intensity, export and import shares, factor intensity, and
inventories – were re-computed using pre-2001 data.
To keep the approach consistent with the main analysis above, we average monthly trade data
at the quarterly frequency, and take the year-on-year changes to avoid seasonality issues. For the
1991 recession, there is no dramatic change in trade. Thus, we take the difference between 1991q4
and 1990q4 as our left-hand side variable. For the 2001 recession, the peak in both imports and
exports is December 2000, also coinciding with the peak of the business cycle. Thus, we take the
in the summary statistics, as the regression specification underlying this table does not cover all sectors due to the
unavailability of some regressors of interest.
33
The historical IP data are no longer publicly available in the SIC classification. We are very grateful to Charlie
Gilbert at the Federal Reserve Board for providing these data.

24

2000q4 to 2001q4 change as the dependent variable.34
Appendix Table A2 reports the results. The first main conclusion is that the sectoral characteristics have much less explanatory power in accounting for the sectoral cross-section of trade
changes. While the overall R2 that we could achieve for the 2008-09 crisis could be as high 13.5%
for all sectors and 20% for manufacturing, the best we can do for 1991 and 2001 is about 3 to 7%
for all sectors and 10% for manufacturing. This is not surprising: while the average changes in
cross-border trade flows were much smaller in these two episodes, their standard deviations were
quite similar across the three recessions. Thus, idiosyncratic sectoral shocks – essentially the error
term in our regressions – were relatively more important in 1991 and 2001. Paradoxically, while
in the current recession the aggregate trade changes are much more of a puzzle as evidenced by
Section 3, we have a much better handle on the cross-sectoral variation.
Second, the only consistently robust explanatory variable in 1991 and 2001 is the Durable
indicator. It is significant for all but the 2001 exports. The magnitudes of the beta coefficients are
smaller, but roughly in line, with what we found for the 2008-09 recession. There is some evidence
that vertical linkages mattered for some trade flows, but it is not robust across episodes and flows.

5

Conclusion

This paper uses highly disaggregated data on U.S. imports and exports to examine the anatomy of
the recent collapse in international trade. We show that this collapse is exceptional in two ways: it
is far larger relative to economic activity than what has been observed in previous U.S. downturns;
and it is far larger than what would be predicted by the evolution of domestic absorption and prices
over the same period. Cross-sectional patterns of declines are consistent with vertical specialization
and compositional effects as (at least partial) explanations for the collapse. By contrast, we do not
detect any impact of trade credit on the reduction in international trade.
An important next step in this research agenda is to develop a theoretical framework that
can be quantitatively successful at replicating this collapse in trade. Doing so will enable us
to use this episode as a laboratory to distinguish between the different models of international
transmission. Our hope is that the empirical results in this paper can offer some guidance as to
which channels are likely to be most promising. In particular, our findings on compositional effects
and vertical linkages point to the crucial importance of developing quantitative models featuring a
realistic sectoral production structure and trade patterns. This will allow the researcher to model
both input-output linkages and systematic differences in the sectoral composition of production and
trade patterns. Recent advances in the closed economy (Carvalho 2008), and open economy settings
34

We experimented with various start dates for both recessions, and the results were not materially affected.

25

(Boileau 1999, Erceg et al. 2008, Engel and Wang 2009, Imbs and Mejean 2009, Jin 2009) appear
promising in this regard. By contrast, we do not find much of a role for financial variables in the
collapse of trade. This of course does not imply that the financial crisis did not have macroeconomic
consequences. Rather, financial shocks appear to have affected trade insofar as they had an impact
on overall economic activity, rather than through a direct finance-trade channel.

26

Appendix A

Wedges Derivation

We begin with the simplest 2-good IRBC model of Backus et al. (1995). There are two countries,
Home and Foreign, and two intermediate goods, one produced in Home, the other in Foreign. There
is one final good, used for both consumption and investment. The resource constraint of the Home
country in each period is given by:

Ct + I t = ω

1
ε



yth

 ε−1
ε

+ (1 − ω)

1
ε



ytf

ε
 ε−1  ε−1
ε

,

(A.1)

where Ct is Home consumption, It is Home investment, yth is the output of the Home intermediate
good that is used in Home production, and ytf is the amount of the Foreign intermediate used in
Home production. In this standard formulation, consumption and investment are perfect substitutes, and Home and Foreign goods are aggregated in a CES production function. The parameter
ω allows for a home bias in preferences.
The household (or, equivalently, a perfectly competitive final goods producer), chooses the mix
of Home and Foreign intermediates optimally:
o
n
min pht yth + pft ytf
yth ,ytf

s.t.

Ct + I t ≤ ω

1
ε



yth

 ε−1
ε

+ (1 − ω)

1
ε



ytf

ε
 ε−1  ε−1
ε

where pht is the price of the domestically-produced good and pft is the price of the imported good,
both expressed in the home country’s currency. This yields the standard demand equations:
 ε
Pt
h
yt = ω
(Ct + It )
pht
!ε
Pt
f
yt = (1 − ω)
(Ct + It ) ,
(A.2)
pft
1

 1−ε  1−ε
1−ε
f
h
where Pt = ω pt
+ (1 − ω) pt
is the standard CES price level.

Log-linearizing these, we obtain the import demand relationship in log changes given in equation
(1).
The derivation is essentially the same for subcomponents of final demand. In particular, suppose
that durable goods consumption in the Home country, Dt , is an aggregate of Home and Foreign
durable varieties:


 ε
ε−1 ε−1
ε−1
1
1 f
ε
h ε
ε
ε
Dt = ω dt
+ (1 − ω) dt
,
27

(A.3)

where dht is the domestic durable variety consumed in Home, and dft is the Foreign durable variety
consumed in Home. In other words, a “final durable goods” producer aggregates domesticallyproduced durable intermediates with foreign-produced durable intermediates to create a durable
good that can be used either as purchases of new durable consumption goods or capital investment.35
Cost minimization then produces the expression for the durable wedge in equation (2).
Similarly, suppose that investment and consumption goods are different, but both are produced
from domestic and foreign varieties
ε
  ε−1
  ε−1  ε−1
1
ε
ε
f
d
,
Ct = ω ct
+ (1 − ω) ε ct



1
ε

σ
  σ−1
  σ−1  σ−1
1
σ
σ
f
d
+ (1 − ζ) σ it
.
It = ζ
it



1
σ

In this formulation, domestic consumption goods cdt are different from domestic investment goods idt ,
and the same holds for the foreign consumption and investment goods. These production functions
then lead to the consumption and investment wedges in equations (3) and (4).

35

This formulation may appear to sidestep the special feature of durable goods, namely that it is the stock of
durables that enters utility. In our formulation, equation (A.3) defines the flow of new durable goods, rather than
the stock. Our assumption is then that the flow of new durable goods is a CES aggregate of the flows of foreign and
domestic durable purchases, dht and dft . We can then define the stock of durables by its evolution Dt = (1−δ)Dt−1 +Dt ,
with the stock Dt entering the utility function. An alternative assumption would be that foreign and domestic durables
have separate stocks, and consumer utility depends on a CES aggregate of domestic and foreign durable stocks (this
is the assumption adopted by Engel and Wang 2009). A priori, we find no economic reason to favor one set of
assumptions over the other, while our formulation is much more amenable to analyzing prices and quantities jointly.
This is because statistical agencies record quantities and prices of purchases, which are flows.

28

References
Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan, “The Great Trade Collapse of 200809: An Inventory Adjustment?,” January 2010. mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank Philadelphia,
Ohio State University and New York University.
Amiti, Mary and David E. Weinstein, “Exports and Financial Shocks,” September 2009. mimeo,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Columbia University.
Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004,
42 (3), 691–751.
Auboin, Marc, “Restoring Trade Finance: What the G20 Can Do,” in Richard Baldwin and
Simon Evenett, eds., The Collapse of Global Trade, Murky Protectionism, and the Crisis:
Recommendations for the G20, London: CEPR, 2009, chapter 15, pp. 75–80.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, “International Business Cycles: Theory and Evidence,” in Thomas Cooley, ed., Frontiers of business cycle research, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1995, pp. 331–356.
Baldwin, Richard and Simon Evenett, “Introduction and Recommendations for the G20,” in
Richard Baldwin and Simon Evenett, eds., The Collapse of Global Trade, Murky Protectionism,
and the Crisis: Recommendations for the G20, London: CEPR, 2009, chapter 1, pp. 1–9.
Behrens, Kristian, Gregory Corcos, and Giordano Mion, “Trade Crisis? What Trade Crisis?,”
February 2010. mimeo, UQAM, NHH, and LSE.
Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Role of Vertical Linkages in the Propagation of the Global Downturn of 2008,” January 2010. mimeo, International Monetary Fund,
Dartmouth College, and Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Blanchard, Olivier and Michael Kremer, “Disorganization,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997,
112, 1091–1126.
, Hamid Faruqee, and Mitali Das, “The initial impact of the crisis on emerging market
countries,” March 2010. mimeo, International Monetary Fund.
Boileau, Martin, “Trade in capital goods and the volatility of net exports and the terms of trade,”
Journal of International Economics, August 1999, 48 (2), 347–365.
Bricongne, Jean-Charles, Lionel Fontagné, Guillaume Gaulier, Daria Taglioni, and Vincent Vicard,
“Firms and the global crisis: French exports in the turmoil,” December 2009. Bank of France
Working Paper 265.
Broda, Christian and David Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 541–85.
Burstein, Ariel, Christopher Kurz, and Linda L. Tesar, “Trade, Production Sharing, and the
International Transmission of Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55,
775–795.
Carvalho, Vasco, “Aggregate Fluctuations and the Network Structure of Intersectoral Trade,” June
2008. Mimeo, CREI-Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Business Cycle Accounting,” Econometrica, May 2007, 75 (3), 781–836.
Chinn, Menzie, “What Does the Collapse of US Imports and Exports Signify?,” June 23 2009.

29

Chor, Davin and Kalina Manova, “Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and International
Trade during the Global Financial Crisis,” October 2009. mimeo, Singapore Management
University and Stanford University.
Cole, Harold and Lee Ohanian, “The U.S. and U.K. Great Depressions through the Lens of
Neoclassical Growth Theory,” American Economic Review, P&P, May 2002, 92 (2), 28–32.
Cowan, Kevin and Alejandro Neut, “Intermediate Goods, Institutions, and Output Per Worker,”
2007. Central Bank of Chile Working Paper No. 420.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Trade Openness and Volatility,” Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2009, 91 (3), 558–585.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical
Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
April 2010, 2 (2), 95–124.
Eaton, Jonathan, Sam Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, “Trade and the Global Recession,” February 2010. mimeo, Penn State University and University of Chicago.
Economist, “Shipping in the Downturn: Sea of Troubles,” June 30 2009.
Engel, Charles and Jian Wang, “International Trade in Durable Goods: Understanding Volatility,
Cyclicality, and Elasticities,” July 2009. mimeo, University of Wisconsin and Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas.
Erceg, Christopher J., Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust, “Trade adjustment and the composition of trade,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, August 2008, 32 (8), 2622–2650.
Freund, Caroline, “The Trade Response to the Global Downturn: Historical Evidence,” August
2009. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5015.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization
in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, June 2001, 54, 75–96.
Iacovone, Leonardo and Veronika Zavacka, “Banking Crises and Exports: Lessons from the Past,”
May 2009. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5016.
Imbs, Jean, “The First Global Recession in Decades,” December 2009. mimeo, HEC Lausanne.
and Isabelle Mejean, “Elasticity Optimism,” January 2009. mimeo, HEC Lausanne and Ecole
Polytechnique.
IMF, “Survey of Private Sector Trade Credit Developments,” February 2009. memorandum.
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy, “The role of trade costs in the great
trade collapse,” in Richard Baldwin, ed., The great trade collapse: Causes, Consequences and
Prospects, VoxEU.org Ebook, 2009, chapter 18.
Jin, Keyu, “International Business Cycles with Heterogenous Sectors,” October 2009. mimeo,
LSE.
Kremer, Michael, “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, 108 (3), 551–75.
Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The Cross-Country Incidence of the Global Crisis,”
January 2010. mimeo, Trinity College Dublin and International Monetary Fund.
Levchenko, Andrei A., “Institutional Quality and International Trade,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (3), 791–819.
30

Love, Inessa, Lorenzo A. Preve, and Virginia Sarria-Allende, “Trade Credit and Bank Credit:
Evidene from Recent Financial Crises,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 83, 453–469.
Raddatz, Claudio, “Credit Chains and Sectoral Comovement: Does the Use of Trade Credit
Amplify Sectoral Shocks?,” 2009. Forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics.
WTO, “World Trade Report,” July 2009.
Yi, Kei-Mu, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?,” Journal of Political
Economy, February 2003, 111 (1), 52–102.

31

Table 1. Changes in Exports/GDP and Imports/GDP during Recessions

Exports/GDP
Imports/GDP
Non-Oil Imports/GDP

2008
Recession From Peak
-14.6%
-19.7%
-24.9%
-29.5%
-21.5%
-23.3%

Exports/GDP
Imports/GDP
Non-Oil Imports/GDP

2001
Recession From Peak
-14.2%
-17.1%
-13.5%
-16.0%
-11.5%
-14.5%

Exports/GDP
Imports/GDP

Average 1950s-1990s
Recession
-0.9%
-0.3%

Notes: This table reports the percent reductions in Exports/GDP and Imports/GDP during the 2008 and
2001 recessions and the average for all the downturns from 1950 to 2000. Column “Recession” reports the
change in the trade variables during the official NBER recession (2007-2009 recession to 2009q2). Column
“From Peak” reports the change from the peak of the trade ratios to the trough (for 2001), and to the
current trough (2009q2). Source: National Income and Product Accounts.

32

33

-94.6
-3.7
-11.0
-79.9
-58.1
-19.5
-23.0
3.6
-19.6

0.35
0.06
0.04
0.26
0.09
0.12
0.07
0.05
0.04

0.19
0.25
0.06
0.01
0.05
0.02
0.22
0.04
0.04
0.01
0.21
0.02
0.11
0.04
0.02

Canada
Asia
China
India
Japan
Taiwan
EU25
Germany
United Kingdom
Eastern Europe
Latin America
Brazil
Mexico
OPEC
Australia

0.17
0.34
0.15
0.01
0.07
0.02
0.18
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.18
0.01
0.11
0.10
0.00

0.04
0.15
0.08
0.07
0.22
0.21
0.02
0.05
0.15
0.11
0.22
0.12
0.10
0.04

1.00
0.78

Share of Total

Panel B: By Destination
-33%
-26%
-15%
-13%
-31%
-42%
-25%
-30%
-25%
-49%
-29%
-28%
-28%
-18%
-26%

-20%
-5%
-24%
-23%
-47%
-12%
-24%
5%
-35%

Panel A: By Sector
-19%
-34%
-36%
-33%

-26%

Percent Change

-157.7
-170.2
-51.4
-5.1
-61.2
-10.0
-120.1
-40.5
-17.1
-3.8
-132.6
-13.9
-67.3
-146.5
-4.0

-8.2
-155
-84.2
-70.8
-269.9
-123.7
-6.7
-23.7
-93.3
-121.4
-75.5
-50.2
-25.2
-11.8

-765.7
-495.8

Imports
Absolute Change

-43%
-24%
-16%
-21%
-42%
-28%
-31%
-39%
-28%
-31%
-33%
-43%
-29%
-60%
-35%

-9%
-47%
-50%
-44%
-54%
-26%
-18%
-22%
-29%
-49%
-15%
-18%
-11%
-12%

-34%
-29%

Percent Change

Notes: This table reports the percentage decrease in nominal U.S. exports and imports over the period 2008q2 to 2009q2, disaggregated by
sector (Panel A) and by destination (Panel B). Source: National Income and Product Accounts and U.S. International Trade Commission.

-80.6
-80.2
-10.5
-2.3
-20.3
-10.9
-68.0
-16.2
-13.8
-4.8
-76.8
-7.8
-37.6
-9.9
-5.5

-21.5
-134.9
-50.3
-84.6

0.09
0.30
0.10
0.20

Foods, feeds, and beverages
Industrial supplies and materials
Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Petroleum and products
Capital goods, except automotive
Civilian aircraft, engines, and parts
Computers, peripherals, and parts
Other
Automotive vehicles, engines, and parts
Consumer goods, except automotive
Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Other

-348.1

1.00

Exports
Absolute Change

Total
Total, excluding petroleum

Share of Total

Table 2. Disaggregated Trade Flows, Nominal

34

-18.5%
-33.9%
-36.4%
-32.6%

Foods, feeds, and beverages
Industrial supplies and materials
Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Petroleum and products
Capital goods, except automotive
Civilian aircraft, engines, and parts
Computers, peripherals, and parts
Other
Automotive vehicles, engines, and parts
Consumer goods, except automotive
Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Other
-19.0%
-9.4%
-16.8%
-21.6%
-46.8%
-11.4%
-25.0%
7.5%
-28.5%

-6.7%
-13.8%
-20.2%
-10.3%

-18.9%

-1.5%
5.0%
-8.2%
-2.0%
0.6%
-0.6%
0.6%
-2.2%
-8.8%

-12.7%
-23.3%
-20.3%
-24.9%

-9.0%

Price

-9.1%
-47.1%
-50.2%
-43.8%
-54.2%
-26.3%
-17.6%
-21.9%
-28.8%
-48.9%
-15.2%
-18.4%
-11.3%
-12.4%

-34.4%
-28.7%

-4.7%
-30.3%
-35.0%
-25.6%
-7.1%
-25.3%
-21.7%
-16.3%
-28.6%
-49.1%
-14.6%
-17.2%
-11.5%
-11.3%

-21.4%
-24.5%

Imports
Nominal
Real

-4.8%
-24.0%
-23.4%
-24.5%
-50.7%
-1.4%
5.3%
-6.7%
-0.4%
0.3%
-0.7%
-1.5%
0.2%
-1.2%

-16.5%
-5.6%

Price

Notes: This table reports the percentage decrease in nominal U.S. exports and imports over the period 2008q2 to 2009q2, the percentage change
in real U.S. exports and imports, and the percentage change in the price of exports and imports, by sector. Source: National Income and
Product Accounts.

-20.2%
-4.8%
-23.7%
-23.2%
-46.6%
-11.9%
-24.5%
5.2%
-34.7%

-26.2%

Total
Total, excluding petroleum

Exports
Nominal
Real

Table 3. Nominal Trade Flows, Real Trade Flows, and Prices

Table 4. Trade Wedges

ε

(1)
Overall

(2)
Overall, Non-Oil

(3)
Durable

(4)
Consumption

(5)
Investment

1.5
6

-0.401
-1.190

-0.278
-0.648

-0.205
-0.342

-0.064
0.072

-0.105
-0.203

Notes: This table reports the wedges calculated for 2009q2 with respect to 2008q2 (year-on-year). Source:
National Income and Product Accounts and authors’ calculations.

35

36

-0.077**
(0.032)
-0.071
(0.057)
-0.162***
(0.055)
437
0.080
0.041

-0.200***
(0.043)

-0.091***
(0.028)
-0.079
(0.058)
-0.151***
(0.055)
437
0.061
0.021

-0.145***
(0.041)

-0.123***
(0.028)
-0.075
(0.059)
-0.161***
(0.056)
437
0.059
0.018

0.134***
(0.046)
-0.087**
(0.043)
-0.096***
(0.028)
-0.036
(0.058)
-0.141**
(0.055)
443
0.042
0.007

-0.206***
(0.063)
-0.045
(0.081)
-0.173***
(0.047)
437
0.094
0.009

-0.094**
(0.042)

-0.220***
(0.060)
-0.047
(0.082)
-0.168***
(0.047)
437
0.089
0.004

-0.061
(0.042)

-0.229***
(0.056)
-0.037
(0.081)
-0.179***
(0.048)
437
0.086
0.000

-0.018
(0.048)
-0.01
(0.051)
-0.229***
(0.055)
-0.036
(0.080)
-0.176***
(0.047)
443
0.088
0.000

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Panel B: Percentage Change in Exports

Notes: Standardized beta coefficients reported throughout. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. The dependent variable is the percentage reduction in U.S. Imports (Panel A) and the percentage reduction in exports (Panel B) in a 6-digit NAICS category
from 2008q2 to 2009q2 (year-to-year). Average Downstream Use is the average usage output in a sector as an intermediate input in other sectors; Number of
Downstream Industries is the number of industries that use a sector as an intermediate; Downstream Herfindahl is the Herfindahl index of the usage of a sector as
an intermediate in other sectors. These three indicators are computed based on the U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table. Production Sharing is the share of
intra-firm imports in total U.S. imports (Panel A), or the share of intra-firm exports in total U.S. exports (Panel B), computed from the BEA multinationals data,
and averaged over the period 2002-2006. Share in Total is the share of a sector in total U.S. imports (Panel A), or exports (Panel B). Elasticity of Substitution
between varieties in a sector is sourced from Broda and Weinstein (2006). Labor Intensity is the compensation of employees as a share of value added, from the
U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table.

Observations
R2
Partial R2

Labor Intensity

Elasticity of Substitution

Share in Total

Production Sharing

Downstream Herfindahl

Number of Downstream Industries

Average Downstream Use

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Percentage Change in Imports

Table 5. Trade Changes and Downstream Production Linkages

37

-0.097***
(0.028)
-0.045
(0.058)
-0.116*
(0.061)
443
0.047
0.012

-0.116*
(0.063)

-0.089***
(0.027)
-0.045
(0.058)
-0.120**
(0.056)
443
0.048
0.013

-0.120**
(0.047)
-0.032
(0.045)
-0.104***
(0.027)
-0.039
(0.058)
-0.165***
(0.055)
443
0.036
0.001

-0.229***
(0.057)
-0.038
(0.079)
-0.168***
(0.053)
443
0.088
0.001

-0.025
(0.055)

-0.195***
(0.060)
-0.045
(0.079)
-0.136***
(0.049)
443
0.101
0.015

-0.128***
(0.047)
0.009
(0.052)
-0.233***
(0.057)
-0.036
(0.080)
-0.176***
(0.047)
443
0.088
0.000

(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel B: Percentage Change in Exports

Notes: Standardized beta coefficients reported throughout. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. The dependent variable is the percentage reduction in U.S. Imports (Panel A) and the percentage reduction in exports (Panel B) in a 6-digit NAICS category
from 2008q2 to 2009q2 (year-to-year). Intermediate Use Intensity is spending on intermediate inputs per dollar of final sales; Number of Intermediates Used is
the number intermediates a sector uses in production; Herfindahl of Intermediate Use is the Herfindahl index of the intermediate good usage in a sector. These
three indicators are computed based on the U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table. Share in Total is the share of a sector in total U.S. imports (Panel A),
or exports (Panel B). Elasticity of Substitution between varieties in a sector is sourced from Broda and Weinstein (2006). Labor Intensity is the compensation of
employees as a share of value added, from the U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table.

Observations
R2
Partial R2

Labor Intensity

Elasticity of Substitution

Share in Total

Herfindahl of Intermediate Use

Number of Intermediates Used

Intermediate Use Intensity

(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Percentage Change in Imports

Table 6. Trade Changes and Upstream Production Linkages

38

-0.124***
(0.036)
-0.035
(0.059)
-0.175***
(0.055)
419
0.041
0.000

0.017
(0.069)

-0.116***
(0.027)
-0.038
(0.059)
-0.176***
(0.057)
419
0.042
0.001

-0.031
(0.065)
-0.071
(0.068)
-0.106***
(0.027)
-0.047
(0.059)
-0.163***
(0.052)
441
0.046
0.005

-0.233***
(0.060)
-0.035
(0.085)
-0.165***
(0.048)
419
0.082
0.000

-0.016
(0.058)

-0.240***
(0.058)
-0.03
(0.081)
-0.164***
(0.047)
419
0.084
0.003

0.05
(0.057)
0.138**
(0.063)
-0.239***
(0.055)
-0.039
(0.076)
-0.159***
(0.046)
443
0.106
0.020

(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel B: Percentage Change in Exports

Notes: Standardized beta coefficients reported throughout. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. The dependent variable is the percentage reduction in U.S. Imports (Panel A) and the percentage reduction in exports (Panel B) in a 6-digit NAICS category
from 2008q2 to 2009q2 (year-to-year). Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold and Accounts Receivable/Sales are measures of trade credit used and extended,
respectively, computed using firm-level information from the Compustat database. TWCC is the measure of trade-weighted credit contraction, computed from
country-specific changes in the interbank interest rates and U.S. bilateral trade shares according to equation (5). Share in Total is the share of a sector in total
U.S. imports (Panel A), or exports (Panel B). Elasticity of Substitution between varieties in a sector is sourced from Broda and Weinstein (2006). Labor Intensity
is the compensation of employees as a share of value added, from the U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table.

Observations
R2
Partial R2

Labor Intensity

Elasticity of Substitution

Share in Total

TWCC

Accounts Receivable/Sales

Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold

(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Percentage Change in Imports

Table 7. Trade Changes and Trade Credit Intensity

39

-0.101**
(0.045)
-0.009
(0.069)
-0.078
(0.055)
401
0.144
0.109

0.338***
(0.045)
-0.200***
(0.047)
-0.091***
(0.031)
-0.047
(0.061)
-0.103*
(0.054)
443
0.072
0.038

-0.233***
(0.065)
-0.011
(0.089)
-0.083*
(0.048)
402
0.116
0.044

0.211***
(0.052)
-0.106**
(0.049)
-0.210***
(0.056)
-0.042
(0.081)
-0.148***
(0.049)
443
0.097
0.011

(3)
(4)
Panel B: Percentage Change in Exports

Notes: Standardized beta coefficients reported throughout. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. The dependent variable is the percentage reduction in U.S. Imports (Panel A) and the percentage reduction in exports (Panel B) in a 6-digit NAICS category
from 2008q2 to 2009q2 (year-to-year). Percentage Change in Industrial Production is the decline in the index of industrial production in a sector; Share in Total
is the share of a sector in total U.S. imports (Panel A), or exports (Panel B). Elasticity of Substitution between varieties in a sector is sourced from Broda and
Weinstein (2006). Labor Intensity is the compensation of employees as a share of value added, from the U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table.

Observations
R2
Partial R2

Labor Intensity

Elasticity of Substitution

Share in Total

Durable dummy

Percentage Change in Industrial Production

(1)
(2)
Panel A: Percentage Change in Imports

Table 8. Trade Changes and Compositional Effects

Table 9. Compositional Effects: Change in Trade Flows as Implied by Industrial Production.

Exports
Imports
IP

(1)
Nominal
Change

(2)
Real
Change

(3)
Implied by IP change
γ̃ trade

(4)
Share of Trade
Corresponding to IP

-34.3%
-35.0%

-25.0%
-19.4%
-13.5%

-18.1%
-16.1%
-13.5%

0.88
0.94
1.00

Notes: Changes in nominal and real exports over 2008q2 to 2009q2 for NAICS sectors where industrial
production (IP) data are available. Weights calculated from share of nominal trade and used to generate
the third column. The fourth column indicates the fraction of overall nominal trade that can be matched
to IP data.

40

41
415
0.135
0.092

-0.171***
(0.043)
-0.119*
(0.066)
0.065
(0.084)
-0.229***
(0.062)
-0.077
(0.050)
-0.083
(0.061)
-0.069
(0.063)

-0.205***
(0.052)
-0.063
(0.112)
0.180**
(0.069)
-0.302***
(0.060)
0.014
(0.063)
-0.076
(0.078)
0.048
(0.117)
0.181
(0.137)
-0.105
(0.097)
0.095
(0.062)
350
0.212
0.120
415
0.097
0.018

-0.094**
(0.044)
-0.019
(0.063)
0.010
(0.067)
-0.098
(0.062)
-0.189***
(0.068)
-0.05
(0.086)
-0.128**
(0.064)

-0.053
(0.048)
-0.03
(0.086)
0.191***
(0.062)
-0.244***
(0.065)
-0.242***
(0.067)
-0.02
(0.065)
-0.062
(0.117)
0.127
(0.131)
0.012
(0.076)
0.041
(0.059)
351
0.178
0.053

(3)
(4)
Panel B: Percentage Change in Exports

Notes: Standardized beta coefficients reported throughout. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. The dependent variable is the percentage reduction in U.S. Imports (Panel A) and the percentage reduction in exports (Panel B) in a 6-digit NAICS category
from 2008q2 to 2009q2 (year-to-year). Average Downstream Use is the average usage output in a sector as an intermediate input in other sectors; Intermediate
Use Intensity is spending on intermediate inputs per dollar of final sales; Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold is a measure of trade credit; Share in Total is
the share of a sector in total U.S. imports (Panel A), or exports (Panel B). Elasticity of Substitution between varieties in a sector is sourced from Broda and
Weinstein (2006). Labor Intensity is the compensation of employees as a share of value added, from the U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table. Capital
Intensity =1-(total compensation)/(value added); Skill Intensity=[(nonproduction workers)/(total employment)]*(1-capital intensity). These two indicators are
computed using the NBER Productivity Database. Inventories is the beginning-of-period level of inventories relative to imports (resp., exports).

Observations
R2
Partial R2

Inventories

Skill Intensity

Capital Intensity

Labor Intensity

Elasticity of Substitution

Share in Total

Durable Dummy

Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold

Intermediate Use Intensity

Average Downstream Use

(1)
(2)
Panel A: Percentage Change in Imports

Table 10. Trade Changes and and All Explanatory Variables Together

Table 11. Decomposition of the Aggregate Reduction in Trade
(1)
Total
(γ A )

(2)
Composition
Effect

(3)
Downstream
Effect

(4)
Upstream
Effect

(5)
Trade Credit
Effect

(6)
Controls

(7)
Constant

0.059
(0.076)

-0.102
(0.045)

-0.014
(0.084)

0.007
(0.048)

-0.185
(0.052)

-0.050
(0.075)

-0.299

-0.069
(0.019)

-0.040
(0.010)

Imports
-0.134
(0.075)

-0.304

-0.034
(0.021)

-0.022
(0.010)

Exports
-0.021
(0.069)

Notes: This table presents a decomposition of the actual aggregate change in trade into components given
in equation (6). Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

42

Figure 1. Historical Trends in Aggregate Trade, 1947-2009.
0.20
0.18
0.16

Imports/GDP

0.14
0.12
0.10

Exports/GDP

0.08
0.06

Non-oil imports/GDP

0.04
0.02
0.00
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

2002

2007

(a) Imports/GDP and Exports/GDP
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05

Exports

GDP

-0.1
Imports

-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
1947

1952

1957

1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

1992

1997

(b) Imports, Exports, and GDP in Deviations from Trend
Notes: The top panel plots the ratios of imports/GDP and exports/GDP for the U.S., along with the NBER
recession bars. The bottom panel plots total imports, exports, and GDP in deviations from HP trend with
parameter 1600. Source: National Income and Product Accounts.

43

Figure 2. Goods and Services Trade
1800
1600

-19%

Billions 2005 USD

1400
1200

Goods

1000
800
600

-7%

400

Services

200
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

(a) Exports
2500

Billions 2005 USD

2000

-24%
1500

Goods
1000
500

-5%

Services
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

(b) Imports
Notes: This Figure reports the total real exports (top panel) and real imports (bottom panel), of both goods
and services. Source: National Income and Product Accounts.

44

Figure 3. Durables and Non-Durables Trade
1400

Billions 2005 USD

1200
1000

-24%

800

Durable

600
400

-10%

200
0

Nondurable
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

(a) Exports
2000
1800

Billions 2005 USD

1600

-30%

1400

Durable

1200
1000
800
600

-15%

400

Nondurable

200
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

(b) Imports
Notes: This Figure reports the total real exports (top panel) and real imports (bottom panel), of both
durable and non-durable goods. Source: National Income and Product Accounts.

45

Figure 4. Real and Nominal Trade
160

Nominal total exports

150
140
130
120

Real total exports

110
100
90
80

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

(a) Exports
160
150
Nominal total imports

140
130

Nominal non-oil

120
110
Real non-oil

100

Real total imports

90
80

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

(b) Imports
Notes: This Figure reports the evolution of nominal and real exports (top panel) and imports (bottom
panel). Both the nominal and real series are normalized to 2005. Source: National Income and Product
Accounts.

46

Figure 5. Real and Nominal Changes in Trade, by Sector
% change real trade
-60%

-50%

-40%

-30%

-20%

-10%

0%

10%

% change nominal trade

10%
Non-dur. C
goods
0%
-10%
-20%
Total
Total

Dur. ind.
supplies

Autos

-30%
-40%
-50%

Petroleum
-60%
Exports

Imports

Notes: This figure plots the percentage changes in real imports and exports against the percentage changes
in nominal imports and exports, by EndUse sector, along with a 45-degree line. Source: National Income
and Product Accounts.

47

Figure 6. Overall and Durable Wedges

0.6
0.4

Overall wedge
Overall non-oil wedge

0.2
0
-0.2
Durable wedge
-0.4
-0.6
1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

2008

Notes: This figure plots the wedges for total imports and the durable imports. Source: National Income
and Product Accounts and authors’ calculations.

Figure 7. Consumption and Investment Wedges
0.6
0.4
Consumption wedge

0.2
0
-0.2

Investment wedge

-0.4
-0.6
1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

2008

Notes: This figure plots the wedges for consumption imports and investment imports. Source: National
Income and Product Accounts and authors’ calculations.

48

Figure 8. Overall Wedges, Large Industrial Countries

.4
0
−.4
−.8

−.8

−.4

0

.4

.8

Germany

.8

Japan

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

2000

2010

2000

2010

2000

2010

.4
0
−.4
−.8

−.8

−.4

0

.4

.8

France

.8

United Kingdom

1990

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

.4
0
−.4
−.8

−.8

−.4

0

.4

.8

Canada

.8

Italy

1990

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

1990

Notes: This figure plots the wedges for total imports for a selected set of countries. Source: OECD and
authors’ calculations.

49

Figure 9. Overall Wedges, Selected Emerging Markets

.4
0
−.4
−.8

−.8

−.4

0

.4

.8

Turkey

.8

Korea

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2005

2010

.4
0
−.4
−.8

−.8

−.4

0

.4

.8

Poland

.8

Mexico

2000

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2005

2010

.4
0
−.4
−.8

−.8

−.4

0

.4

.8

Czech Republic

.8

Hungary

2000

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

Notes: This figure plots the wedges for total imports for a selected set of countries. Source: OECD and
authors’ calculations.

50

Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold

Figure 10. The Evolution of Trade Credit
0.6
0.58
0.56
0.54
0.52
0.5
2000

2001

2002
Average

2003

2004

2005

2006

Non-Seas. Adj.

2007

2008

2009

Seas. Adj.

(a) Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold

Accounts Receivable/Sales

0.6
0.58
0.56
0.54
0.52
0.5
2004

2005
Average

2006

2007

Non-Seas. Adj.

2008

2009

Seas. Adj.

(b) Accounts Receivable/Sales
Notes: The top panel of this figure displays the median value of accounts payable/cost of goods sold across
firms in each period. The bottom panel reports the median value of accounts receivable/sales across firms
in each period. Source: Compustat.

51

Table A1. Summary Statistics
Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Independent Variables
Percentage Change in Imports
Percentage Change in Exports

-0.253
-0.209

0.227
0.214

-1.000
-0.969

0.861
0.744

Downstream Indicators
Average Downstream Use
Number of Downstream Industries
Downstream Herfindahl
Production Sharing (exports)
Production Sharing (imports)

0.001
102
0.220
0.196
0.150

0.002
111
0.223
0.133
0.139

0.000
1
0.009
0.005
0.000

0.013
419
1.000
0.612
0.577

Upstream Indicators
Intermediate Use Intensity
Number of Intermediates Used
Herfindahl of Intermediate Use

0.631
113
0.094

0.122
26
0.066

0.254
46
0.028

0.949
218
0.532

Credit Indicators
Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold
Accounts Receivable/Sales
TWCC (imports)
TWCC (exports)

0.469
0.532
-2.691
-2.721

0.141
0.131
0.493
0.392

0.194
0.156
-5.594
-4.190

1.733
0.817
-1.178
-0.411

Compositional Indicators
Percentage Change in Industrial Production
Durable dummy

-0.179
0.588

0.121
0.493

-0.757
0

0.036
1

Control Variables
Share in Total Imports
Share in Total Exports
Elasticity of Substitution
Labor Intensity

0.002
0.002
6.8
0.633

0.007
0.005
10.7
0.229

0.000
0.000
1.2
0.049

0.088
0.045
103
0.998

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the variables used in the estimation for the 2008-2009
episode. Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.

52

53
400
0.037
0.022

0.065
(0.048)
-0.118*
(0.067)
-0.114**
(0.045)
-0.069
(0.057)
0.024
(0.028)
-0.118**
(0.049)
-0.018
(0.020)

0.074
(0.048)
0.038
(0.073)
0.045
(0.048)
-0.146**
(0.065)
0.051*
(0.029)
-0.058
(0.056)
0.249***
(0.083)
0.416***
(0.103)
-0.190***
(0.069)
-0.071
(0.044)
383
0.107
0.021
398
0.063
0.044

-0.114***
(0.041)
-0.035
(0.065)
-0.105
(0.100)
-0.131**
(0.061)
0.026
(0.062)
-0.155**
(0.064)
-0.073
(0.061)

-0.101**
(0.042)
0.082
(0.105)
0.115**
(0.050)
-0.193***
(0.071)
0.016
(0.071)
-0.112
(0.070)
0.094
(0.106)
0.180
(0.128)
-0.039
(0.082)
0.107
(0.066)
380
0.095
0.043
408
0.074
0.028

-0.049
(0.043)
0.059
(0.064)
-0.079
(0.056)
-0.104**
(0.053)
-0.108*
(0.060)
-0.014
(0.068)
-0.189***
(0.065)

-0.08
(0.051)
-0.068
(0.084)
0.052
(0.069)
-0.134**
(0.062)
-0.049
(0.055)
-0.028
(0.088)
-0.032
(0.119)
-0.021
(0.118)
-0.084
(0.095)
0.213***
(0.053)
350
0.115
0.023

414
0.032
0.019

-0.073
(0.050)
0.131**
(0.056)
-0.042
(0.060)
-0.005
(0.052)
-0.052
(0.040)
0.015
(0.064)
-0.150**
(0.061)

-0.048
(0.057)
0.04
(0.089)
-0.023
(0.078)
-0.031
(0.066)
-0.071
(0.049)
0.006
(0.078)
-0.117
(0.118)
-0.030
(0.131)
0.032
(0.110)
-0.016
(0.070)
351
0.021
0.005

(6)
(7)
(8)
2001 Recession
Panel C: Percentage
Panel D: Percentage
Change in Imports
Change in Exports

(5)

Notes: Standardized beta coefficients reported throughout. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%. The dependent variable is the percentage reduction in U.S. Imports (Panels A and C) and the percentage reduction in exports (Panels B and D) in a
4-digit SIC category from 1990q4 to 1991q4 (1991 Recession) or 6-digit NAICS category from 2000q4 to 2001q4 (2001 Recession). Average Downstream Use is the
average usage output in a sector as an intermediate input in other sectors; Intermediate Use Intensity is spending on intermediate inputs per dollar of final sales;
Accounts Payable/Cost of Goods Sold is a measure of trade credit; Share in Total is the share of a sector in total U.S. imports (Panel A), or exports (Panel B).
Elasticity of Substitution between varieties in a sector is sourced from Broda and Weinstein (2006). Labor Intensity is the compensation of employees as a share
of value added, from the U.S. 1987 Benchmark Input-Output Table (1991 Recession), or U.S. 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Table (2001 Recession). Capital
Intensity =1-(total compensation)/(value added); Skill Intensity=[(nonproduction workers)/(total employment)]*(1-capital intensity). These two indicators are
computed using the NBER Productivity Database. Inventories is the beginning-of-period level of inventories relative to imports (resp., exports).

Observations
R2
Partial R2

Inventories

Skill Intensity

Capital Intensity

Labor Intensity

Elasticity of Substitution

Share in Total

Durable Dummy

Accounts Payable

Intermediate Use Intensity

Average Downstream Use

(2)
(3)
(4)
1991 Recession
Panel A: Percentage
Panel B: Percentage
Change in Imports
Change in Exports

(1)

Table A2. Trade in the 1991 and 2001 Recessions

Figure A1. Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates for the U.S..
140
120
100

REER

80
60
NEER
40
20
0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Notes: This figure displays the Nominal Effective Exchange Rate and the Real Effective Exchange Rate for
the United States. Source: International Monetary Fund.

54

