                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE IMPACT OF HEALTH CARE REFORM ON HOSPITAL AND PREVENTIVE CARE:
                   EVIDENCE FROM MASSACHUSETTS

                                        Jonathan T. Kolstad
                                        Amanda E. Kowalski

                                        Working Paper 16012
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16012


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




This paper has been updated to include newly-available data that extend our analysis for an additional
15 months after the reform. Andrew Maleki, Doug Norton, Aditi Sen and Swati Yanamadala provided
excellent research assistance. C. Lanier Benkard, Joseph Doyle, Amy Finkelstein, Sherry Glied, Dana
Goldman, Jonathan Gruber, Kate Ho, Jill Horwitz, Rob Huckman, Kosali Simon, Jonathan Skinner,
Erin Strumpf, Ebonya Washington, and Heidi Williams provided helpful feedback. We thank the Schaeffer
Center at USC. We also thank seminar participants at the University of Connecticut, Columbia University,
the University of Illinois, the University of Lausanne, Case Western, Rice/University of Houston,
the NBER Summer Institute, the Louis and Myrtle Moskowitz Workshop on Empirical Health Law
and Business at the University of Michigan, and the 2nd HEC Montreal IO and Health Conference.
Mohan Ramanujan and Jean Roth provided invaluable support at the NBER. Remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jonathan T. Kolstad and Amanda E. Kowalski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Health Care Reform On Hospital and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts
Jonathan T. Kolstad and Amanda E. Kowalski
NBER Working Paper No. 16012
May 2010
JEL No. H22,H51,I11,I28,I38

                                               ABSTRACT

In April 2006, the state of Massachusetts passed legislation aimed at achieving near universal health
insurance coverage. A key provision of this legislation, and of the national legislation passed in March
2010, is an individual mandate to obtain health insurance. Although previous researchers have studied
the impact of expansions in health insurance coverage among the indigent, children, and the elderly,
the Massachusetts reform gives us a novel opportunity to examine the impact of expansion to near-universal
health insurance coverage among the entire state population. In this paper, we are the first to use hospital
data to examine the impact of this legislation on insurance coverage, utilization patterns, and patient
outcomes in Massachusetts. We use a difference-in-difference strategy that compares outcomes in
Massachusetts after the reform to outcomes in Massachusetts before the reform and to outcomes in
other states. We embed this strategy in an instrumental variable framework to examine the effect of
insurance coverage on utilization patterns. Using the Current Population Survey, we find that the reform
increased insurance coverage among the general Massachusetts population. Our main source of data
is a nationally-representative sample of approximately 20% of hospitals in the United States. Among
the population of hospital discharges in Massachusetts, the reform decreased uninsurance by 36%
relative to its initial level. We also find that the reform affected utilization patterns by decreasing length
of stay and the number of inpatient admissions originating from the emergency room. Using new measures
of preventive care, we find some evidence that hospitalizations for preventable conditions were reduced.
The reform affected nearly all age, gender, income, and race categories. We also examine costs on
the hospital level and find that hospital cost growth did not increase after the reform in Massachusetts
relative to other states.


Jonathan T. Kolstad
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
108 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
jkolstad@wharton.upenn.edu

Amanda E. Kowalski
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue
Room 32, Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
amanda.kowalski@yale.edu
1    Introduction

In April 2006, the state of Massachusetts passed legislation aimed at achieving near-universal health

insurance coverage. This legislation has been considered by many to be a model for the national

health reform legislation passed in March 2010. In light of both reforms, it is of great policy

importance to understand the impact of a growth in coverage to near-universal levels, unprecedented

in the United States. In theory, insurance coverage could increase or decrease the intensity and

cost of health care, depending on the underlying demand for care and its impact on health care

delivery. Which effects dominate in practice is an empirical question.

    Although previous researchers have studied the impact of expansions in health insurance cover-

age, these studies have focused on specific subpopulations – the indigent, children, and the elderly

(see e.g. Currie and Gruber (1996); Card et al. (2008); Finkelstein (2007)). The Massachusetts

reform gives us a novel opportunity to examine the impact of a policy that achieved near-universal

health insurance coverage among the entire state population. Furthermore, the magnitude of the

expansion in coverage after the Massachusetts reform is similar to the predicted magnitude of the

coverage expansion in the national reform. In this paper, we are the first to use hospital data

to examine the impact of this legislation on insurance coverage, patient outcomes, and utilization

patterns in Massachusetts. We use a difference-in-difference strategy that compares Massachusetts

after the reform to Massachusetts before the reform and to other states.

    The first question we address is whether the Massachusetts reform resulted in reductions in

uninsurance. We consider overall changes in coverage as well as changes in the composition of

types of coverage among the entire state population and the population who were hospitalized. One

potential impact of expansions in publicly subsidized coverage is to crowd out private insurance

(Cutler and Gruber (1996)). The impact of the reform on the composition of coverage allows us to

consider crowd out in the population as a whole as well as among those in the inpatient setting.

    After estimating changes in the presence and composition of coverage, we turn to the impact of

the reform on hospital and preventive care. We first study the intensity of care provided. Because

health insurance lowers the price of health care services to consumers, a large-scale expansion in

coverage has the potential to increase demand for health care services, the intensity of treatment,

and cost. Potentially magnifying this effect are general equilibrium shifts in the way care is supplied


                                                  2
due to the large magnitude of the expansion (Finkelstein (2007)). Countervailing this effect is the

monopsonistic role of insurance plans in setting prices and quantities for hospital services. To the

extent that health reform altered the negotiating position of insurers vis a vis hospitals, expansions

in coverage could actually reduce total demand, intensity of treatment, or costs. The existence of

insurance itself can also alter the provision of care in the hospital directly (e.g. substitution towards

services that are reimbursed). Achieving near-universal insurance could alter length of stay and

other measures of services intensity though physical limits on the number of beds in the hospital,

efforts to increase throughput in response to changes in profitability, or changes in care provided

when physicians face a pool of patients with more homogeneous coverage (Glied and Zivin (2002)).

Given these competing hypotheses, expanded insurance coverage could raise or lower the intensity

of care provided.

       In addition to changes in the production process within a hospital, we are interested in the

impact of insurance coverage on how patients enter the health care system and access preventive

care. We first examine changes in the use of the emergency room (ER) as a point of entry for

inpatient care. Because hospitals must provide at least some care, without regard to insurance

status, the ER is a potentially important point of access to hospital care for the uninsured.1 When

the ER is the primary point of entry into the hospital, changes in admissions from the ER can impact

welfare for a variety of reasons. First, the cost of treating patients in the ER is likely higher than it

would be to treat the same patient in another setting. Second, the emergency room is designed to

treat acute health events. If the ER is a patient’s primary point of care, then he might not receive

preventive care that could mitigate future severe and costly health events. Uninsured individuals

who access inpatient care after a visit to the emergency room also have barriers to receiving follow

up treatment (typically dispensed in an outpatient setting or as drug prescriptions); potentially

reducing the efficacy of the inpatient care they receive. To the extent that uninsurance led people

to use the ER as a point of entry for treatment that they otherwise would have sought through

another channel, we expect to see a decline in the number of inpatient admissions originating in

the ER.

       We also study the impact of insurance on access to care outside of the inpatient setting. Using a
   1
    Under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), hospitals must provide stabilizing care
and examination to people who arrive in the ER for an emergency condition without considering whether a person is
insured or their ability to pay.


                                                       3
methodology developed by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) we are able to

study preventive care in an outpatient setting using inpatient data. We identify inpatient admissions

that should not occur in the presence of sufficient preventive care. If the reform facilitated increased

preventive care, then we expect a reduction in the number of inpatient admissions meeting these

criteria. These measures also indirectly measure health in the form of averted hospitalizations.

We augment this analysis with data on direct measures of access to and use of outpatient and

preventive care.

       Finally, we turn to the impact of the reform on the cost of hospital care. We examine hospital-

level measures of operating costs (e.g. overhead, salaries, and equipment) that include both fixed

and variable costs. This allows us to jointly measure direct effects of insurance on cost – the

relative effect of changing the out of pocket price – as well as the potential for quality competition

at the hospital level. In the latter case, hospitals facing consumers who are relatively less price

elastic (or more quality elastic) increase use of costly services and may also increase use of variable

inputs as well as investments in large capital projects in order to attract price-insensitive customers

(Dranove and Satterthwaite (1992)). In the extreme, large expansions in coverage might lead to

a so called “medical arms race,” in which hospitals make investments in large capital projects to

attract customers and are subsequently able to increase demand to cover these fixed costs (Robinson

and Luft (1987)).2 The impact of all of these effects would be increased hospital costs as coverage

approaches near-universal levels.

       Our analysis relies on three main data sets. To examine the impact on coverage in Massachusetts

as a whole, we analyze data from the Current Population Survey. To examine coverage among the

hospitalized population, health care utilization, and preventive care, we analyze the universe of

hospital discharges from a nationally-representative sample of approximately 20% of hospitals in

the United States from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) National Inpatient

Sample (NIS). In addition, we augment our study of access and preventive care using data from

the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS).

       In the next section, we describe the elements of the reform and its implementation, as well as

the limited existing research on its impact. In the third section, we describe the data. In the fourth
   2
    The resulting equilibrium is akin to the socially excessive level of fixed costs associated with free entry (Cutler
et al. (2010); Mankiw and Whinston (1986)) though information asymmetries and insurance can exacerbate these
problems.


                                                          4
section, we present the difference-in-difference results for the impact of the reform on insurance

coverage and hospital and preventive care. In the fifth section, we present the instrumental variable

results and examine heterogeneity in these results by patient demographic characteristics. In the

sixth section, we conclude and discuss our continuing work in this area.



2    Description of the Reform

The recent Massachusetts health insurance legislation, known as Chapter 58, included several fea-

tures, the most salient of which was a mandate for individuals to obtain health insurance coverage

or pay a tax penalty. All individuals were required to obtain coverage, with the exception of indi-

viduals with religious objections and individuals whose incomes were too high to qualify for state

health insurance subsidies but too low for health insurance to be “affordable” as determined by the

Massachusetts Health Insurance Connector Authority. For a broad summary of the reform, see

McDonough et al. (2006); for details on the implementation of the reform see The Massachusetts

Health Insurance Connector Authority (2008).

    The reform also extended free and subsidized health insurance to low income populations in

two forms: expansions in the existing Medicaid program (called “MassHealth” in Massachusetts),

and the launch of a new program called CommCare. First, as part of the Medicaid expansion, the

reform expanded Medicaid eligibility for children to 300% of poverty, and it restored benefits to

special populations who had lost coverage during the 2002-2003 fiscal crisis, such as the long-term

unemployed and those enrolled in the HIV program. The reform also facilitated outreach efforts

to Medicaid eligible individuals and families. Implementation of the elements of the reform was

staggered, and Medicaid changes were among the first to take effect. According to one source,

“Because enrollment caps were removed from one Medicaid program and income eligibility was

raised for two others, tens of thousands of the uninsured were newly enrolled just ten weeks after

the law was signed” (Kingsdale (2009), page w591).

    Second, the reform extended free and subsidized coverage through a new program called Comm-

Care. CommCare offered free coverage to individuals up to 150% of poverty and three tiers of

subsidized coverage up to 300% of poverty. Some funding for the subsidies was financed by the




                                                 5
dissolution of existing state uncompensated care pools.3 To limit crowd-out of federal coverage,

individuals with coverage through CHAMPVA, the federal health insurance program for veterans,

or Medicare, the federal health insurance program for the elderly, were not allowed to purchase

subsidized CommCare plans. CommCare plans were sold through a new state-run health insurance

exchange. For the first three years, only four existing Medicaid managed care organizations were

allowed to offer plans through CommCare.

       In addition, the reform created a new online health insurance marketplace called the Connector,

where individuals who did not qualify for free or subsidized coverage could purchase health insurance

coverage. Unsubsidized CommChoice plans available through the Connector from several health

insurers offered three regulated levels of coverage – bronze, silver, and gold. Young Adult plans

with fewer benefits were also made available to individuals age 26 and younger. Individuals were

also free to continue purchasing health insurance through their employers or to purchase health

insurance directly from insurers.

       The reform also implemented changes in the broader health insurance market. It merged the

individual and small group health insurance markets. Existing community rating regulations, which

required premiums to be set regardless of certain beneficiary characteristics of age and gender,

remained in place, though it gave new authority to insurers to price policies based on smoking

status. It also required all family plans to cover young adults for at least two years beyond loss of

dependent status, up to age 26.

       Another important aspect of the reform was an employer mandate that required employers

with more than 10 full time employees to offer health insurance to employees and contribute a

certain amount to premiums. The legislation allowed employers to designate the Connector as its

“employer-group health benefit plan” for the purposes of federal law. Employer-sponsored coverage

through the exchange could combine employer contributions from multiple part-time employers or

from spousal employers.

       The national health reform legislation passed in March 2010 shares many features of the Mas-
   3
     Addressing costs associated with the reform remains an important policy issue. In 2008, facing a recession, the
Massachusetts legislature passed new legislation that scaled back subsidies for low-income legal immigrants. Current
policy debates in Massachusetts focus on cost-control – the recent “Special Commission on the Health Care Payment
System” proposed a system of “global payments,” which would require Federal waivers for Medicaid and Medicare
(Bebinger (2009)). In April 2010, Governor Deval Patrick’s administration used existing regulatory authority for the
first time to deny premium increases in the individual / small group market. In August 2010, additional legislation
established open seasons in this market.


                                                         6
sachusetts reform, including an individual mandate to obtain health insurance coverage, new re-

quirements for employers, expansions in subsidized care, state-level health insurance marketplaces

modeled on the Massachusetts Connector, and new requirements for insurers to cover dependents

to age 26, to name a few. For a summary of the national legislation, see Kaiser Family Foundation

(2010). Taken together, the main characteristics of the reform bear strong similarity to those in

the Massachusetts reform, and the impact of the Massachusetts reform should offer insight into the

likely impact of the national reform.

        As Chapter 58 was enacted very recently, there has been very little research on its impact to date.

Long (2008) presents results on the preliminary impact of the reform from surveys administered in

2006 and 2007. Yelowitz and Cannon (2010) examine the impact of the reform on coverage using

data from the March 2006-2009 Supplements to the Current Population Survey (CPS). They also

examine changes in self-reported health status in an effort to capture the effect of the reform on

health. Using this measure of health, they find little evidence of health effects. The NIS discharge

data allow us to examine utilization and health effects in much greater detail. Long et al. (2009)

perform an earlier analysis using one fewer year of the same data. Long et al. (2009) and Yelowitz

and Cannon (2010) find a decline in uninsurance among the population age 18 to 64 of 6.6 and 6.7

percent respectively. We also rely on the CPS for preliminary analysis.4 Our main results, however,

focus on administrative data from hospitals.



3        Description of the Data

For our main analysis, we focus on a nationally-representative sample of hospital discharges. Hos-

pital discharge data offer several advantages over other forms of data to examine the impact of

Chapter 58. First, though hospital discharge data offer only limited information on the overall

population, they offer a great deal of information on a population of great policy interest – individ-

uals who are sick. This population constitutes the group most vulnerable to changes in coverage

due to illness itself and demographics correlated both with health and insurance coverage (i.e. race,

income, etc.). Furthermore, inpatient care represents a disproportionate fraction of total health

care costs. Second, hospital discharge data allow us to observe the insured as well as the uninsured,
    4
    Our estimates using the CPS are similar in magnitude to the prior studies, though our sample differs in that we
include all individuals under age 65 and at all income levels.


                                                        7
regardless of payer, and payer information is likely to be more accurate than it is in survey data.

Third, hospital discharge data allow us to examine treatment patterns and some health outcomes in

great detail. In addition, relative to the CPS, hospital discharge data allow us to examine changes

in medical expenditure, subject to limitations discussed below. One disadvantage of hospital dis-

charge data relative to the CPS is that the underlying sample of individuals in our data could have

changed as a result of the reform. We use many techniques to examine selection as an outcome of

the reform and to control for selection in the analysis of other outcomes.

       Our data are from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) Nationwide Inpatient

Sample (NIS). Each year of NIS data is a stratified sample of 20 percent of United States community

hospitals, designed to be nationally representative.5 The data contain the universe of all hospital

discharges, regardless of payer, for each hospital in the data in each year. Because such a large

fraction of hospitals are sampled in each year, and because of stratification, a large fraction of

hospitals appear in several years of the data, and we can use hospital identifiers to examine changes

within hospitals over time.

       We focus on the most recently available NIS data for the years 2004 to 2008. Our full sample

includes a total of 36,362,108 discharges for individuals of all ages. An advantage of these data

relative to the annual March Supplement to the CPS is that they allow us to examine the impact

of the reform quarterly instead of annually. Relative to the original version of this paper (Kolstad

and Kowalski (2010)), we extend our analysis by an additional 15 months after the reform using

data that recently became available. The reform was passed in April 2006, and our data now begin

at the start of 2004 and extend through the end of 2008.

       Because some aspects of the reform, such as Medicaid expansions, were implemented imme-

diately after the reform, but other reforms were staggered, we do not want to include the period

immediately following the reform in the After or the Before period. To be conservative, we define

the After reform period to include 2007 Q3 and later. The After period represents the time after

July 1, 2007, when one of the most salient features of the reform, the individual health insurance
   5
    “Community hospitals” are defined by the American Hospital Association as “all non-Federal, short-term, general,
and other specialty hospitals, excluding hospital units of institutions” (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(2004 – 2007b)). The sample is stratified by geographic region – Northeast vs. Midwest vs. West vs. South; control
– government vs. private not-for-profit vs. private investor-owned; location – urban vs. rural; teaching status –
teaching vs. non-teaching; and bed size – small vs. medium vs. large. Implicit stratification variables include state
and three-digit zip code.



                                                         8
mandate, took effect. We denote the During period as the year from 2006 Q3 through 2007 Q2, and

we use this period to analyze the immediate impact of the reform before the individual mandate

took effect. The Before period includes 2004 Q1 through 2006 Q2.

        Unfortunately, Massachusetts did not provide Q4 data to the NIS in 2006 or 2007.6 To address

this limitation, we drop all data from all states in 2006 Q4 and 2007 Q4.7 We account for seasonal

trends by including a fixed effect for each quarterly time period.

        In total, from 2004-2008, the data cover 42 states – Alabama, Alaska, Delaware, Idaho, Missis-

sippi, Montana, North Dakota, and New Mexico are not available in any year because they did not

provide data to the NIS. The data include the universe of discharges from a total of 3,090 unique

hospitals, with 48 in Massachusetts.8 The unit of observation in the data and in our main analysis

is the hospital discharge. To account for stratification, we use discharge weights in all summary

statistics and regressions. Although it would be interesting to examine the reform controlling for

individual fixed effects, individual identifiers are not available.



4        Difference-in-Difference Empirical Results

4.1       Impact on Uninsurance

4.1.1       Impact on Insurance Coverage in the Overall and Inpatient Hospital Popula-

            tions

We begin by considering the issue that was the primary motivation for the Massachusetts reform

– the expansion of health insurance coverage. Before focusing on inpatient hospitalizations, we

place this population in the context of the general population using data from the 2004 to 2009

March Supplements to the Current Population Survey (CPS). In most of our results, we focus on

the nonelderly population because the reform was geared toward the nonelderly population (elderly

with coverage through Medicare were explicitly excluded from purchasing subsidized CommCare
    6
      Potential users of these data should note that to address this limitation, the NIS relabeled some data from the
first three quarters of the year in 2006 and 2007 MA as Q4 data. Using information provided by NIS, we recovered
the unaltered data for use here.
    7
      In Kolstad and Kowalski (2010), we did not drop data from other states in 2006 Q4 and 2007 Q4, but we do here
so that we can measure hospital fixed effects equally well in Massachusetts and other states. This change accounts
for the very small discrepancy between the MA∗ During coefficients in this paper and in the previous version.
    8
      With few exceptions, if a hospital is in the data in a given year, it is in the data for all available quarters of that
year.



                                                             9
plans, but they were eligible for Medicaid expansions if they met the income eligibility criteria).9

       Figure 1 depicts trends in total insurance coverage of all types among nonelderly in the CPS.

The upper line shows trends in coverage in Massachusetts, and the lower line shows trends in

coverage in all other states. From the upper line, it is apparent that Massachusetts started with a

higher baseline level of coverage than the average among other states. The average level of coverage

among the nonelderly in Massachusetts prior to the reform (2004-2006 CPS) was 88.2%.10 This

increased to a mean coverage level of 93.8% in the 2008-2009 CPS.11 In contrast, the remainder

of the country had relative stable rates of nonelderly coverage: 82.7% pre-reform and 82.5% post-

reform. For the entire population, including those over 65, coverage in Massachusetts went from

89.5% to 94.5% for the same periods while the remainder of the country saw a small decline from

84.6% insured pre-reform to 84.4% insured post-reform.

       The initial coverage level in Massachusetts was clearly higher than the national average, though

it was not a particular outlier. Using data from the 2004, 2005 and 2006 CPS, we rank states in

terms of insurance coverage. In this time period, Massachusetts had the seventh highest level of

coverage among the nonelderly in the US. It was one of 17 states with 88 percent or higher share

of the population insured, and its initial coverage rate was only 1.7 percentage points higher than

the 86.5 percent coverage rate in the median state.

       Appendix Table 1 formalizes this comparison of means with difference-in-difference regression

results from the CPS. These results suggest that the Massachusetts reform was successful in expand-

ing health insurance coverage in the population. The estimated reduction in nonelderly uninsurance
   9
     Because the reform was geared toward the nonelderly, we considered using the elderly as an additional control
group in our difference-in-difference estimates. However, we did not pursue this identification strategy for three
reasons: first, the elderly were eligible for some elements of the reform; second, the elderly are less healthy overall
and suffer from different types of health shocks than the younger individuals of interest to us; and third, we find
some increases in coverage for the elderly. Although many assume that the elderly are universally covered through
Medicare, some estimates suggest that 4.5% or more of the elderly population are not eligible for full federally
subsidized coverage through Medicare Part A, so coverage increases are possible in this population (Birnbaum and
Patchias (n.d.), Gray et al. (2006)).
  10
     We follow the Census Bureau in defining types of coverage and uninsurance. These definitions and the associated
code to implement them are available from http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/hlthins/hlthinsvar.html. For indi-
viduals who report having both Medicaid and Medicare (“dual eligibles”) we code Medicaid as their primary insurance
type. We make the additional assumption that individuals who are covered by private health insurance but not by
an employer-sponsored plan are in the private market unrelated to employment.
  11
     Results from 2007 are difficult to interpret because the reform was in the midst of being implemented in March,
when the CPS survey was taken. Medicaid expansions had occurred at that point but the individual mandate was
not implemented until July 2007. We thus focus on the period that was clearly before the full reform – CPS March
supplement answers from 2004-2006 – compared to 2008-2009. Note that we use more precise definitions of the periods
before, during, and after the reform in the NIS, as described below. We have made these definitions as comparable
as possible across all data sets.


                                                          10
of 5.7 percentage points represents a 48% reduction relative to the pre-reform rate of nonelderly

uninsurance in Massachusetts. In Appendix Tables 2-4 we present estimates of the decline in unin-

surance for each age, gender, income, and race category using the CPS. We discuss these results

when we consider the incidence of the reform.

   To some, the decrease in uninsurance experienced by Massachusetts may appear small. To put

this in perspective, the national reform targets a reduction in uninsurance of a similar magnitude.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, National Health Statistics

Group, predicts a decrease in uninsurance of 7.1 percentage points nationally from 2009 to 2019

(Truffer et al. (2010)).


4.1.2   Regression Results on the Impact on Uninsurance

Using the NIS data, we begin by estimating a simple difference-in-difference specification. Our

primary estimating equation is:


                 Ydht = α + β(MA∗ After )ht + γ(MA∗ During)ht
                          X                    X
                                                                      0
                        +    ρh (Hosp = h)h +    φt Year Quarter t + Xdht δ + dht               (1)
                           h                     t


where Y is an outcome variable for hospital discharge d in hospital h at time t. The coefficient

of interest, β, gives the impact of the reform – the change in coverage after the reform relative

to before the reform in Massachusetts relative to other states. Analogously, γ gives the change in

coverage during the reform relative to before the reform in Massachusetts relative to other states.

The identification assumption is that there were no factors outside of the reform that differentially

affected Massachusetts relative to other states after the reform. We also include hospital and

quarterly time fixed effects. Thus, identification comes from comparing hospitals to themselves over

time in Massachusetts compared to other states, after flexibly allowing for seasonality and trends

over time. We include hospital fixed effects to account for the fact that the NIS is an unbalanced

panel of hospitals. Without hospital fixed effects, we are concerned that change in outcomes could

be driven by changes in the sample of hospitals in either Massachusetts or control states (primarily

the prior since the sample is nationally representative but is not necessarily representative within




                                                 11
each state) after the reform.12 Our preferred specification, which includes time and hospital fixed

effects, is the most conservative model in our view.13

    For each outcome variable of interest we also estimate models that incorporate a vector X of

patient demographics and other risk adjustment variables. We do not control for these variables

in our main specifications because we are interested in measuring the impact of the reform as

broadly as possible. To the extent that the reform changed the composition of the sample of

inpatient discharges based on these observable characteristics, we would obscure this effect by

controlling for observable patient characteristics. Beyond our main specifications, the impact of the

reform on outcomes holding the patient population fixed is also highly relevant. For this reason,

in other specifications, we incorporate state-of-the-art risk adjusters, and we present a number of

specifications focused on understanding changes in the patient composition. We return to this in

more detail below. In general, however, we find that though there is some evidence of selection, it is

not large enough to alter the robustness of our findings with respect to coverage or most outcomes.

    We use linear probability models for all of our binary outcomes. Because our specifications

are nearly saturated in the independent variables, our coefficients are very similar to unreported

average marginal effects from probit models.14 Under each coefficient, we report asymptotic 95%

confidence intervals, clustered to allow for arbitrary correlations between observations within a

state. Following Bertrand et al. (2004), we also report 95% confidence intervals obtained by block

bootstrap by state.15

    In addition to the specifications we present here, we consider a number of robustness checks to

investigate the internal and external validity of our results. We find that the conclusions presented

in Table 1 are robust to a variety of alternative control groups and do not appear to be driven

by unobserved factors that are a unique to Massachusetts. For brevity, we present and discuss
  12
     Restricting the sample to the balanced panel of the 52 hospitals that are in the sample in all possible quarters
(2004 Q1 to 2008 Q4, excluding 2006 Q4 and 2007 Q4) eliminates approximately 98% of hospitals and 97% of
discharges, likely making the sample less representative, so we do not make this restriction in our main specifications.
However, in the last panel of Appendix Table 7, we present our main specifications using only the balanced panel,
and the results are not statistically different from the main results.
  13
     It is possible that insurance coverage changes which hospital people visit, in which case the bias from the use of
hospital fixed effects would be of ambiguous sign. However, we are not able to investigate this claim since we do not
have longitudinal patient identifiers. Absent differential selection into specific hospitals based on insurance status, we
believe that the model with hospital fixed effects is the most conservative.
  14
     This is consistent with a general phenomenon. See Angrist and Pischke (2009).
  15
     See Appendix A for more detail on the implementation of the block bootstrapped confidence intervals. In practice,
the confidence intervals obtained through both methods are very similar. To conserve space, we do not report the
block bootstrapped standard errors in some tables.


                                                           12
these results in Appendix B. In Figures 2 and 3, we present quarterly trends for each of our

outcome variables of interest for Massachusetts and the remainder of the country. Each line and the

associated confidence interval are the coefficient estimates for each quarter for Massachusetts and

non-Massachusetts states in a regression that includes hospital fixed effects. The omitted category

for each is the first quarter of 2004, which we set equal to 0.16 Given our short time period, we

are particularly concerned about pre-trends in Massachusetts relative to controls. While the plots

show slight variation, none of our outcomes of interest appear to have strong pre-reform trends in

Massachusetts relative to control states that might explain our findings. When we formalize this

visual analysis in results not reported, we find slightly different trends in Massachusetts, some with

statistical significance. However, the magnitude of these effects is generally small relative to the

MA∗ After coefficients for each outcome. Taken together, this evidence suggests that our estimates

are unlikely to be driven by differential pre-reform trends in Massachusetts.


4.1.3      Effects on the Composition of Insurance Coverage among Hospital Discharges

In this section, we investigate the effect of the Massachusetts reform on the level and composition of

health insurance coverage in the sample of hospital discharges. We divide health insurance coverage

(or lack thereof) into five mutually exclusive types – Uninsured, Medicaid, Private, Medicare,

and Other. CommCare plans and other government plans such as Workers’ Compensation and

CHAMPUS (but not Medicaid and Medicare) are included in Other. We estimate equation (1)

separately for each coverage type and report the results in columns 1 through 5 of Table 1. Because

these represent mutually exclusive types of coverage, the coefficients sum to zero across the first

five columns. We focus on results for the nonelderly here, and we report results for the full sample

and for the elderly only in Table 6.

       Column 1 presents the estimated effect of the reform on the overall level of uninsurance. We find

that the reform led to a 2.31 percentage point reduction in uninsurance. Both sets of confidence

intervals show that the difference-in-difference impact of the reform on uninsurance is statistically

significant at the 1% level. Since the model with fixed effects obscures the main effects of MA and

After, we also report mean coverage rates in Massachusetts and other states before and after the
  16
   This normalization obscures initial level differences in Massachusetts and other states that could alter the visual
comparison of trends.



                                                         13
reform. The estimated impact of Chapter 58 represents an economically significant reduction in

uninsured discharges of roughly 36% (2.31/6.43) of the Massachusetts pre-reform mean. We present

coefficients on selected covariates from this regression in column 1 of Appendix Table 5.

    We see from the difference-in-difference results in column 2 of Table 1 that among the nonelderly

hospitalized population, the expansion in Medicaid coverage was larger than the overall reduction in

uninsurance. Medicaid coverage expanded by 3.89 percentage points, and uninsurance decreased by

2.31 percentage points. Consistent with the timing of the initial Medicaid expansion, the coefficient

on MA∗ During suggests that a large fraction of impact of the Medicaid expansion was realized in

the year immediately following the passage of the legislation. It appears that at least some of

the Medicaid expansion crowded out private coverage in the hospital, which decreased by 3.06

percentage points. The risk-adjusted coefficient in the last row of column 2 suggests that even after

controlling for selection into the hospital, our finding of crowd out persists. All of these effects are

statistically significant at the 1% level.

    To further understand crowd out and the incidence of the reform on the hospitalized popula-

tion relative to the general population, we compare the estimates from Table 1 – coverage among

those who were hospitalized – with results from the CPS – coverage in the overall population.

In Appendix Table 1, we report difference-in-difference results by coverage type in the CPS. The

coverage categories reported by the CPS do not map exactly to those used by the NIS. In the CPS,

insurance that is coded as private coverage in the NIS is divided into employer sponsored coverage

and private coverage not related to employment. Furthermore, to deal with the new types of plans

available in Massachusetts, CommCare and CommChoice, the Census Bureau decided to code all of

these plans as “Medicaid.”17 Thus the estimated impact on Medicaid is actually the combined effect

of expansions in traditional Medicaid with increases in CommCare and CommChoice.18 Medicaid

expansions are larger among the hospital discharge population than they are in the CPS – a 3.89

percentage point increase vs. a 3.50 percentage point increase, respectively. Furthermore, the CPS
  17
     We thank the Census Bureau staff for their rapid and thorough response to the many calls we made to confirm
this decision on categorizing the new types of plans.
  18
     Since the CPS coded CommChoice plans as Medicaid, we are concerned that estimated increases in Medicaid
coverage in the CPS should could lead to overestimates of crowd out because the estimated Medicaid expansion could
include includes individuals who transitioned from private market unsubsidized care to CommChoice unsubsidized
care. To investigate this possibility, in unreported regressions, we divide the sample by income to exclude individuals
who are not eligible for subsidized care. The results suggest an increase in “Medicaid” coverage for people above
300% of the FPL of 0.6 percentage points. Thus, the bulk of the effect on Medicaid reflects some form of publicly
subsidized coverage and not unsubsidized CommChoice plans coded as Medicaid.


                                                          14
coefficient is statistically lower than the NIS coefficient. It is not surprising to see larger gains in

coverage in the hospital because hospitals often retroactively cover Medicaid-eligible individuals

who had not signed up for coverage. Furthermore, the hospitalized population disproportionately

represents poor individuals, and these individuals could have multiple discharges.19

    Comparing changes in types of coverage in the NIS to changes in types of coverage in the

CPS, we find that crowd out of private coverage only occurred among the hospitalized popula-

tion. In Appendix Table 1, the magnitudes of the MA∗ After coefficients are 0.0345 and 0.0351 for

ESHI and Medicaid respectively. That is, both employer-sponsored and Medicaid, CommCare or

CommChoice coverage increased by a similar amount following the reform, and those increases were

roughly equivalent to the total decline in uninsurance (5.7 percentage points). The only crowding

out in Appendix Table 1 seems to be of non-group private insurance, though this effect is relatively

small at 0.86 percentage points. Combining coefficients for ESHI and private insurance unrelated

to employment gives us a predicted increase in private coverage (as it is coded in the NIS) of 2.59

percentage points. This is in marked contrast with the 3.54 percentage point decrease in private

coverage that we observe in the NIS.

    Returning to the NIS, we consider changes in coverage beyond private and Medicaid. Our results

also indicate a statistically significant change in the number of non-elderly covered by Medicare. The

magnitude of the effect, however, is quite small both in level of coverage and in change relative to the

baseline share of non-elderly inpatient admissions covered by Medicare. Other coverage, the general

category that includes other types of government coverage including CommCare, increased by a

statistically significant 1.06 percentage points. We restrict the dependent variable to include only

CommCare in specification 6. By definition, CommCare coverage is zero outside of Massachusetts

and before the reform. CommCare increased by 1.24 percentage points. The coefficient is larger than

the overall increase in Other coverage, though the difference in the coefficients is not statistically

significant.20 As reported in specification 7, the probability of having missing coverage information
  19
     As shown in Table 7, people from the poorest 25% of zip codes account for 28% of hospital discharges. Another
factor that affects the comparison between CPS Medicaid changes and NIS Medicaid changes is that CPS Medicaid
changes should overstate changes in Medicaid eligibility because they also include increases in take up that occurred
to comply with the mandate. In contrast, Medicaid changes in the NIS should only reflect changes in eligibility
because hospitals, in order to maximize reimbursement, facilitate take-up for Medicaid-eligibles before and after the
reform. That said, changes in Medicaid take-up reflected in the CPS could have real effects on utilization if the reform
encouraged previously eligible individuals to take up Medicaid, potentially making them more likely to consume care,
instead of retroactively taking up Medicaid after a hospitalization.
  20
     We would have liked to have used Massachusetts residents that were prohibited from obtaining coverage through


                                                          15
also increased after the reform, but this increase was small relative to the observed increases in

coverage.


4.2     Impacts on Health Care Provision

Having established the impact of the Massachusetts reform on coverage, we next turn to our primary

focus: understanding the impact of achieving near-universal health insurance coverage on health

care delivery and cost. To do so, we estimate equation (1) with a set of dependent variables that

capture changes in the way in which health care is delivered and consumed. This section is divided

into four subsections, each intended to address key areas of health care delivery that might be

affected by health insurance coverage. In our next section, 4.2.1, we consider the impact of health

insurance expansion on the extensive margin decision to seek care. In section 4.2.2, we study

changes in the intensive margin choice of intensity of services provided, conditional on admission

to the hospital. In the third subsection, we study the impact of health insurance coverage on

outpatient and preventive care. Finally, we turn to studying the impact of the Massachusetts

reform on hospital costs.

    The relevant results for this section are contained in Tables 1 through 5. Tables 1, 3, and 4 report

results on the discharge level, following directly from equation (1). Tables 2 and 5, on the other

hand, report results on the hospital-time period level. Table 2 presents results that are aggregated

to the hospital-quarter level because we need to aggregate individual discharges to examine total

discharges. Table 5 presents hospital cost results on the hospital-year level. Our cost measures,

which we describe in more detail below, are based on data collected on an annual basis, allowing

us only to identify the model from changes from year to year within a hospital.


4.2.1    Impact on Hospital Volume and Patient Composition

One potential impact of the reform could be to increase the use of inpatient hospital services.

Whether more people accessed health insurance after the reform is of intrinsic interest as this

implies a change in welfare due to the policy (e.g. an increase in moral hazard through insurance
CommCare because of eligibility for federal coverage as a control group, but the Massachusetts data in the NIS do not
include enough detail (e.g. eligibility for coverage through CHAMPUS) for us to do so. Furthermore, the individual
mandate could still have had an impact on those prohibited from obtaining coverage through CommCare, for example
if it encouraged enrollment of people previously eligible but not enrolled in CHAMPUS.



                                                         16
or a decrease in ex ante barriers to the hospital through insurance). Beyond this, changes in the

composition of patients present an important empirical hurdle to estimating the causal impact of

the reform on subsequent measures of care delivered. If the number of patients seeking care after

the reform increased and the marginal patients differed in underlying health status, changes in

treatment intensity could reflect this, rather than actual changes in the way care is delivered. We

investigate this possibility in two ways: first, we examine changes in the number of discharges at

the hospital level; second, we control for observable changes in the health of the patient pool and

compare our results to specifications without controls.

   In Table 2, we investigate selection into hospitals by estimating a series of specifications with

the number of discharges at the hospital-quarter level as the dependent variable. In column 1

of Table 2, which includes hospital and quarterly fixed effects to mitigate the impact of changes

in sample composition, the coefficient on MA∗ After in column 1 indicates that the number of

quarterly discharges for hospitals in Massachusetts was unchanged relative to other states following

the reform. The coefficient estimate of 19 is small relative to the pre-reform quarterly discharge

level of 5,616, and it is not statistically significant. In column 2, we re-estimate the model with the

log of total discharges as the dependent variable to account for any skewness in hospital size. The

coefficient on MA∗ After in this specification also indicates that the reform had no impact on the

total volume of discharges. Columns 3 to 6 break down changes in discharges by age relative to

65. Among these subgroups we find no statistically significant change in total elderly or nonelderly

discharges in either levels or logs. These findings suggest that any change in the composition

of patients would have to have occurred through substitution as the total number of discharges

remained unchanged.

   To deal with changes in the patient population directly, we control for observable changes in the

health of the patient pool using six sets of risk adjustment variables: demographic characteristics,

the number of diagnoses on the discharge record, individual components of the Charlson Score

measure of comorbidities, AHRQ comorbidity measures, All-Patient Refined (APR)-DRGs, and

All-Payer Severity-adjusted (APS)-DRGs. We discuss these measures in depth in Appendix C.

These measures are a valid means to control for selection if and only if unobservable changes in

health are correlated with the changes in health that we observe. We interpret our risk-adjusted

specifications assuming that this untestable condition holds, with the caveat that if it does not

                                                  17
hold, we cannot interpret our results without a model of selection.

   In specifications 8 to 13 of Table 2 we estimate our model with a subset of our measures of

patient severity as the dependent variable. For this exercise, we focus on the six sets of severity

measures that are simplest to specify as outcome variables. This allows us to observe some direct

changes in the population severity in Massachusetts after the reform. These results present a mixed

picture of the underlying patient severity. For four of the six measures, we find no significant change

in severity. Two of the severity measures, however, saw statistically significant changes after the

reform. The results in specification 8 suggest that the average severity, measured by the Charlson

score, increased following the reform. The model of APS-DRG charge weights suggests the opposite.

Taken together, these results and the lack of any change in total discharges are not indicative of

a consistent pattern of changes in the patient population within a given hospital in Massachusetts

after the reform relative to before relative to other states.

   Despite this general picture, and in light of the results in columns 8 and 13, for all of our

outcome variables we estimate the same model incorporating the vector of covariates X, which

flexibly controls for all risk adjusters simultaneously. In general, our results are unchanged by

the inclusion of these controls – consistent with the small estimated impact of the reform on the

individual severity measures. If anything, we find that the main results are strengthened by the

inclusion of covariates as we would expect with increased severity after the reform.

   In column 7 of Table 2, we investigate the possibility that either hospital size increased or

sampling variation led to an observed larger size of hospitals after the reform relative to before

the reform by using a separate measure of inherent hospital size as the dependent variable. In this

measure, Hospital Bedsize, as collected by the American Hospital Association (AHA) annual survey

of hospitals, hospitals were categorized in small, medium, or large using categories for the number

of hospital beds that did not change during the sample period. We recode the data so that small

hospitals have a value of zero, medium hospitals have a value of 0.5, and large hospitals have a value

of one. The coefficient estimates from the reported regression, which includes hospital and quarter

fixed effects, indicates that hospital size increased by 2.5 percent of the possible range from 0 to 1.

This estimate, which is statistically significant, indicates that the hospitals that identify impacts on

length of stay increased in size, perhaps to accommodate the increases in insurance coverage, even

though we observe no statistically significant change in total discharges. The discrepancy between

                                                  18
the difference-in-difference mean estimate of 8 percent from the means at the bottom of the table

and the difference-in-difference regression estimate of 2.5 percent estimates suggests that larger

hospitals are differentially selected into the sample after the reform in Massachusetts, meriting our

use of hospital fixed effects in our preferred specification.


4.2.2   Impact on Resource Utilization and Length of Stay

Moving beyond the question of the extensive margin decision to go to the hospital or to admit a

patient to the hospital, we turn to the intensity of services provided conditional on receiving care.

The most direct measure of this is the impact of the reform on length of stay. As discussed earlier,

we expect length of stay to increase in response to increased coverage if newly insured individuals

(or their physician agents) demand more treatment – that is, if moral hazard or income effects

dominate. Alternately, we expect length of stay to decrease in response to increased coverage if

newly insured individuals are covered by insurers who are better able to impact care through either

quantity restrictions or prices – that is, if insurer bargaining effects dominate. Length of stay

may also decline if insurance alters treatment decisions, potentially allowing substitution between

inpatient and outpatient care or drugs that would not have been feasible without coverage. To

investigate these two effects, we estimate models of length of stay following equation (1) with both

levels and logs of the dependent variable.

   The results in specifications 8 and 9 Table 1 show that length of stay decreased by 0.05 days on

a base of 5.42 days in the specification in levels – a decline of approximately 1 percent. Estimates

in column 2 show a 0.12 percent decline in the specification in logs. These two results are slightly

different because of skewness in length of stay, but they both indicate a statistically significant

reduction, though the log specification is only significant at the 10 percent level using the block

bootstrap confidence intervals. Because taking logs increases the weight on shorter stays, this

difference suggests that the reform had a larger impact on longer stays. In unreported results,

we also estimate models of the probability a patient exceeds specific length of stay cutoffs. The

results validate the findings that compare level and log outcomes (column 1 and 2). Patients

were statistically significantly roughly 10 percent less likely to stay beyond 13 and 30 days in

Massachusetts after the reform. The probabilities of staying beyond shorter cutoffs (2, 5 and 9

days) were unchanged. The results suggest that patients were significantly more likely to stay at

                                                   19
least 3 days though the magnitude of the coefficient suggests an increase of only 1 percent relative

to the baseline share.

       To address the concern that our estimated reduction in length of stay was driven by differential

selection of healthier patients into the hospital after the reform in MA, we report results controlling

for risk adjustment variables in the last row of all specifications in Table 1. The estimated decreases

in length of stay and log length of stay are at least twice as pronounced in the specifications that

include risk adjusters. We interpret this to indicate that holding the makeup of the patient pool

constant, length of stay declined. The comparison between the baseline and risk-adjusted results

suggests that, if anything, patients requiring longer length of stays selected into the patient pool

in post-reform Massachusetts.

       One plausible mechanism for the decline in length of stay is limited hospital capacity. As with

patient severity, capacity constraints are interesting in their own right, but they could bias our

estimates of other reform impacts. Capacity itself is endogenous and may have changed with the

reform, as we saw in the model with number of beds as the dependent variable. In a simple queuing

model of hospital demand and bed size, Joskow (1980) shows that, under general assumptions,

the probability that a patient is turned away from a hospital is endogenously determined by the

hospital when it selects a reserve ratio (the difference between the total number of beds and the

average daily census (ADC) relative to the standard deviation in arrival rates).21 Because beds are

a fixed cost, capacity and utilization are a source of scale economies for hospitals. If hospitals seek

to improve efficiency (potentially when faced with increased pricing pressure from insurers after

the reform) we would expect to see improved throughput in an effort to lower cost. One means of

accomplishing this is to make smaller increases in capacity relative to demand following the reform.

       Our results can provide some insight into whether changes in length of stay seem to be related

to capacity by comparing the additional capacity that resulted from the decrease in length of stay

relative to the magnitude of the change in discharges. Because hospitals care about total changes

in capacity, not just among the nonelderly, we use estimates for the change in length of stay among

the entire population reported in column 7 of Table 6. The new, lower average length of stay is

5.88 − 0.06 = 5.82 days. This would make room for an extra (0.06 ∗ 5, 616)/(5.88 − 0.06) = 58
  21
    Joskow
        √ (1980) formally models the stochastic arrival rate as a Poisson process which yields a standard deviation
equal to ADC.



                                                        20
discharges. An extra 58 discharges exceeds the estimated increase of 19 discharges (from column

1 of Table 2). We note, however, that the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for the

estimated change in total discharges is greater than 58. Thus, decreased length of stay could have

been a response to increased supply side constraints, although this explanation would be more

convincing if the point estimate for the change in the number of discharges were positive and closer

to change in the supply-side constraint of 58.22


4.2.3      Impact on Access, Prevention, Quality and Safety

One potentially important role for insurance is to reduce the cost of obtaining preventive care that

can improve health and/or reduce future inpatient expenditures. In this case, moral hazard can be

dynamically efficient by increasing up front care that results in future cost reductions (Chernew et

al. (2007)). One manifestation of a lack of coverage that has received substantial attention is the

use of the emergency room (ER) as a provider of last resort. If people do not have a regular point

of access to the health care system and, instead, go to the emergency room only when they become

sufficiently sick, such behavior can lead them to forego preventive care and, potentially, increase the

cost of future treatment. In addition, emergency room care could be ceteris paribus more expensive

to provide than primary care because of the cost of operating an ER relative to other outpatient

settings. Although we do not observe all emergency room discharges, we can examine inpatient

admissions from the emergency room as a rough measure of emergency room usage. A decrease in

admissions from the ER after the reform is evidence that a subset of the population that previously

accessed inpatient care through the emergency room accessed inpatient care through a traditional

primary care channel or avoided inpatient care entirely (perhaps by obtaining outpatient care).

       In specification 10 of Table 1, we examine the impact of the reform on discharges for which the

emergency room was the source of admission. We see that the reform resulted in a 2.02 percentage

point reduction in the fraction of admissions from the emergency room. Relative to an initial

mean in Massachusetts of 38.7 percent this estimate represents a decline in inpatient admissions

originating in the emergency room of 5.2 percent. The risk-adjusted estimate reported in the
  22
    Although we do not find much evidence for capacity constraints in the inpatient setting, there is anecdotal
evidence for capacity constraints in the outpatient primary care setting. Investigating constraints in that setting is
beyond the scope of this paper.




                                                         21
bottom row of specification 10 is very similar.23

    As a further specification check, we decompose the effect by zip code income quartile in section

5. To the extent that income is a proxy for ex ante coverage levels, we expect larger declines in

inpatient admissions originating in the ER among relatively poorer populations. The results in

section 5 conform to our expectations. We find that the reduction in emergency admissions was

particularly pronounced among people from zip codes in the lowest income quartile. As reported in

the bottom panel of Table 7, the coefficient estimate suggests a 12.2 percent reduction (significant

at the 1 percent level) in inpatient emissions from the emergency room. The effect in the top two

income quartiles, on the other hand, is not statistically significantly different from zero (coefficient

estimate of -0.0107 and 0.0098 for the 3rd and 4th income quartiles respectively). Taken together,

these results suggest that the reform did reduce use of the ER as a point of entry into inpatient

care. This effect was driven by expanded coverage, particularly among lower income populations.

    In addition to the use of the ER, we are interested in measuring whether providing health

insurance directly affects access to and use of preventive care or quality of care provided. To

investigate the impact of the reform on prevention, quality of care, and safety, we use the four sets

of measures developed by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ): prevention

quality indicators (PQIs), inpatient quality indicators (IQIs), patient safety indicators (PSIs), and

pediatric quality indicators (PDIs).24 See Appendix D for more details on these measures. Each set

of quality indicators includes several outcomes developed by doctors and health services researchers

to measure quality. Since the hospital’s production function is complex, it is possible for the reform

to have improved some quality measures and negatively impacted others. In general, we expect

widespread health insurance to increase prevention quality, but the impact on the other measures

is ambiguous.

    To investigate the impact of the reform on prevention, we use the PQI measures, which were

developed as a means to measure the quality of outpatient care using inpatient data, which are more
  23
     We note that these results differ somewhat from discussions in media and policy circles (Kowalczyk (2010)). Our
analysis differs for a few reasons. First, we are focused solely on inpatient admissions from the ER. While this limits
the scope of our results, it allows us to focus on a population of particular importance, the relatively sick and costly
populations who, ultimately, receive care in the hospital. A second issue with the existing discussion of Massachusetts
ER usage is the lack of a control group. Our results take into account trends in ER usage nationwide that are likely
to be changing over time. Using this approach we are better able to account for changes in ER usage unrelated to the
reform that affect MA, though we note that our findings do not appear to be driven by differential trends in states
other than Massachusetts (see Figure 2).
  24
     We thank Carlos Dobkin for suggesting the use of these indicators.


                                                          22
readily available. The appearance of certain preventable conditions in the inpatient setting, such as

appendicitis that results in perforation of the appendix, or diabetes that results in lower extremity

amputation, is evidence that adequate outpatient care was not obtained. All of the prevention

quality measures are indicator variables that indicate the presence of a diagnosis that should not

be observed in inpatient data if adequate outpatient care was obtained.25 One concern in using

these measures over a relatively narrow window of time is that we might not expect to see any

impact of prevention on inpatient admissions. However, validating these measures with physicians

suggest that the existence of a PQI admissions is likely due to short term management of disease

in an outpatient setting (e.g. cleaning and treating diabetic foot ulcers to avoid amputations due

to gangrene), that we expect would be manifest within the post-reform period.26 Interpreted with

different emphasis, these measures also capture impacts on health through averted hospitalizations.

We run our difference-and-difference estimator separately for each quality measure using the binary

numerator as the outcome variable, and the denominator to select the sample.

       Table 3 presents regression results for each of the prevention quality indicators. Each regression

is a separate row of the table. In the first row, the outcome is the “Overall PQI” measure suggested

by AHRQ – a dummy variable that indicates the presence of any of the prevention quality indicators

on a specific discharge.27 We find little overall effect in the base specification.28 One advantage of

examining this measure relative to the individual component measures is that doing so mitigates

concerns about multiple hypothesis testing. The following rows show that of the 13 individual PQI

measures, 3 exhibit a statistically significant decrease, 9 exhibit no statistically significant change,

and 1 exhibits a statistically significant increase. Taken together, these results suggest that there
  25
      The calculation of each one of these quality indicators is often based on a complicated algorithm because the
diagnosis first needs to be identified, and then specific discharges must be excluded based on secondary diagnoses
and risk factors that mitigate the potential for prevention. Each quality measure includes a numerator – a specific
condition, as well as a denominator – the population at risk for this specific condition – sometimes the entire population
in a geographic area. The presence of the numerator and denominator allows a researcher to calculate rates with
data for a single hospital. Since our research design compares hospitals to each other and to themselves over time,
we do not calculate any of the measures as rates. Instead, we use a dummy dependent variable to indicate inclusion
in the numerator – the presence of a quality measure on a specific discharge. For each quality measure, we restrict
the sample to discharges included in the denominator.
   26
      We thank Dr. Katrina Abuabara for discussing each of these PQI measures and the associated treatment regime
and potential for inpatient admission.
   27
      PQI 02 is excluded from this measure, presumably because it has a different denominator.
   28
      We note that in previous work with a shorter post-reform period (Kolstad and Kowalski (2010)) we found larger
effects on the PQI measures. The decline in the unadjusted estimate may suggest that there was only a short term
impact of the reform on preventive care. Future work that incorporates a longer time period and panel data would
be better able to model such dynamics.



                                                           23
may have been small impacts on preventive care but little overall effect in reducing the number of

preventable admissions.

       We also estimate the model including controls for severity. If the impact of insurance or outpa-

tient care on the existence of a PQI varies in patient severity, it is possible that the small estimated

effects mask a compositional effect of the inpatient population after the reform. That is, if relatively

severe patients are more likely to be hospitalized with a PQI, regardless of the outpatient care they

receive, then estimates that hold the patient population fixed provide a better estimate for the

impact of the reform on preventive care. These results are contained in the right panel of Table 3.

For the overall PQI measure, the coefficient on MA∗ After is -0.0023 and is statistically significant

at the 1 percent level. Compared to the baseline rate of PQIs, this corresponds to a decline of 2.7

percent in preventable admissions. Results for the individual measures tell a similar story. Taken

together, these results suggest that there was a small overall effect of the reform on preventable

admissions but, holding the severity of the population fixed, there were significant declines. We

find that, if anything, the inpatient population was more severe after the reform. Thus comparing

the two coefficients – with and without risk adjustment – suggests that the effect of the reform on

reducing preventable admissions was largest among relatively less severe patients.

       To supplement our analysis of preventive care, we also estimate models of prevention using data

from the BRFSS for 2004-2009. The BRFSS is a state-based system of health surveys that collects

information on health risk behaviors, preventive practices, and health care access.29 The results

are presented in Table 4. Column 1 presents the differences-in-differences estimate for the impact

of reform on those reporting they have health insurance coverage. Consistent with the results from

the CPS, we find an increase in coverage in Massachusetts after the reform relative to before relative

to other states of roughly 5 percent. The remaining seven columns present results that are relevant

to outpatient and preventive care. In column 2, we see a significant increase of 1.26 percent in

individuals reporting they had a personal doctor. The reform also led to a decline in individuals

reporting they could not access care due to cost by 3.06 percentage points. Columns 4-8 present
  29
     The BRFSS is a cross-sectional telephone survey conducted by state health departments on a monthly basis with
technical and methodological assistance provided by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Sampling follows a mul-
tistage design based on random-digit-dialing in order to select a representative sample from the non-institutionalized
adult population in each state and territory. Our sample from BRFSS data contain 2,293,672 observations; in the
analysis, data are weighted for the probability of selection of a telephone number, the number of adults in a house-
hold, and the number of telephones in a household; post-stratification adjustments are also made for non-response
and non-coverage of households without telephones.


                                                         24
diff-in-diff estimates for the impact of the reform on a set of direct measures of preventive care.

We find little overall impact in the population. The only statistically significant estimate is for the

impact of the reform on receiving a flu vaccination.

   We next return to the NIS and focus on Patient Safety Indicators – measures of the quality of

care provided in the inpatient setting. If achieving near-universal coverage altered the way care was

delivered in the hospital setting, we expect to see shifts in patient safety indicators – outcomes that

should not be observed if appropriate care is provided. The lower panel of Table 3 presents a full

set of PSI measures with and without risk adjusters. One issue in estimating models using the PSIs

is the relevant population at risk. Unlike most PQI measures, PSI outcomes are only relevant for

a subset of the populations (e.g. obstetric trauma can only occur if a woman is pregnant). Thus,

we do not have a single pooled measure of PQIs but instead present the full sample estimated

separately among the relative population at risk for each.

   The outcomes in Table 3 suggest that, overall, patient safety was improved following the expan-

sion in insurance coverage. Of the 23 PSIs, we find statistically significant improvements for 13, no

change for 7 and declines for 3. Not only is the effect of the reform statistically significant on those

that improved but they also appear to be economically significant. For example, mortality for low

mortality DRGs declined by roughly one third of its baseline level and pressure ulcers was reduced

by 36 percent relative to baseline.

   In addition to the PQI and PSI measures we also estimate models that represent quality of care

for adult and pediatric populations – Inpatient Quality Indicators and Pediatric Quality Indicators.

As discussed above, we do not have a strong prior about the impact of coverage expansions on these

indicators. Empirical results are correspondingly mixed. Although there were decreases in some

measures and increases in others, no general pattern is visible. Appendix Table 6 reports the results

for these two measures. The reform was particularly unlikely to improve quality for pediatric pa-

tients. Since many children were already covered by Medicaid before the reform, it seems plausible

that gains in pediatric quality had already been realized before the reform. Indeed, Dafny and Gru-

ber (2005) examine the effect of Medicaid expansions on pediatric hospitalizations, and their results

are broadly consistent with the results that we find for the general population. They use a measure

of “avoidable” hospitalizations that seems to have been a precursor for the AHRQ measures. They

find that pediatric length of stay decreased (as do we among the nonelderly), pediatric admissions

                                                  25
increased (we find no change among the nonelderly), and avoidable pediatric hospitalizations did

not increase as much as unavoidable pediatric hospitalizations (we find a decrease in preventable

hospitalizations among the nonelderly).


4.2.4      Impact on Hospital Costs

In this section, we investigate the impact of the reform on hospital costs. The cost impact, as

we discuss above, depends on the relative changes in incentives facing hospitals and physicians

in treatment and investment decisions. In the presence of moral hazard or income effects we

expect that the large coverage expansion in Massachusetts would lead the newly insured to seek

additional care and, conditional on use, more expensive care (e.g. Pauly (1968); Manning et

al. (1987); Kowalski (2009)). Insurers are also able to negotiate lower prices for care and, in

the case of managed care plans, address treatment decisions directly through quantity limits (i.e.

prior authorization rules that require a physician to get approval from the insurer in order for a

procedure to be reimbursed, etc.) (Cutler et al. (2000)). Thus, increases in coverage could lead to

a countervailing decrease in cost with insurance coverage. Consequently, it is an empirical question

whether increases in health insurance coverage among the hospitalized population will raise or lower

cost.

       To measure hospital costs directly, we obtained hospital level all-payer cost to charge ratios.

Hospitals are required to report these ratios to Medicare on an annual basis. The numerator of the

ratio represents the annual total costs of operating the hospital such as overhead costs, salaries, and

equipment.30 The denominator of this ratio represents annual total charges across all payers, which

we observe disaggregated by discharge in the NIS. With our information on total charges from

the NIS, we can get an accurate measure of total costs at the hospital level. Several papers in the

economics literature measure total costs at the discharge ratio by deflating total charges by the cost

to charge ratio (see e.g. Almond et al. (2010). However, since there is no variation in observed costs

at a level finer than the hospital level, estimating such a regression requires the strong assumption

that the ratio of costs to charges is the same for all discharges within the hospital. Since we are

interested in hospital-level costs, we need not impose this assumption, and we can focus on results
  30
    Costs do not include the cost of uncompensated care, which presumably declined with the increase in insurance
coverage.



                                                       26
at the hospital level.

   Table 5 presents difference-in-difference estimates for the impact of the reform on hospital

costs using a variety of specifications. The first column presents estimates in levels. The coefficient

estimate of 9.54 is not statistically significantly different from zero. The logarithmic specification in

column 2 yields a negative estimate for the impact of the reform on cost, though the coefficient is also

insignificant. The difference between the two, though not statistically significant, can be explained

in that the logarithmic specification takes into account trends in growth for both treatment and

control groups. That is, Massachusetts had a differential trend in cost growth relative to the rest of

the country before the reform. The log specification results indicate that this trend was not altered

by the expansion in coverage relative to trends before and after the reform in the remainder of the

country. The plots in Figure 4, which depict cost trends in Massachusetts and other states for the

outcomes in Table 5, show that Massachusetts had a higher rate of cost growth as compared to

other states before the reform. After the reform, Massachusetts relative costs appear to be in line

with their pre-reform trend.

   In the next columns, and in the bottom plots in Figure 4, we model cost per day and discharge,

to account for changes in cost that may be due to changes in the intensity or total volume of patients

treated. Both results are consistent with the levels regression in column 1 and suggest that cost

growth was largely unchanged by the expansion in coverage in Massachusetts.

   Decomposing the results by year, however, paints a slightly different picture. In the lower

panel of Table 5, we allow the post period effect to differ in 2007 and 2008 (the two years of data

we have following the reform). The coefficient for MA∗ 2008 in levels is positive and statistically

significant. Given the relatively short period of our study, it is difficult to identify dynamic effects.

However, the results do suggest that there may, eventually, have been increased cost levels, despite

little rise in the immediate aftermath. The other specifications, however, do not show a significant

differential effect on the log, per discharge, or per day cost in 2008 in MA relative to before the

reform relative to other states. Thus, taking into account trends or volume and length of stay

changes after the reform, we do not find increased cost even a year and a half after the full reform

(including the individual mandate) went into effect. Combining the estimates across specifications,

our results imply that the Massachusetts reform did not increase the cost of hospital care relative

to the baseline trend in cost growth. Thus, the Massachusetts reform did not appear to “bend the

                                                   27
cost curve” upward or downward.



5         Direct and Spillover Effects of the Reform

5.1        IV Estimates Relating Gains in Coverage to Outcomes

Using our difference-in-difference strategy, we have shown a reduced form impact of the reform

on utilization, outcomes, and hospital costs. These impacts are of direct policy interest in Mas-

sachusetts, and they provide suggestive evidence on the potential impact of the national reform.

To estimate the impact of insurance coverage on outcomes more generally, we can combine these

reduced form estimates with first stage estimates of the impact of the reform on insurance coverage.

To do so entails imposing the exclusion restriction that the reform only affected the reduced form

outcomes through the expansion in insurance coverage. This exclusion restriction could be violated

for several reasons; for example, if the type of coverage and not just the expansion in coverage

matters. We report the instrumental variable estimates subject to this caveat.

         When scaling our reduced form estimates by our first stage coverage estimates, we use two sets

of first stage coverage estimates – those from the NIS and those from the CPS. Scaling by the NIS

estimate gives the effect of reduced uninsurance in the hospital on outcomes, and scaling by the

CPS estimate gives the effect of reduced uninsurance in the population on hospital outcomes. In a

similar context, Anderson et al. (2010) use a bounding exercise to address how changes in population

coverage result in changes in hospital coverage because they only observe hospital coverage. Here,

rather than using a bounding exercise with its accompanying assumptions, we can simply scale by

the population estimate from the CPS to address this issue.

         Returning to the estimated coefficients on length of stay and emergency admissions, we combine

these results with the estimated coefficient from the NIS uninsurance regression. We find that a one

percentage point increase in insurance coverage in the hospital decreases length of stay by 0.022 days

(0.050/2.31) and decreases emergency admissions by 0.87 percentage points (2.02/2.31).31 Using

the CPS first stage estimates, we find that a one percentage point increase in insurance coverage

in the population decreases length of stay by 0.009 days (0.050/5.71) and decreases emergency
    31
    These estimates are approximate because the two underlying estimates are estimated on slightly different samples
due to data availability.




                                                        28
admissions by 0.37 percentage points (2.02/5.71).


5.2      Heterogeneity by Age, Gender, Income and Race

There are several reasons to examine heterogeneity in the impact of the reform by age, gender,

income, and race. The first is to understand the incidence of the reform. Another is to understand

the impact of the coverage mandate on disparities in coverage and outcomes. A third, as discussed

above, is to identify heterogeneous impacts of expansions in coverage within groups and to look for

evidence of spillovers across groups.

       Comparison of the first stage results in the NIS and the CPS for all non-elderly demographic

groups suggests that a one percentage point increase in population coverage translated into a 0.4

(2.31/5.71) percentage point increase in coverage in the hospital. If demographic groups gain

insurance coverage in the population and in the hospital at the same rate, we expect the ratio of

the NIS first stage to the CPS first stage to be the same across demographic groups. However,

it is possible that population coverage translates into hospital coverage differently for different

demographic groups (e.g. if men have bigger gains in coverage in the hospital than in the population

because hospitalized men tend to have lower incomes).32 Differential changes in hospital coverage

relative to population coverage within a demographic group will be reflected in the ratio of the NIS

first stage result to the CPS first stage result within that demographic group.

       Comparing changes in coverage by age in the NIS in Table 6 and in the CPS in Appendix

Table 2, we see that the ratio is generally constant across demographic groups at roughly the

population ratio of 0.4. This comparison provides further evidence that the reform itself did not

lead to large differential selection into hospitals based on observable characteristics. However, for

individuals 27-30 and for individuals 45-54, a one percentage point increase in population coverage

translated into a 0.13 (0.022/0.166) and 0.67 (0.028/0.042) percentage point increase in hospital

coverage, respectively. Thus, it seems that younger individuals were less likely to gain coverage in

the hospital than they were in the population, presumably because younger hospitalized already

had higher rates of coverage. The reverse was true for older individuals. To address these differences

in the propensity of coverage in the population to translate into coverage in the hospital, we prefer
  32
    Differential selection into the hospital by newly insured members of each demographic group could also affect the
translation of population coverage into actual coverage. However, we find limited scope for differential selection into
the hospital in section 4.2.1.


                                                          29
to use the CPS first stage rather than the NIS first stage to scale our IV estimate within each

demographic subgroup.

       In Table 6 and Appendix Table 2, we examine changes in coverage by age in the NIS and the

CPS, respectively. As expected, increases in coverage are most pronounced in the nonelderly, but

the elderly did experience small gains in coverage, mostly through Medicaid. As our insurance

variable reports the primary payer for the discharge, increases in Medicaid coverage could indicate

that some individuals eligible for Medicare also became eligible for Medicaid, and Medicaid became

the primary payer. As discussed above, Medicare does not cover all elderly individuals, and some

elderly people might have gained coverage through the Medicaid expansions or through CommCare.

Among the elderly in MA in 2008 Q4, 808 elderly discharges, including 466 discharges for age 75+,

report CommCare as the primary payer.

       From the bottom rows of Table 6, we see that decreases in uninsurance were largest among

individuals aged 19-26. These individuals predominantly obtained coverage through Medicaid and

CommCare. Individuals of all ages obtained CommCare, and takeup of CommCare is largest

among the near elderly hospitalized population, aged 55-64. All nonelderly age groups experienced

a statistically significant decline in private coverage, providing further evidence that public coverage

crowed out private coverage within the hospitalized population.33

       When we turn to outcomes by age in specifications 7 to 9 in Table 6, we see some heterogeneity

in estimated effects of length of stay across age groups, with some groups experiencing statistically

significant decreases and others experiencing statistically significant increases. Since all groups

experienced expanded coverage in the NIS and the CPS, this implies variation in the within group

instrumental variables estimates of the impact of coverage on length of stay. In contrast, admissions

from the emergency room declined for all ages. The NIS and CPS IV estimates for the effect of

coverage on inpatient admissions from the ER are uniformly negative for all individuals over 18

and, generally, increase with age. This provides further evidence that, in the absence of the newly

provided coverage, uninsured individuals were seeking care through the ER. We would expect health

status to decline with age and thus, use of the ER as a point of entry into the health care system

should also increase with age if this is the primary point of access for those without insurance. The
  33
    Crowd out among young adults is likely to be less pronounced than in the general population because young
adults with CommCare coverage tend to be healthy and less likely to have inpatient stays.



                                                     30
CPS IV estimate for the impact of a one percentage point increase in population coverage among

individuals 27-30 is a 0.13 percentage point reduction in the probability of an inpatient admission

originating in the ER. The estimated impact for those from 31-40, 41-54, and 55-64 is a 0.33, 1.22,

and 1.12 percentage point reduction respectively.

    In the top panel of Table 7 and Appendix Table 3, we report difference-in-difference results

for insurance coverage by gender in the NIS and CPS, respectively. From the mean coverage

rate in the lower rows, we can see that Massachusetts males were approximately twice as likely

to be uninsured as Massachusetts women before the reform, and though males experienced larger

gains in coverage than women during the reform, males were still almost twice as likely to be

uninsured after the reform.34 If changes in outcomes for a particular group occur directly through

changes in insurance coverage for that group and there are no heterogeneous treatment effects,

men’s outcomes should show a larger change than women’s because their coverage changed more.

We do find larger decreases for men for length of stay, inpatient admissions from the ER, and some

and cost measures. The IV estimate for the impact of population coverage on admissions from the

ER is relatively uniform across the two groups with a predicted reduction of 0.39 and 0.27 percent

for a one percent increase in coverage for men and women respectively.

    In the lower panel of Table 7 and Appendix Table 3, we report difference-in-difference results

for insurance coverage by the income quartile of the patient’s zip code.35 People from the lowest

income zip codes are over-represented in hospital discharges, making up 28% of the sample. People

from these poorest zip codes experienced the largest gains in coverage, mostly driven by increases in

Medicaid and CommCare. People from the richest zip codes experienced no statistically significant

change in coverage overall and the only statistically significant effects were on Other and CommCare

coverage. The largest increases in CommCare coverage occurred for patients in the second lowest

income quartile, which seems plausible because Medicaid was aimed at the poor, and CommCare

was particularly targeted at the near poor. However, CommCare coverage reached people in zip
  34
     It is not surprising that males had lower initial rates of coverage than females because Medicaid programs explicitly
have more lenient eligibility thresholds for women, especially single mothers. Furthermore, coverage is often more
valuable for women of child-bearing age because childbirth is an expensive and common medical expense.
  35
     Income thresholds that determine the quartile of income for each zip code are different in every year. For 2008,
the lowest quartile ranged from $1 to $38,999, the second ranged from $39,000 to $48,999, the third ranged from
$49,000 to $63,999, and the fourth was greater than or equal to $64,000. The quartile of income is suppressed for any
zip code with a population below a certain threshold and for any zip code that is the only zip code in its state in the
given quartile.



                                                           31
codes of all income quartiles, consistent with heterogeneity in income within zip codes.

   Specifications 7 to 9 of Table 7 show changes in outcomes by zip code income quartile. Inter-

estingly, the impact of the reform on both the level and log of LOS is positive and significant for

individuals from the poorest zip codes. Individuals from the second income quartile, however, saw

statistically significant declines in LOS in both levels and logs. As discussed above, decreases in

emergency admissions are particularly pronounced for individuals in the lowest income zip codes,

for which Medicaid expansions were the largest. Other outcomes show minimal heterogeneity across

the income categories, though this could be due in part to the fact that estimates for costs are based

on hospital level cost to charge ratios that could obscure within hospital heterogeneity in costs by

income.

   Finally, we examine heterogeneity in coverage by race in the NIS in Table 8 and in the CPS

in Appendix Table 4. From the means in the bottom rows of each cell, we can see that whites

had the highest levels of insurance coverage before the reform. In percentage point terms, all races

experienced gains in coverage, but people identified as black, Hispanic, or of unknown race, experi-

enced the largest increases in coverage through the reform. Medicaid expansions were also largest

among these groups. Native Americans, which make up less than one percent of the population,

experienced the largest gains in private coverage. People of all races took up coverage through

CommCare at varying rates. The reform reduced disparities in coverage by race, but it did not

eliminate them.

   In columns 7 to 9 of Table 8, we examine outcomes by race. We see more heterogeneity in the

estimated changes in outcomes across the race categories than we do across other demographic cat-

egories. Although we see decreases in length of stay among White patients, length of stay increased

among Black, Hispanic, Asian and Native American patients. Admissions from the emergency room

declined across most races with the exception of Asian patients. Overall, it appears that within-race

changes in outcomes are not directly related to within-race changes in insurance coverage.

   Our instrumental variable estimates for some outcomes vary substantially across the subgroups

we analyze. Furthermore, though there is less variation in the direction of the results for length

of stay, the NIS and CPS IV estimates are not proportional across subgroups. This could be

evidence for spillovers from insurance coverage in the hospital production function or it could

reflect heterogeneity in the underlying impact of insurance on outcomes by subgroup, perhaps by

                                                 32
type of coverage. One plausible mechanism for the former is that hospitals, facing convergence to

almost complete insurance coverage, alter the way in which they provide care to all patients, not

only those who are newly insured. Put differently, our estimates suggest that expanding coverage to

near-universal levels, particularly among the relatively young, impacts care for other populations,

including the elderly, who typically have coverage through Medicare. If overall coverage levels

impact care among those who are already covered, an externality exists in an individual’s choice

to purchase health insurance. Among all of our outcome measures, we find the least evidence for

spillovers in inpatient admissions from the ER. However, barring network effects within a community

or supply side constraints within an ER, we would not expect a change in coverage of one individual

to change the ER usage of another.



6    Conclusion

In this paper, we show that the Massachusetts health insurance reform expanded coverage among

the inpatient hospital population by approximately 36 percent relative to its pre-reform level.

Among this population, we see some evidence of crowd of out private coverage by subsidized

coverage, but we do not find evidence for crowd out in the general population, suggesting that

the incidence of crowd out differs by health status.

    We show declines in length of stay and admissions from the emergency room following the

reform. Our results also suggest that prevention increased outside of hospitals, resulting in a

decline in inpatient admissions for some preventable conditions, reflecting a likely health impact for

individuals susceptible to these conditions. In the midst of these gains, we find no evidence that

hospital cost growth increased. We are unable to make precise welfare statements as we do not

capture increased costs to the government and to the purchasers of health insurance that resulted

from the reform.

    Combining estimates of coverage expansion with estimates of outcome changes, we estimate

the instrumental variable impact of expanded coverage on hospital outcomes and find economically

significant impacts. To capture the incidence of the reform, we examine changes in coverage and

outcomes by demographic group. The reform increased coverage most among young adults and

the near elderly, men, people from the lowest income zip codes, and people identified as black and


                                                 33
Hispanic.

      This paper is the first to examine the effect of Massachusetts health insurance reform on hospital

outcomes. In other research, we aim to answer other economic questions using variation induced by

health insurance reform in Massachusetts. In Kolstad and Kowalski (2010), we examine the impact

of individually mandated health insurance coverage on the labor market.



References

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample

  (NIS). Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) April 2004 – 2007.                               www.hcup-

  us.ahrq.gov/nisoverview.jsp.

  ,         AHRQ             Quality        Indicators        Software       Download.           April       2007.

  http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/software.htm.

  ,     Inpatient   Quality      Indicators    Download.      AHRQ       Quality   Indicators.     March     2007.

  http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/iqi download.htm.

  ,     Patient     Safety     Indicators     Download.       AHRQ       Quality   Indicators.    March      2007.

  http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/psi download.htm.

  ,     Pediatric    Safety     Indicators     Download.      AHRQ       Quality   Indicators.     March     2007.

  http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/pqi download.htm.

  ,     Pediatric    Safety     Indicators     Download.      AHRQ       Quality   Indicators.     March     2007.

  http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/pdi download.htm.

Almond, Douglas, Jr. Joseph J. Doyle, Amanda E. Kowalski, and Heidi Williams,

 “Estimating Marginal Returns to Medical Care: Evidence from At-Risk Newborns,” Quarterly

  Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 591–634.

Anderson, Michael, Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross, “The Effect of Health Insurance Coverage

  on the Use of Medical Services,” NBER Working Paper 15823, 2010.




                                                         34
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiri-

  cist’s Companion, Princeton University Press, 2009.

Bebinger, Martha, “Mission Not Yet Accomplished? Massachusetts Contemplates Major Moves

  On Cost Containment,” Health Affairs, 2009, 28 (5), 1373.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We

  Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?*,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1),

  249–275.

Birnbaum, Michael and Elizabeth Patchias, “Medicare Coverage for Seniors: How Uni-

  versal Is It and What Are the Implications?,” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the

  APSA 2008 Annual Meeting, Hynes Convention Center, Boston, Massachusetts, August 28, 2008.

  http://www.allacademic.com/meta/p281081 index.html.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas, “The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance

  Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare,” American Economic Review,

  2008, 98 (5), 2242–2258.

Charlson, Mary E., Peter Pompei, Kathy L. Ales, and C. Ronald MacKenzie, “A

  New Method of Classifying Prognostic Comorbidity in Longitudinal Studies: Development and

  Validation,” Journal of Chronic Diseases, 1987, 40 (5), 373–383.

Chernew, Michael E., Allison B. Rosen, and A. Mark Fendrick, “Value-Based Insurance

  Design,” Health Affairs, 2007, 26 (2), w195.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber, “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care,

  and Child Health,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 431–466.

Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber, “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insur-

  ance,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 391–430.

  , Mark McClellan, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “How Does Managed Care Do It?,” The

  RAND Journal of Economics, 2000, 31 (3), 526–548.




                                                 35
  , Robert S. Huckman, and Jonathan T. Kolstad, “Input Constraints and the Efficiency of

  Entry: Lessons from Cardiac Surgery,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2

  (1), 51–76.

Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber, “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations: Access

  and Efficiency Effects,” Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89 (1), 109–129.

Dranove, David and Mark A. Satterthwaite, “Monopolistic Competition When Price and

  Quality are Imperfectly Observable,” RAND Journal of Economics, 1992, 23 (4), 518–534.

Finkelstein, Amy, “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction

  of Medicare,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (1), 1–37.

Glied, Sherry and Joshua Zivin, “How Do Doctors Behave When Some (but Not All) of Their

  Patients are in Managed Care?,” Journal of Health Economics, 2002, 21 (2), 337–353.

Gray, Bradford H., Roberta Scheinmann, Peri Rosenfeld, and Ruth Finkelstein, “Aging

  without Medicare? Evidence from New York City,” Inquiry, 2006, 43 (3), 211–221.

Gruber, Jonathan and Samuel A. Kleiner, “Do Strikes Kill? Evidence from New York State,”

  NBER Working Paper 15855, 2010.

HSS, Inc., Definitions Manual for All-Payer Severity-adjusted DRG (APS-DRGs) Assignment.

  2003. http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/db/nation/nis/APS DRGsDefManualV26Public.pdf.

Joskow, Paul L., “The Effects of Competition and Regulation on Hospital Bed Supply and the

  Reservation Quality of the Hospital,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1980, pp. 421–447.

Kaiser Family Foundation, “Side-by-side Comparison of Major Health Care Reform Proposals,”

  March 2010. http://www.kff.org/healthreform/upload/housesenatebill final.pdf.

Kingsdale, Jon, “Implementing Health Care Reform in Massachusetts:               Strategic Lessons

  Learned,” Health Affairs, 2009, 28 (4), w588.

Kolstad, Jonathan T. and Amanda E. Kowalski, “The Impact of an Individual Health Insur-

  ance Mandate On Hospital and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts,” NBER Working

  Paper 16012, 2010.

                                                  36
Kowalczyk, Liz, “Emergency Room Visits Grow in Mass,” The Boston Globe, July 2010.

Kowalski, Amanda, “Censored Quantile Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Price Elasticity

  of Expenditure on Medical Care,” NBER Working Paper 15085, 2009.

Long, Sharon, “On the Road to Universal Coverage: Impacts of Reform in Massachusetts at One

  Year,” Health Affairs, 2008, 27 (4), w270.

Long, Sharon K., Karen Stockley, and Alshadye Yemane, “Another Look at the Impacts of

  Health Reform in Massachusetts: Evidence Using New Data and a Stronger Model,” American

  Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2), 508.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Michael D. Whinston, “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency,” The

  RAND Journal of Economics, 1986, pp. 48–58.

Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett Keeler, Bernadette

  Benjamin, Arleen Leibowitz, M. Susan Marquis, and Jack Zwanziger, “Health In-

  surance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” The

  American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (3), 251–277.

McDonough, John E., Brian Rosman, Fawn Phelps, and Melissa Shannon, “The Third

  Wave of Massachusetts Health Care Access Reform,” Health Affairs, 2006, 25 (6), w420.

Pauly, Mark V., “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment,” The American Economic Review,

  1968, pp. 531–537.

Quan, Hude, Vijaya Sundararajan, Patricia Halfon, Andrew Fong, Bernard Burnand,

  Jean-Christophe Luthi, Duncan L. Saunders, Cynthia A. Beck, Thomas E. Feasby,

  and William A. Ghali, “Coding Algorithms for Defining Comorbidities in ICD-9-CM and

  ICD-10 Administrative Data.”

Robinson, James C. and Harold S. Luft, “Competition and the Cost of Hospital Care, 1972

  to 1982,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 1987, 257 (23), 3241.




                                               37
The Massachusetts Health Insurance Connector Authority, “Report to the Massachusetts

  Legislature: Implementation of the Health Care Reform Law, Chapter 58, 2006–2008,” 2008. Jon

  Kingsdale, Executive Director. Available at www.mahealthconnector.org.

Truffer, Christopher J., Sean Keehan, Sheila Smith, Jonathan Cylus, Andrea Sisko,

  John A. Poisal, Joseph Lizonitz, and M. Kent Clemens, “Health Spending Projections

  through 2019: The Recession’s Impact Continues,” Health Affairs, 2010, 29 (3), 522.

Yelowitz, Aaron and Michael F. Cannon, “The Massachusetts Health Plan: Much Pain, Little

  Gain,” Policy Analysis, January 2010. http://www.cato.org/pub display.php?pub id=11115.




Appendices

A      Block Bootstrap

Since our main identifying variation is at the state-time level, we follow Bertrand et al. (2004),

and block bootstrap our confidence intervals by state. Doing so allows for an arbitrary variance-

covariance matrix within states across time. In this section, we discuss some implementation details

that are not discussed by Bertrand et al. (2004). First, the empirical simulation results using the

CPS presented by Bertrand et al. (2004) assume that half of the states are treated and the other

half are untreated. Since we have only one treated state, it is only sampled in approximately one

third of block bootstrap draws. In these draws, the difference-in-difference coefficient on MA∗ After

cannot be estimated. In practice, we include these replications in the bootstrap sample to estimate

the confidence intervals on the other coefficients without bias. We use a large number of bootstrap

replications – 1,000 – so that the confidence intervals on our coefficient of interest are still based

on a large number of bootstrap replications.36

    Second, all of our regressions are weighted. To address weighting within our block bootstrap

procedure, we sample states with replacement. Within a state, the sum of the weights does not
  36
     Difficulties in the block bootstrap procedure aside, we acknowledge that having only one treated state potentially
limits the external validity of our results. To address this limitation, we consider level and trend differences between
MA and other states, which we discuss in Section 4.1.2.



                                                          38
change because all observations from a given state are drawn at once. However, the sum of the

weights varies across regressions because not all states are sampled and some states are sampled

more than once.



B     Robustness of Insurance Results

One potential concern about the external validity of our results is that Massachusetts could differ

from the remainder of the country in ways that we do not observe, and these differences could lead

to changes in coverage at the same time that the reform was implemented. Such differences could

be due, for example, to factors that affected the entire Northeast. Alternately, it could be due

to factors that affected states with relatively low levels of uninsurance. To account for potential

unobserved differences that are correlated with observed differences in uninsurance, we estimate

a series of specifications in our nonelderly sample, in which we restrict the comparison groups to

states most similar to Massachusetts. We present these results in Appendix Table 7.

    We first examine changes in uninsurance. When we restrict the comparison group of hospitals

to hospitals in the Northeast Census division in the second panel, the impact of the reform on

uninsurance is smaller than it is in the preferred specification, reproduced in the first panel. As

reported in the means at the bottom of the column, the initial level of insurance coverage in the

comparison states in the Northeast Census division was similar to the initial level of insurance

coverage in the comparison states in the national sample. Similarly, in the third panel, when we

restrict the comparison group to include only New England states, which had an initial lower but

not statistically lower rate of uninsurance than Massachusetts, the estimated impact of the reform

falls to a 1.59 percentage point reduction in uninsurance. This is statistically smaller than the

baseline effect, but it remains significantly different from zero at the 1% level despite the much

smaller sample size. To investigate the possibility that this change in magnitude is due to the

limited health reforms that occurred in 2006 in Maine, Vermont and San Francisco, California, in

column 4, we estimate the main specification in the full sample but we exclude Maine, Vermont,

and California. Reassuringly, our point estimate remains unchanged from our main specification.

As an alternative specification check, we estimate the same specification on the sample of the 25

states with the highest levels of nonelderly insurance coverage before the reform in the CPS. Our


                                                39
point estimate is not statistically different from that in the main specification.

    In the remaining columns of Appendix Table 7, we present similar specifications for each of our

main outcomes of interest. In general, our quantitative conclusions as well as our qualitative con-

clusions are unchanged when we change the group of comparison states. Our emergency admission

result is particularly robust.

    An additional issue in extrapolating from our Massachusetts results is that Massachusetts had

a relatively smaller potential increase in insurance due to its high baseline level. If the cost of

expanding coverage is convex, we expect larger reductions in uninsurance from the same policies in

locations with higher baseline levels of uninsurance. We could test this proposition if another state

with a different baseline level of uninsurance enacted the same policies. In the absence of such a

natural experiment, we look for suggestive evidence in support of this hypothesis by examining the

effect of the reform by baseline levels of insurance coverage within Massachusetts on the hospital

level.

    In Appendix Table 8, we divide hospitals based on their initial level of insurance coverage

in the pre-reform period. Because not all hospitals in the sample were in the pre-reform data,

we first restrict the sample to hospitals that appear at least once in the sample in the Before

period. These results are presented in the second panel. Estimating the average impact of the

reform in this subsample, we find that impact of the reform remained virtually unchanged, 1.52

percentage points compared to 1.53. We then divide the sample into two groups based on whether

the hospital had below- or above-median levels of uninsurance in the Before period. In among

hospitals Massachusetts in the sample in the Before period, 29 hospitals had uninsurance below the

national median, and the remaining 11 hospitals had uninsurance above the national median. We

are able to estimates statistically significant impacts on uninsurance in both groups of hospitals,

but estimates based on hospitals with below-median uninsurance are more precise.

    Estimates from the first column of the third and fourth panels show that the impact of the

reform was statistically indistinguishable in hospitals with lower initial rates of uninsurance (a 1.78

percentage point increase in coverage) and hospitals with higher initial rates of uninsurance (a 1.65

percentage point increase in coverage). Although we might have expected that convex cost of cover-

age expansion would have led to greater reductions in uninsurance in hospitals with initially higher

rates of uninsurance, the results are not statistically different from each other. As shown in the

                                                  40
second to fourth columns, impacts on length of stay and admissions from the ER were also similar

across both groups of hospitals. Without recovering the structural parameters that determine the

cost of coverage expansion it is difficult to make precise out of sample predictions. However, these

findings suggest the results we find in Massachusetts, which had lower initial uninsurance than

other states, could be similar to the impact of the national reform.



C        Risk Adjustment

Selection into hospitals after the reform in Massachusetts is an outcome of interest in its own

right, which we address as a complement to our analysis, but to examine causal changes in other

outcomes, we control for characteristics of the patient pool. To do so, we use six37 sets of risk ad-

justment variables: demographic characteristics, the number of diagnoses on the discharge record,

individual components of the Charlson Score measure of comorbidities, AHRQ comorbidity mea-

sures, All-Patient Refined Diagnosis Related Groups (APR-DRG)s, and All-Payer Severity-adjusted

(APS)-DRGs. Each risk adjustment measure was developed with a slightly different purpose, but

the correlation among them is high. Since our focus is on controlling for selection and not on in-

vestigating the relative merit of each measure, we include all risk adjustment variables in the same

specification. We run all of our regressions on the discharge level, as opposed to the hospital level,

to capture the interactions between measures on the discharge level.

       We construct the first four measures ourselves from the information in the discharge records.

First, we include the same demographic measures that we include in specification 3 of Table 1 –

saturated controls in race, gender, and income, as well as age and age squared. Second, following

Gruber and Kleiner (2010), we control for the number of diagnoses on the hospital discharge

record. The number of diagnoses in our nonelderly sample varies from 0 to 15, the average is 5, and

the maximum potentially reported is 15. Third, using data on the composition of diagnoses, we

calculate and control for the individual components of the Charlson Score.38 The Charlson score,

which includes 18 components, has been shown to have a strong relationship with mortality (Quan

et al. (n.d.)). The average number of components in our nonelderly data is 0.37, and the maximum
  37
     In Kolstad and Kowalski (2010), we included a seventh set of risk adjusters, Medstat disease staging measures,
but we must omit them here because they are no longer available in 2008.
  38
     See Charlson et al. (1987) for the origin of the Charlson Score measures. We draw our Charlson Score code from
http://healthservices.cancer.gov/seermedicare/program/charlson.comorbidity.macro.txt.


                                                        41
is 9. Fourth, we control for the 29 AHRQ comorbidity measures. The nonelderly mean in our data

is 1 and the maximum is 14.

   The remaining two measures were constructed in our data using proprietary algorithms. The

APR-DRG measures and the APS-DRG measures, developed by 3M, were developed as refine-

ments to the existing Refined DRGs (R-DRGs) and All-Patient DRGs (AP-DRGs) systems, which

expanded the DRG system beyond the Medicare population. The APR-DRG and APS-DRG mea-

sures include further adjustments for severity and for neonatal discharges. There are two separate

APR-DRG measures: a mortality-specific measure and a general severity measure. We include both

measures in each specification. The mortality measure takes on integer values from 0 to 4 with a

mean in our data of 1.3, and the severity measure takes on the same values with a mean of 1.7.

   There are three APS-DRG measures: one charge-specific measure, one length of stay-specific

measure, and one mortality-specific measure. Each outcome-specific APS-DRG measure was de-

veloped using the 2000 NIS data, and is standardized to have a mean of 1 in that sample (HSS,

Inc. (2003)). Multiplying the outcome-specific measure by the mean of that outcome in the 2000

NIS gives a prediction of the expected value of that outcome. For example, the mean charge in

the 2000 NIS was $13,241.41, and the largest value of the charge-specific APS-DRG for a discharge

in our nonelderly sample was 26.21, so predicted charges for that discharge would be $347,057 in

the year 2000. To interpret the other magnitudes, the mean LOS in the 2000 NIS was 4.5096, and

mean mortality in the 2000 NIS was 0.0247 deaths per discharge. In our sample including all ages,

the means of each measure are slightly than the standardized value of 1.0, reflecting real changes

in since the year 2000 and sampling changes from the 2000 NIS to 2004-2007 NIS. The charges

measure takes on values from 0.09 to 26.21, with a mean of 0.88 in the nonelderly sample; the

length of stay measure takes on values from 0.21 to 19.02, with a mean of 0.93 in the nonelderly

sample; and the mortality measure takes on values from 0 to 46.74, with a mean of 0.69 in the

nonelderly sample. We include all three measures in each specification. The second specification

of Appendix Table 5 reports the coefficients on all risk adjustment variables in the risk-adjusted

uninsurance regression reported in the last row of the first specification in Table 1.




                                                 42
D     Quality Indicators

We use software from AHRQ to calculate these measures in our NIS data (Agency for Healthcare

Research and Quality (2007a)). For each set of indicators, we use the most recent set of code

that does not include a windows executable file. We use the December 2009 Version 4.1 of the

Prevention Quality Indicators (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2007e)), the March

2008 Version 3.2a of the Inpatient Quality Indicators with results of the DRG grouper software

merged on from the NIS Severity file (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2007c)), the

January 2009 Version 3.2a of the Patient Safety Indicators (Agency for Healthcare Research and

Quality (2007d)), and the December 2009 Version 4.1 of the Pediatric Quality Indicators (Agency

for Healthcare Research and Quality (2007f)). The overall pediatric quality indicator is an indicator

for any one of PDI 14 (Chronic), 15 (Chronic), 16 (Acute), or 17 (Acute), set to zero for age less

than six.




                                                 43
Figure 1




Source: CPS March Supplement 2004-2009, authors’ calculations.
Vertical lines separate During and After periods.
Figure 2




                            Trends in MA vs Non−MA
                     Uninsured                              Medicaid                       Private
   .02 .04




                                       .1




                                                                                0
                                       .05




                                                                                −.05
   −.02 0




                                       −.05 0




                                                                                −.1
       2004 Q1         2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1                2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1       2006 Q3 2008 Q4

                       MA        Non                          MA       Non                  MA       Non



                     Medicare                                 Other
   0 .01 .02 .03




                                       .01 .02
                                       −.01 0




       2004 Q1         2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1                2006 Q3 2008 Q4

                       MA        Non                          MA       Non



                   Length of Stay                       Log Length of Stay             Emergency Admit
                                       −.02 0 .02 .04




                                                                                .05
   .2




                                                                                0
   0




                                                                                −.05
   −.2




       2004 Q1         2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1                2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1       2006 Q3 2008 Q4

                       MA        Non                          MA       Non                  MA       Non


  Source: NIS authors’ calculations.
  Trends obtained from regressions including hospital fixed effects.
  95% asympototic confidence intervals shown.
  Confidence intervals clustered by state for Non−MA and robust for MA.
  All data omitted in 2006 Q4 and 2007 Q4 because of MA data availability.
  Vertical lines separate During and After periods.
Figure 3




                              Trends in MA vs Non−MA
                               Hospital−Quarter Level
                    Total Discharges             Charlson Score     APRDRG Risk Mortality




                                           .4




                                                                    .2
   500




                                                                    .1
                                           .2
   0




                                                                    −.1 0
   −500




                                           0
        2004 Q1          2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1     2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1   2006 Q3 2008 Q4

                         MA       Non                MA       Non              MA       Non



                    APRDRG SeverityAPSDRG Mortality Weight
                                                        APSDRG LOS Weight



                                                                    .05
   .2




                                           .2
   .1




                                                                    0
                                           0
   −.1 0




                                                                    −.05
                                           −.2




        2004 Q1          2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1     2006 Q3 2008 Q4 2004 Q1   2006 Q3 2008 Q4

                         MA       Non                MA       Non              MA       Non



 APSDRG Charge Weight
   −.1 −.05 0 .05




        2004 Q1          2006 Q3 2008 Q4

                         MA       Non


  Source: NIS authors’ calculations.
  Trends obtained from regressions including hospital fixed effects.
  95% asympototic confidence intervals shown.
  Confidence intervals clustered by state for Non−MA and robust for MA.
  All data omitted in 2006 Q4 and 2007 Q4 because of MA data availability.
  Vertical lines separate During and After periods.
Figure 4




               Trends in MA vs Non−MA
            Hospital−Year Level, Excluding Q4
                 Total Costs                                     Log Total Costs
    150




                                          .3
    100




                                          .2
    50




                                          .1
    0




          2004      2006         2008     0               2004        2006         2008

                  MA            Non                                 MA         Non



            Costs Per Total LOS                      Costs Per Total Discharge
                                         1000 2000 3000
    600
    400
    200




                                         0
    0




          2004      2006         2008                     2004        2006         2008

                  MA            Non                                 MA         Non

  Source: NIS authors’ calculations.
  For this figure, data collapsed annually by hospital, excluding Q4.
  All Q4 data omitted because of MA data availability.
  Trends obtained from regressions including hospital fixed effects.
  95% asympototic confidence intervals shown.
  Confidence intervals clustered by state for Non−MA and robust for MA.
  Vertical lines separate 2006 from other years.
Table 1: Insurance and Outcomes in NIS
                                                                  Mutually Exclusive Types of Coverage
                               (1)                           (2)                     (3)                      (4)                 (5)                  (6)                   (7)
Dependent Variable:        Uninsured                     Medicaid                 Private                 Medicare              Other              CommCare          No Coverage Info
MA*After                    ‐0.0231                       0.0389                  ‐0.0306                  0.0042              0.0106                0.0124               0.0015
                    [‐0.0300,‐0.0162]***          [0.0265,0.0512]*** [‐0.0378,‐0.0233]*** [0.0013,0.0070]*** [0.0041,0.0171]*** [0.0123,0.0124]*** [0.0000,0.0030]**
                     [‐0.0299,‐0.0166]+++         [0.0293,0.051]+++       [‐0.0385,‐0.0236]+++ [0.0014,0.0068]+++ [0.0050,0.0181]+++ [0.0124,0.0125]+++ [0.0001,0.0029]++
MA*During                   ‐0.0129                       0.0365                  ‐0.0224                  ‐0.0003             ‐0.0009               0.0029               ‐0.0017
                    [‐0.0176,‐0.0083]***          [0.0293,0.0437]*** [‐0.0274,‐0.0173]*** [‐0.0024,0.0017]             [‐0.0043,0.0026]      [0.0029,0.0029]*** [‐0.0065,0.0031]
                    [‐0.0177,‐0.0084]+++          [0.0302,0.0438]+++ [‐0.0277,‐0.0168]+++ [‐0.0025,0.0018]*            [‐0.0049,0.0026]*     [0.0029,0.0029]+++ [‐0.0076,0.0014]*
N (Nonelderly)            23,860,930                    23,860,930              23,860,930               23,860,930          23,860,930            23,860,930           23,913,983
R Squared                   0.0659                        0.1148                  0.1502                   0.0341              0.0689                0.0249               0.0662
Mean MA Before              0.0643                        0.2460                  0.5631                   0.1073              0.0193                0.0000               0.0002
Mean Non‐MA Before          0.0791                        0.2876                  0.4978                   0.0928              0.0427                0.0000               0.0020
Mean MA After               0.0352                        0.2594                  0.5518                   0.1177              0.0360                0.0165               0.0040
Mean Non‐MA After           0.0817                        0.2790                  0.4923                   0.1020              0.0450                0.0000               0.0017
MA*After                    ‐0.0228                       0.0374                  ‐0.0275                  0.0021              0.0107                0.0124               0.0014
with risk adjusters  [‐0.0297,‐0.0158]***           [0.0235,0.0514]*** [‐0.0361,‐0.0190]***           [‐0.0007,0.0050]   [0.0047,0.0168]*** [0.0123,0.0124]***      [0.0000,0.0028]**
R Squared                   0.0939                        0.2232                  0.2381                   0.2006              0.0761                0.0249               0.0666
                                                         Outcomes
                                     (8)                     (9)                    (10)
Dependent Variable:           Length of Stay        Log Length of Stay       Emergency Admit
MA*After                         ‐0.0504                  ‐0.0012                 ‐0.0202
                         [‐0.0999,‐0.0008]** [‐0.0111,0.0086]             [‐0.0397,‐0.0007]**
                          [‐0.1026,‐0.0065]++ [‐0.0113,0.0066]*           [‐0.0351,0.0011]+
MA*During                        ‐0.0037                  0.0037                ‐0.0317***
                         [‐0.0369,0.0294]         [‐0.0022,0.0095]        [‐0.0449,‐0.0184]***
                         [‐0.0367,0.0238]*        [‐0.0026,0.0084]*       [‐0.0409,‐0.0166]+++
N (Nonelderly)                  23,913,183              23,913,183              23,913,983
R Squared                         0.0335                  0.0458                  0.1088
Mean MA Before                    5.4256                  1.4267                  0.3868
Mean Non‐MA Before                5.0770                  1.3552                  0.3591
Mean MA After                     5.3717                  1.4355                  0.4058
Mean Non‐MA After                 5.0958                  1.3596                  0.3745
MA*After                         ‐0.1037                  ‐0.0105                 ‐0.0220
with risk adjusters       [‐0.1471,‐0.0603]*** [‐0.0186,‐0.0023]** [‐0.0427,‐0.0012]**
R Squared                         0.3801                  0.4038                  0.2907
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
95% bootstrapped CI, blocks by state, 1000 reps: +++ Significant at .01, ++ Significant at .05, + Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Risk adjusters include six sets of risk adjustment variables: demographic characteristics, the number of diagnoses on the discharge record, individual components of the Charlson
Score measure of comorbidities, AHRQ comorbidity measures, All‐Patient Refined (APR)‐DRGs, and All‐Payer Severity‐adjusted (APS)‐DRGs. See Appendix 2.
CommCare included in Other. No Coverage Info not included in any other specifications.
Length of Stay is calculated as one plus the discharge date minus the admission date. The smallest possible value is one day. Emergency Admit indicates emergency room source of admission.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Table 2: Regressions on the Hospital‐Quarter Level in NIS
                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                    (5)               (6)                          (7)
                          Total Discharges      Log Total Disch.      Nonelderly Dischg.    Log Noneld. Dischg.      Elderly Dischg.Log Elderly Dischg.            Hospital Bedsize
MA* After                        19                   0.0037                  ‐7                   0.0029                   26              0.0115                      ‐0.0032
                             [‐183,220]         [‐0.0133,0.0206]         [‐174,160]           [‐0.0192,0.0250]          [‐19,70]       [‐0.0059,0.0289]            [‐0.0165,0.0100]
N (All Ages)                   18,622                 18,622               18,622                  18,590                18,622             18,327                       18,595
Mean MA Before                  5616                  8.4125                3,592                  7.8958                 2,023             7.4190                       0.6350
Mean Non‐MA Before              5029                  8.1894                3,454                  7.7512                 1,569             7.0394                       0.7529
Mean MA After                   6769                  8.5300                4,433                  8.0369                 2,336             7.5456                       0.6914
Mean Non‐MA After               5389                  8.2327                3,712                  7.7908                 1,672             7.0949                       0.7602
                                 (8)                    (9)                  (10)                   (11)                   (12)              (13)
                           Charlson Score         APRDRG Risk         APRDRG Severity        APSDRG Mortality                          APSDRG Charge
                                                    Mortality                                      Weight         APSDRG LOS Weight         Weight
MA* After                        0.0340                   0.0057                   0.0062                  ‐0.0059             ‐0.006             ‐0.0195
                           [0.0205,0.0476]***        [‐0.0050,0.0164]         [‐0.0097,0.0220]        [‐0.0323,0.0206]    [‐0.0141,0.0022] [‐0.0310,‐0.0080]***
N (All Ages)                     18,622                   18,622                   18,622                   18,622             18,622              18,622
Mean MA Before                   0.5750                   1.5467                   1.8892                   1.1504             1.0660             1.0623
Mean Non‐MA Before               0.5058                   1.4919                   1.8413                  1.0992              1.0313             1.0356
Mean MA After                    0.7325                   1.6144                   1.9672                  1.2324              1.0758             1.0488
Mean Non‐MA After                0.6518                   1.5700                   1.9289                  1.2167              1.0457             1.0417
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means are on hospital‐quarter level, weighted by sum of discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Hospital Bedsize takes on values of 0 for small, .5 for medium, and 1 for large. See text for more details.
Discharges with missing age included in "Total Discharges" specifications but not in "Nonelderly" or "Elderly" specifications.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Table 3: Prevention Quality Indicators in NIS
Prevention Quality Indicators                 Improvement? MA* After              Improvement? MA* After, Risk Adjusted        N, Mean MA Before
PQI 90 Overall PQI                                             ‐0.0002 [‐0.0016,0.0011]         Y ‐0.0023 [‐0.0036,‐0.0009]*** 17,674,454 0.0838
PQI 01 Diabetes Short‐term Comp. Admission                     ‐0.0001 [‐0.0002,0.0001]             ‐0.0002 [‐0.0005,0.0001]    17,674,454 0.0058
PQI 02 Perforated Appendix Admission Rate                   Y ‐0.0463 [‐0.0557,‐0.0368]*** Y ‐0.0072 [‐0.0133,‐0.0012]**            189,588 0.2457
PQI 03 Diabetes Long‐Term Comp. Admission                       0.0000 [‐0.0002,0.0003]         Y ‐0.0009 [‐0.0011,‐0.0007]*** 17,674,454 0.0083
PQI 05 COPD Admission Rate                                     ‐0.0002 [‐0.0005,0.0001]         Y ‐0.0005 [‐0.0008,‐0.0002]*** 17,674,454 0.0097
PQI 07 Hypertension Admission rate                              0.0001 [‐0.0002,0.0004]              0.0001 [‐0.0002,0.0004]    17,674,454 0.0020
PQI 08 CHF Admission Rate                                       0.0000 [‐0.0005,0.0005]             ‐0.0003 [‐0.0006,0.0001]    17,674,454 0.0109
PQI 10 Dehydration Admission Rate                               0.0000 [‐0.0002,0.0002]         Y ‐0.0005 [‐0.0007,‐0.0003]*** 17,674,454 0.0054
PQI 11 Bacterial Pneumonia Admission Rate                       0.0001 [‐0.0005,0.0006]              0.0004 [‐0.0002,0.0009]    17,674,454 0.0172
PQI 12 Urinary Tract Infection Admission Rate                  ‐0.0001 [‐0.0004,0.0002]              0.0000 [‐0.0003,0.0003]    17,674,454 0.0070
PQI 13 Angina without Procedure Admission Rate              N 0.0005 [0.0004,0.0007]***         N 0.0005 [0.0004,0.0007]***     17,674,454 0.0014
PQI 14 Uncontrolled Diabetes Admission rate                     0.0001 [‐0.0001,0.0003]             ‐0.0001 [‐0.0003,0.0001]    17,674,454 0.0007
PQI 15 Adult Asthma Admission Rate                          Y ‐0.0006 [‐0.0009,‐0.0002]*** Y ‐0.0006 [‐0.0009,‐0.0003]*** 17,674,454 0.0146
PQI 16 Rate of Lower‐extremity Amputation                   Y ‐0.0005 [‐0.0006,‐0.0004]*** Y ‐0.0006 [‐0.0007,‐0.0005]*** 17,674,454 0.0023
Patient Safety Indicators
PSI 1 Complications of Anesthesia                               0.0000 [‐0.0001,0.0002]             ‐0.0001 [‐0.0002,0.0001]      5,822,429 0.0008
PSI 2 Death in Low‐Mortality DRGs                           Y ‐0.0001 [‐0.0001,‐0.0000]**       Y ‐0.0002 [‐0.0002,‐0.0001]***    8,223,877 0.0003
PSI 3 Pressure Ulcer                                        Y ‐0.0040 [‐0.0051,‐0.0029]*** Y ‐0.0037 [‐0.0049,‐0.0024]***         3,518,425 0.0110
PSI 4 Failure to Rescue                                         0.0106 [0.0041,0.0171]***       N 0.0073 [0.0008,0.0138]**          108,149 0.0955
PSI 6 Iatrogenic Pneumothorax, Provider Level                   0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0001]              0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0001]    12,720,445 0.0005
PSI 7 Selected Infections Due to Medical Care               Y ‐0.0005 [‐0.0007,‐0.0004]*** Y ‐0.0006 [‐0.0008,‐0.0004]*** 12,310,324 0.0021
PSI 8 Postoperative Hip Fracture                            N 0.0000 [‐0.0001,‐0.0000]** N 0.0000 [‐0.0001,‐0.0000]**             2,944,801 0.0002
PSI 9 Postoperative Hemorrhage or Hematoma                  N 0.0002 [0.0001,0.0004]**               0.0000 [‐0.0002,0.0002]      4,403,970 0.0024
PSI 10 Postop. Physio. and Metab. Derangement               Y ‐0.0002 [‐0.0004,‐0.0000]**       Y ‐0.0002 [‐0.0003,0.0000]*       2,200,834 0.0008
PSI 11 Postop. Respiratory Failure                          Y ‐0.0008 [‐0.0017,0.0001]*              0.0002 [‐0.0006,0.0010]      1,897,941 0.0058
PSI 12 Postop. Pul. Embolism or Deep Vein Thromb.           Y ‐0.0010 [‐0.0017,‐0.0004]*** Y ‐0.0009 [‐0.0015,‐0.0004]***         4,392,033 0.0068
PSI 13 Postoperative Sepsis                                 Y ‐0.0023 [‐0.0036,‐0.0009]*** Y ‐0.0026 [‐0.0036,‐0.0016]***           424,437 0.0053
PSI 14 Postoperative Would Dehiscence                       Y ‐0.0014 [‐0.0017,‐0.0010]*** Y ‐0.0015 [‐0.0019,‐0.0012]***           939,696 0.0022
PSI 15 Accident. Puncture or Laceration, Provider           Y ‐0.0007 [‐0.0009,‐0.0005]*** Y ‐0.0010 [‐0.0012,‐0.0008]*** 13,049,551 0.0034
PSI 17 Birth Trauma ‐ Injury to Neonate                        ‐0.0002 [‐0.0006,0.0003]              0.0001 [‐0.0003,0.0006]      3,976,866 0.0032
PSI 18 Ob. Trauma ‐ Vag. Deliv. with Instrument                 0.0008 [‐0.0057,0.0073]         N 0.0076 [0.0011,0.0140]**          236,512 0.1740
PSI 19 Ob. Trauma ‐ Vag. Deliv. without Instrument          N 0.0026 [0.0010,0.0041]***         N 0.0022 [0.0006,0.0038]***       2,463,695 0.0365
PSI 20 Obstetric Trauma ‐ Cesarean Delivery                 Y ‐0.0025 [‐0.0030,‐0.0019]*** Y ‐0.0025 [‐0.0030,‐0.0020]***         1,248,050 0.0067
PSI 22 Iatrogenic Pneumothorax, Area Level                      0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0001]              0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0001]    12,722,192 0.0007
PSI 23 Selected Infections Due to Medical Care, Area Y ‐0.0007 [‐0.0008,‐0.0005]*** Y ‐0.0007 [‐0.0009,‐0.0006]*** 15,515,612 0.0029
PSI 24 Postoperative Wound Dehiscence, Area                 Y ‐0.0001 [‐0.0002,‐0.0001]*** Y ‐0.0001 [‐0.0002,‐0.0001]*** 12,398,272 0.0003
PSI 25 Accidental Puncture or Laceration, Area              Y ‐0.0008 [‐0.0009,‐0.0006]*** Y ‐0.0011 [‐0.0013,‐0.0009]*** 13,053,510 0.0038
PSI 27 Postoperative Hemorrhage or Hemat., Area                 0.0000 [‐0.0001,0.0001]             ‐0.0001 [‐0.0001,0.0000]    13,393,334 0.0015
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
Y and N indicate statistically significant gains and losses, respectively.
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means are weighted using discharge weights
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Risk adjusters include six sets of risk adjustment variables: demographic characteristics, the number of diagnoses on the discharge record, individual
components of the Charlson Score measure of comorbidities, AHRQ comorbidity measures, All‐Patient Refined (APR)‐DRGs, and All‐Payer Severity‐
adjusted (APS)‐DRGs. See Appendix 2.
Regressions in this table estimated in the sample of nonelderly discharges.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Table 4. Insurance and outcomes in BRFSS
                                                                                                         Access and Preventive Outcomes
                                   (1)                      (2)                 (3)                         (4)                    (5)                  (6)                    (7)                  (8)
                                                                      Could not Access Care                              Cholesterol Check in                         Mammogram in Last
                            Any Health Plan       Any Personal Doctor      due to Cost               On BP Medication          Last Year        Flu Shot in Last Year         Year            PSA in Last Year
MA*After                        0.0496                   0.0126              ‐0.0306                      0.0304                ‐0.0152                0.0168               ‐0.0136               0.0048
                          [0.0399, 0.0593]***      [0.0010, 0.0241]** [‐0.0395, ‐0.0216]***          [‐0.0144, 0.0752]     [‐0.0357, 0.0052]     [0.0015, 0.0320]**    [‐0.0406, 0.0133]     [‐0.0431, 0.0527]

MA*During                       0.0137                   0.0078                  ‐0.0168                  0.0704                0.0050                0.0071                ‐0.0277               ‐0.0331
                          [0.0012, 0.0262]**        [‐0.0067, 0.0223]     [‐0.0274, ‐0.0063]***     [0.0187, 0.1222]***    [‐0.0201, 0.0302]     [‐0.0105, 0.0246]    [‐0.0595, 0.0041] *    [‐0.0908, 0.0246]

After                           0.0065                  0.0115                   0.0115                   0.0205                0.0175                0.1060                0.0317                0.0169
                          [0.0032, 0.0097]***     [0.0080, 0.0149]***      [0.0086, 0.0143]***      [0.0109, 0.0300]***   [0.0125, 0.0225]***   [0.1027, 0.1099]***   [0.0245, 0.0388]***   [0.0041, 0.0296]***

During                          0.0060                  0.0064                    0.0002                  0.0340                0.0112                0.0649                0.0214                0.0120
                          [0.0019, 0.0101]***     [0.0020, 0.0109]***        [‐0.0034, 0.0038]      [0.0200, 0.0480]***   [0.0036, 0.0187]***   [0.0607, 0.0692]***   [0.0127, 0.0301]***    [‐0.0037, 0.0276]

MA                              0.0814                  0.0765                   ‐0.0862               ‐0.1390              ‐0.0230                   0.0204                0.1200                ‐0.0047
                          [0.0698, 0.0930]***     [0.0636, 0.0894]***     [‐0.0967, ‐0.0756]*** [‐0.1816, ‐0.0971]*** [‐0.0442, ‐0.0018]**      [0.0049, 0.0359]***   [0.0923, 0.1471]***    [‐0.0528, 0.0434]

Constant                        0.8200                  0.7860                   0.1720                   0.7790                0.7130                0.2100                0.5980                0.6960
                          [0.8099, 0.8293]***     [0.7753, 0.7966]***      [0.1631, 0.1806]***      [0.7536, 0.8044]***   [0.6974, 0.7291]***   [0.1994, 0.2205]***   [0.5766, 0.6188]***   [0.6607, 0.7305]***

N (Nonelderly)                  1,658,293               1,658,784                1,659,567                  243,497            724,819              1,410,193              373,036               114,573
R Squared                          0.018                   0.021                   0.008                     0.016              0.008                 0.017                 0.006                 0.005
MA Before                         0.8877                  0.8556                  0.0937                    0.6358             0.6960                0.2246                0.7155                0.6851
Non‐MA Before                     0.8119                  0.7651                  0.1527                    0.6820             0.6756                0.1988                0.6130                0.6461
MA After                          0.9432                  0.8796                  0.0750                    0.6897             0.6998                0.3452                0.7328                0.7061
Non‐MA After                      0.8167                  0.7751                  0.1647                    0.7017             0.6954                0.3029                0.6441                0.6640
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
All specifications and means are weighted using population weights
All specifications include state fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2009, monthly
Source: BRFSS 2004‐2009 authors' calculations. See text for more details
Table 5: Cost Regressions on the Hospital‐Year Level, Excluding Q3, in NIS
                                            (1)                      (2)                     (3)                    (4)
                                   Total Costs, $Mill         Log Total Costs         Total Costs/LOS       Total Costs/Disch.
MA* After 2006                            9.544                    ‐0.003                  16.123                154.602
                                     [‐4.669,23.758]           [‐0.043,0.037]        [‐32.972,65.218]       [‐181.444,490.648]
N (All Ages)                              3,869                     3,869                  3,869                   3,869
Mean MA Before 2006                      152.292                   18.491                1,328.481              7,844.672
Mean Non‐MA Before 2006                  121.030                   18.178                1,318.436              7,451.341
Mean MA After 2006                       230.174                   18.798                1,629.457              9,576.684
Mean Non‐MA After 2006                   152.690                   18.381                1,557.693              8,728.628
MA*After 2006 Divided by Year to Investigate Dynamics
MA* 2008                                  22.441                   ‐0.006                  19.677                231.422
                                    [3.310,41.572]**           [‐0.043,0.032]        [‐41.922,81.276]       [‐199.535,662.380]
MA*2007                                   1.869                    ‐0.001                  14.008                108.884
                                    [‐10.152,13.890]           [‐0.052,0.050]        [‐36.777,64.793]       [‐231.317,449.085]
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported.
All specifications and means are on hospital‐year level, weighted by sum of the discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, annually.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Table 6: Insurance and Outcomes by Age in NIS
                                   (1)                  (2)                    (3)                    (4)                (5)                  (6)                (7)                 (8)                (9)
                              Uninsured             Medicaid                Private               Medicare             Other             CommCare          Length of Stay   Log Length of Stay    Emergency Admit
All Ages (100% of sample, including missing ages)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0153              0.0238                 ‐0.0183                 0.0039             0.0059               0.0076            ‐0.0626              0.0006               ‐0.0367
                        [‐0.0201,‐0.0104]*** [0.0161,0.0315]*** [‐0.0248,‐0.0119]*** [‐0.0003,0.0081]* [0.0010,0.0109]** [0.0076,0.0077]*** [‐0.1102,‐0.0150]** [‐0.0090,0.0103]                 [‐0.0585,‐0.0149]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0409              0.1536                  0.3693                 0.4214             0.0148               0.0000             5.8833              1.5099                0.4789
Nonelderly (age<65) (66% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0231              0.0389                 ‐0.0306                 0.0042             0.0106               0.0124            ‐0.0504             ‐0.0012              ‐0.0202
                        [‐0.0300,‐0.0162]*** [0.0265,0.0512]*** [‐0.0378,‐0.0233]*** [0.0013,0.0070]*** [0.0041,0.0171]*** [0.0123,0.0124]*** [‐0.0999,‐0.0008]** [‐0.0111,0.0086]               [‐0.0397,‐0.0007]**
Mean MA Before                   0.0643              0.2460                  0.5631                 0.1073             0.0193               0.0000             5.4256              1.4267               0.3868
Elderly (age 65+) (34% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0016              0.0020                 ‐0.0015                 0.0021            ‐0.0011               0.0001            ‐0.0640              0.0049               ‐0.0675
                        [‐0.0025,‐0.0006]*** [0.0006,0.0034]*** [‐0.0122,0.0092]              [‐0.0098,0.0140]   [‐0.0054,0.0033] [0.0001,0.0001]*** [‐0.1211,‐0.0070]** [‐0.0049,0.0148]        [‐0.0951,‐0.0398]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0045              0.0096                  0.0671                 0.9112             0.0076               0.0000             6.5975              1.6396                0.6226
Age<19 (18% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0154              0.0720                 ‐0.0575                ‐0.0010             0.0019               0.0026            ‐0.0672             ‐0.0024              0.0192
                           [‐0.0361,0.0053] [0.0454,0.0987]*** [‐0.0680,‐0.0470]*** [‐0.0050,0.0029]             [‐0.0025,0.0062] [0.0026,0.0026]*** [‐0.1192,‐0.0153]** [‐0.0104,0.0056]        [0.0132,0.0252]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0199              0.3122                  0.6515                 0.0004             0.0160               0.0000             5.2987              1.3623              0.1287
Age 19‐26 (7% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0407              0.0449                 ‐0.0210                 0.0013             0.0155               0.0204            ‐0.0134              0.0008               ‐0.0252
                        [‐0.0491,‐0.0323]*** [0.0297,0.0600]*** [‐0.0306,‐0.0113]*** [‐0.0034,0.0061] [0.0092,0.0218]*** [0.0204,0.0205]*** [‐0.0646,0.0377]                 [‐0.0079,0.0096]    [‐0.0423,‐0.0082]***
Mean MA Before                   0.1266              0.4298                  0.3880                 0.0339             0.0216               0.0000             4.6897              1.3344                0.3859
Age 27‐30 (4% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0221              0.0433                 ‐0.0372                 0.0019             0.0141               0.0137             0.0899              0.0103              ‐0.0209
                        [‐0.0302,‐0.0139]*** [0.0272,0.0593]*** [‐0.0461,‐0.0283]*** [‐0.0025,0.0062] [0.0074,0.0208]*** [0.0136,0.0137]*** [0.0376,0.1423]*** [0.0022,0.0184]**                 [‐0.0366,‐0.0051]**
Mean MA Before                   0.0825              0.2659                  0.5805                 0.0519             0.0192               0.0000             4.5374              1.3464               0.3144
Age 31‐40 (10% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0304              0.0313                 ‐0.0130                 0.0026             0.0095               0.0121            ‐0.1187             ‐0.0041              ‐0.0240
                        [‐0.0374,‐0.0234]*** [0.0215,0.0411]*** [‐0.0206,‐0.0054]*** [‐0.0016,0.0068]           [0.0012,0.0179]** [0.0120,0.0122]*** [‐0.1819,‐0.0555]*** [‐0.0142,0.0060]       [‐0.0459,‐0.0021]**
Mean MA Before                   0.0841              0.2118                  0.5962                 0.0883             0.0196               0.0000             4.8814              1.3839               0.3914
Age 41‐54 (15% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0283              0.0230                 ‐0.0247                 0.0155             0.0146               0.0163             0.0504              0.0068               ‐0.0513
                        [‐0.0377,‐0.0189]*** [0.0154,0.0306]*** [‐0.0323,‐0.0171]*** [0.0119,0.0191]*** [0.0055,0.0237]*** [0.0162,0.0163]*** [‐0.0104,0.1111]               [‐0.0057,0.0194]    [‐0.0830,‐0.0195]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0855              0.1975                  0.5110                 0.1842             0.0220               0.0000             5.7564              1.4839                0.5807
Age 55‐64 (12% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0120              0.0181                 ‐0.0145                ‐0.0036             0.0120               0.0147            ‐0.1480             ‐0.0090               ‐0.0462
                        [‐0.0176,‐0.0063]*** [0.0110,0.0251]*** [‐0.0221,‐0.0069]*** [‐0.0074,0.0001]* [0.0049,0.0192]*** [0.0146,0.0147]*** [‐0.2012,‐0.0948]*** [‐0.0213,0.0034]               [‐0.0759,‐0.0166]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0512              0.1344                  0.5511                 0.2436             0.0197               0.0000             6.3052              1.5602                0.5541
Age 65‐74 (13% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0028              0.0017                 ‐0.0006                 0.0048            ‐0.0031               0.0001            ‐0.0136              0.0086               ‐0.0572
                        [‐0.0040,‐0.0017]*** [‐0.0001,0.0035]*         [‐0.0131,0.0119]       [‐0.0095,0.0190]   [‐0.0084,0.0023] [0.0001,0.0001]*** [‐0.0623,0.0351]        [‐0.0018,0.0189]    [‐0.0844,‐0.0300]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0078              0.0174                  0.1131                 0.8518             0.0099               0.0000             6.4894              1.6001                0.5693
Age 75+ (21% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0009              0.0022                 ‐0.0010                ‐0.0003             0.0001               0.0000            ‐0.0833              0.0038               ‐0.0733
                         [‐0.0018,‐0.0000]** [0.0010,0.0034]*** [‐0.0108,0.0087]              [‐0.0109,0.0103]   [‐0.0037,0.0039] [0.0000,0.0000]*** [‐0.1530,‐0.0136]** [‐0.0057,0.0133]        [‐0.1016,‐0.0451]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0029              0.0059                  0.0449                 0.9398             0.0065               0.0000             6.6496              1.6587                0.6484
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Sample sizes vary across specifications based on availability of dependent variable. 808 elderly discharges, including 466 discharges for age 75+ have CommCare in MA 2008 Q4.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Table 7: Insurance and Outcomes by Gender and Income in NIS
                                   (1)                  (2)                    (3)                    (4)             (5)                    (6)                   (7)              (8)                (9)
                              Uninsured             Medicaid                Private               Medicare           Other               CommCare           Length of Stay Log Length of Stay Emergency Admit
Female (59% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0182              0.0399                 ‐0.0357                 0.0046          0.0095                 0.0109               0.0035            0.0046            ‐0.0147
                        [‐0.0256,‐0.0108]*** [0.0264,0.0534]*** [‐0.0426,‐0.0288]*** [0.0014,0.0079]*** [0.0040,0.0149]*** [0.0109,0.0110]*** [‐0.0398,0.0468]              [‐0.0038,0.0129]  [‐0.0320,0.0026]*
Mean MA Before                   0.0443              0.2707                  0.5814                 0.0905          0.0131                 0.0000                5.1450           1.4050             0.3320
Male (41% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0300              0.0381                 ‐0.0238                 0.0035          0.0122                 0.0143              ‐0.1277           ‐0.0095            ‐0.0282
                        [‐0.0374,‐0.0226]*** [0.0273,0.0490]*** [‐0.0319,‐0.0158]*** [0.0010,0.0059]*** [0.0040,0.0204]*** [0.0143,0.0144]*** [‐0.1893,‐0.0662]*** [‐0.0216,0.0027] [‐0.0513,‐0.0051]**
Mean MA Before                   0.0908              0.2133                  0.5388                 0.1297          0.0360                 0.0165                5.7970           1.4555             0.4595
Patient's Zip Code in First (Lowest) Income Quartile (28% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0359              0.1050                 ‐0.0899                 0.0059          0.0148                 0.0130               0.0535            0.0158            ‐0.0570
                        [‐0.0440,‐0.0277]*** [0.0873,0.1227]*** [‐0.1004,‐0.0793]*** [0.0025,0.0093]*** [0.0035,0.0260]** [0.0130,0.0130]*** [‐0.0050,0.1119]* [0.0071,0.0244]*** [‐0.0703,‐0.0436]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0643              0.2460                  0.5631                 0.1073          0.0193                 0.0000                5.6074           1.4402             0.4665
Patient's Zip Code in Second Income Quartile (26% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0226              0.0447                 ‐0.0495                 0.0148          0.0126                 0.0165              ‐0.0941           ‐0.0081            ‐0.0190
                        [‐0.0309,‐0.0143]*** [0.0305,0.0590]*** [‐0.0595,‐0.0396]*** [0.0113,0.0184]*** [0.0053,0.0199]*** [0.0164,0.0165]*** [‐0.1310,‐0.0572]*** [‐0.0153,‐0.0009]** [‐0.0297,‐0.0083]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0643              0.2460                  0.5631                 0.1073          0.0193                 0.0000                5.5681           1.4451             0.4437
Patient's Zip Code in Third Income Quartile (23% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0234              0.0217                 ‐0.0106                 0.0020          0.0103                 0.0130              ‐0.0890            0.0017            ‐0.0107
                        [‐0.0295,‐0.0174]*** [0.0098,0.0336]*** [‐0.0187,‐0.0026]** [‐0.0010,0.0050] [0.0069,0.0138]*** [0.0130,0.0130]*** [‐0.1417,‐0.0363]*** [‐0.0061,0.0095]               [‐0.0392,0.0178]
Mean MA Before                   0.0643              0.2460                  0.5631                 0.1073          0.0193                 0.0000               5.3885            1.4240             0.3671
Patient's Zip Code in Fourth (Highest) Income Quartile (21% of sample)
Ma*After                        ‐0.0059              0.0006                  0.0010                ‐0.0007          0.0050                 0.0090              ‐0.0911           ‐0.0185            0.0098
                           [‐0.0159,0.0042]     [‐0.0080,0.0093]       [‐0.0116,0.0135]       [‐0.0066,0.0051] [0.0011,0.0089]** [0.0090,0.0090]*** [‐0.1957,0.0136]*       [‐0.0478,0.0108]   [‐0.0324,0.0519]
Mean MA Before                   0.0643              0.2460                  0.5631                 0.1073          0.0193                 0.0000                5.2333           1.4067             0.3189
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Regressions in this table estimated in the sample of nonelderly discharges. Sample sizes vary across specifications based on availability of dependent variable.
Results for missing gender and income categories not shown.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Table 8: Insurance and Outcomes by Race in NIS
                                   (1)                  (2)                    (3)                    (4)                (5)                  (6)                  (7)              (8)                 (9)
                              Uninsured             Medicaid                Private               Medicare             Other            CommCare            Length of Stay Log Length of Stay Emergency Admit
White (45% of sample)
MA*After                        ‐0.0156              0.0192                 ‐0.0193                0.0071             0.0086               0.0125              ‐0.0665           ‐0.0050             ‐0.0234
                        [‐0.0218,‐0.0095]*** [0.0105,0.0279]*** [‐0.0266,‐0.0121]*** [0.0042,0.0101]*** [0.0053,0.0120]*** [0.0124,0.0126]*** [‐0.1282,‐0.0048]** [‐0.0191,0.0091]             [‐0.0480,0.0011]*
Mean MA Before                   0.0524              0.1647                  0.6475                 0.1147            0.0207               0.0000               5.3834            1.4270              0.3786
Black (12% of sample)
MA*After                        ‐0.0287              0.0616                 ‐0.0474                0.0043             0.0103               0.0138               0.1013            0.0107             ‐0.0019
                        [‐0.0383,‐0.0192]*** [0.0476,0.0755]*** [‐0.0573,‐0.0375]*** [‐0.0032,0.0118] [0.0026,0.0179]*** [0.0138,0.0139]*** [0.0163,0.1862]**               [‐0.0026,0.0240]    [‐0.0516,0.0477]
Mean MA Before                   0.1012              0.4469                  0.3008                 0.1363             0.0149              0.0000                5.9492           1.4840              0.5226
Hispanic (12% of sample)
MA*After                        ‐0.0491              0.1058                 ‐0.0627                ‐0.0002            0.0062               0.0122               0.0203            0.0023             ‐0.0200
                         [‐0.0943,‐0.0039]** [0.0476,0.1639]*** [‐0.0756,‐0.0498]*** [‐0.0054,0.0051]            [‐0.0036,0.0160] [0.0121,0.0122]*** [‐0.0368,0.0774]       [‐0.0091,0.0138] [‐0.0320,‐0.0079]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0903              0.5390                  0.2773                 0.0801             0.0134              0.0000                5.1288           1.3786              0.4179
Asian (2% of sample)
MA*After                        ‐0.0223              ‐0.0175                 0.0222                 0.0025             0.0152              0.0141                0.1930           0.0289              0.0037
                        [‐0.0300,‐0.0147]*** [‐0.0275,‐0.0075]*** [0.0125,0.0319]*** [‐0.0020,0.0070] [0.0091,0.0213]*** [0.0141,0.0142]*** [0.0706,0.3153]*** [0.0128,0.0451]*** [‐0.0068,0.0143]
Mean MA Before                   0.0661               0.2911                 0.6070                 0.0250             0.0109               0.0000               5.0414           1.3643              0.2626
Native American (1% of sample)
MA*After                         0.0042               0.0542                 0.0694                ‐0.0538            ‐0.0739              ‐0.0009               0.4699           0.0201             ‐0.0905
                           [‐0.0091,0.0175] [0.0211,0.0872]*** [0.0538,0.0850]*** [‐0.0630,‐0.0447]*** [‐0.1255,‐0.0223]*** [‐0.0009,‐0.0009]*** [0.1538,0.7860]*** [‐0.0033,0.0436]* [‐0.1333,‐0.0478]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0514              0.3330                  0.4700                 0.1305            0.0152               0.0000                5.3411           1.4772              0.2774
Other Race (3% of sample)
MA*After                        ‐0.0248              0.0048                  0.0032                ‐0.0017            0.0185               0.0146              ‐0.1673           ‐0.0212             ‐0.0260
                         [‐0.0454,‐0.0041]** [‐0.0054,0.0149]          [‐0.0154,0.0218]       [‐0.0087,0.0053] [0.0103,0.0267]*** [0.0143,0.0148]*** [‐0.3827,0.0480]       [‐0.0563,0.0138] [‐0.0421,‐0.0100]***
Mean MA Before                   0.1107               0.3108                 0.5238                 0.0331             0.0217              0.0000                5.7428           1.4287              0.2211
Unknown Race (25% of sample)
MA*After                        ‐0.0430               0.0657                 0.0120                ‐0.0098            ‐0.0250              0.0095              ‐0.5677           ‐0.0246             ‐0.0951
                        [‐0.0590,‐0.0269]*** [0.0536,0.0779]*** [‐0.0066,0.0305] [‐0.0145,‐0.0050]*** [‐0.0336,‐0.0164]*** [0.0095,0.0095]*** [‐0.6256,‐0.5098]*** [‐0.0347,‐0.0146]*** [‐0.1065,‐0.0836]***
Mean MA Before                   0.0596              0.2316                  0.6044                 0.0756            0.0289               0.0000                5.6372           1.4452              0.2554
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Regressions in this table estimated in the sample of nonelderly discharges. Sample sizes vary across specifications based on availability of dependent variable.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 1: Insurance in CPS
                                                                                Mutually Exclusive Types of Coverage
                                    (1)                      (2)                      (3)                     (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                                                                              Private Insurance
                                                                                Unrelated to
                               Uninsured                    ESHI                Employment                Medicaid             Medicare              VA/Military
MA*After                         ‐0.0571                   0.0345                  ‐0.0086                  0.0351              ‐0.0004                ‐0.0036
                         [‐0.0605,‐0.0537]*** [0.0283,0.0408]***           [‐0.0106,‐0.0066]*** [0.0317,0.0386]***      [‐0.0012,0.0004]       [‐0.0050,‐0.0023]***
                         [‐0.0604,‐0.0536]+++ [0.0286,0.0403]+++           [‐0.0105,‐0.0066]+++ [0.0317,0.0385]+++      [‐0.0011,0.0004]+      [‐0.0051,‐0.0025]+++
MA*During                        ‐0.0049                   0.0024                   0.0066                 ‐0.0005               0.0011                ‐0.0047
                         [‐0.0093,‐0.0005]** [‐0.0016,0.0064]              [0.0036,0.0096]***      [‐0.0036,0.0025]     [0.0004,0.0019]***     [‐0.0061,‐0.0034]***
                         [‐0.0097,‐0.0005]++ [‐0.0020,0.0060]              [0.0041,0.0102]+++      [‐0.0036,0.0022]     [0.0004,0.0019]+++     [‐0.006,‐0.0032]+++
After                             0.0007                  ‐0.0134                  ‐0.0006                  0.0101               0.0023                 0.0009
                         [‐0.0027,0.0042]         [‐0.0197,‐0.0072]*** [‐0.0026,0.0015]            [0.0066,0.0136]***   [0.0015,0.0031]***     [‐0.0004,0.0022]
                         [‐0.0027,0.0037]+        [‐0.0192,‐0.0077]        [‐0.0025,0.0013]+       [0.0068,0.0135]+++   [0.0016,0.003]+++      [‐0.0003,0.0023]+
During                            0.0058                  ‐0.0077                  ‐0.0004                  0.0023               0.0010                ‐0.0009
                         [0.0014,0.0101]**        [‐0.0117,‐0.0037]*** [‐0.0034,0.0025]            [‐0.0008,0.0053]     [0.0002,0.0018]**      [‐0.0022,0.0004]
                         [0.0015,0.0105]+++       [‐0.0113,‐0.0033]+++ [‐0.0039,0.0020]+           [‐0.0004,0.0053]     [0.0003,0.0018]+++     [‐0.0024,0.0003]+
MA                               ‐0.0335                   0.0513                   0.0075                 ‐0.0082              ‐0.0114                ‐0.0056
                         [‐0.0352,‐0.0319]*** [0.0490,0.0536]***           [0.0067,0.0083]***      [‐0.0098,‐0.0067]*** [‐0.0118,‐0.0111]***   [‐0.0061,‐0.0051]***
                         [‐0.0718,0.0013]+        [0.0144,0.1127]+         [‐0.0606,0.0084]+       [‐0.0683,0.0444]     [‐0.0117,0.0016]+      [‐0.0633,0.0012]+
Constant                          0.1511                   0.6531                   0.0459                  0.1195               0.0172                 0.0132
                         [0.1494,0.1527]***       [0.6508,0.6555]***       [0.0450,0.0467]***      [0.1180,0.1210]***   [0.0169,0.0175]***     [0.0127,0.0137]***
                         [0.1164,0.1889]+++       [0.5922,0.6898]+++       [0.0449,0.1138]+++      [0.067,0.1796]+++     [0.0041,0.0175]+++    [0.0065,0.0708]+++
N (Nonelderly)                  1,129,221               1,129,221                 1,129,221               1,129,221            1,129,221              1,129,221
R Squared                         0.0152                   0.0160                   0.0030                  0.0071               0.0013                 0.0066
MA Before                         0.1176                   0.7044                   0.0534                  0.1113               0.0057                 0.0076
Non‐MA Before                     0.1732                   0.6358                   0.0607                  0.1066               0.0090                 0.0147
MA After                          0.0612                   0.7255                   0.0442                  0.1565               0.0077                 0.0049
Non‐MA After                      0.1747                   0.6214                   0.0602                  0.1167               0.0113                 0.0157
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
95% bootstrapped CI, blocks by state, 1000 reps: +++ Significant at .01, ++ Significant at .05, + Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using sample weights.
All specifications include state fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2009, annually. Omitted state: Alabama.
Source: CPS March Supplement 2004‐2009 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 2: Insurance by Age in CPS
                                    (1)                     (2)                      (3)                       (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                               Uninsured                   ESHI                   Medicaid                 Medicare              Military             Private
Age<19 (32% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0351                  0.0210                   0.0416                   ‐0.0002              ‐0.0046              ‐0.0227
                          [‐0.0518,‐0.0183]***       [‐0.0223,0.0644]        [0.0047,0.0784]**         [‐0.0018,0.0013]  [‐0.0070,‐0.0022]*** [‐0.0380,‐0.0074]***
Mean MA Before                    0.0728                  0.7116                   0.1587                    0.0006               0.0055               0.0508
Age 19‐26 (9% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.1410                  0.1000                   0.0454                    0.0011               0.0037              ‐0.0091
                          [‐0.1622,‐0.1198]*** [0.0585,0.1415]***            [0.0086,0.0823]**         [‐0.0015,0.0037]     [‐0.0038,0.0111]     [‐0.0320,0.0137]
Mean MA Before                    0.2654                  0.5321                   0.0977                    0.0000               0.0018               0.1030
Age 27‐30 (5% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.1662                  0.1269                   0.0329                    0.0085              ‐0.0026               0.0006
                          [‐0.1927,‐0.1397]*** [0.0859,0.1679]***           [0.0195,0.0463]***       [0.0063,0.0107]***     [‐0.0063,0.0010]     [‐0.0459,0.0471]
Mean MA Before                    0.2691                  0.5984                   0.0934                    0.0000               0.0019               0.0372
Age 31‐40 (14% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0711                  0.0372                   0.0506                    0.0066              ‐0.0038              ‐0.0195
                          [‐0.1039,‐0.0382]*** [0.0084,0.0659]**            [0.0305,0.0708]***         [‐0.0079,0.0211]  [‐0.0067,‐0.0010]*** [‐0.0372,‐0.0018]**
Mean MA Before                    0.1417                  0.7050                   0.0959                    0.0032               0.0049               0.0492
Age 41‐54 (21% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0424                  0.0129                   0.0295                    0.0006              ‐0.0029               0.0023
                          [‐0.0649,‐0.0198]***       [‐0.0360,0.0618]        [0.0058,0.0531]**         [‐0.0071,0.0084]   [‐0.0055,‐0.0003]**    [‐0.0096,0.0141]
Mean MA Before                    0.0872                  0.7693                   0.0857                    0.0041               0.0074               0.0464
Age 55‐64 (9% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0408                  0.0292                   0.0396                   ‐0.0123              ‐0.0114              ‐0.0042
                          [‐0.0541,‐0.0276]***       [‐0.0428,0.1012]       [0.0101,0.0690]***         [‐0.0302,0.0056]  [‐0.0151,‐0.0078]***    [‐0.0312,0.0228]
Mean MA Before                    0.0806                  0.7594                   0.0525                    0.0298               0.0243               0.0534
Age 65‐74 (5% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0150                  0.0734                   0.0343                   ‐0.0665               0.0165              ‐0.0427
                          [‐0.0040,‐0.0259]*** [0.0011,0.1458]**            [0.0175,0.0511]***        [‐0.1340,0.0009]*     [‐0.0172,0.0503]    [‐0.1280,0.0426]
Mean MA Before                    0.0159                  0.3945                   0.0565                    0.2466               0.0144               0.2721
Age 75+ (4% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0071                  0.0798                   0.0065                   ‐0.0028              ‐0.0025              ‐0.0092
                          [‐0.0096,‐0.0046]*** [0.0180,0.1416]**              [‐0.0171,0.0300]      [‐0.0044,‐0.0011]***    [‐0.0055,0.0005]    [‐0.0274,0.0090]
Mean MA Before                    0.0062                  0.3178                   0.0406                    0.3493               0.0083               0.2778
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using sample weights.
All specifications include state fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2009, annually. Omitted state: Alabama.
Source: CPS March Supplement 2004‐2009 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 3: Insurance by Gender and Income in CPS
                                    (1)                       (2)                    (3)                       (4)                 (5)                  (6)
                               Uninsured                     ESHI                 Medicaid                 Medicare             Military             Private
Female (51% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0547                    0.0284                 0.0419                   ‐0.0009             ‐0.0018              ‐0.0128
                          [‐0.0720,‐0.0374]*** [0.0008,0.0560]**            [0.0233,0.0605]***         [‐0.0045,0.0026] [‐0.0032,‐0.0005]*** [‐0.0212,‐0.0043]***
Mean MA Before                    0.0937                    0.6496                 0.1037                    0.0513              0.0059               0.0958
Male (49% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0719                    0.0476                 0.0367                    0.0014             ‐0.0057              ‐0.0081
                          [‐0.0787,‐0.0652]*** [0.0081,0.0871]**            [0.0156,0.0579]***         [‐0.0005,0.0033] [‐0.0081,‐0.0034]***    [‐0.0298,0.0137]
Mean MA Before                    0.1274                    0.6713                 0.0950                    0.0303              0.0098               0.0663
Patient's Zip Code in First (Lowest) Income Quartile (15% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.1232                   ‐0.0206                 0.1396                   ‐0.0007             ‐0.0043               0.0092
                          [‐0.1612,‐0.0852]***       [‐0.0440,0.0027]*      [0.1172,0.1620]***         [‐0.0178,0.0165]   [‐0.0090,0.0004]*     [‐0.0375,0.0559]
Mean MA Before                    0.2188                    0.2154                 0.4621                    0.0205              0.0086               0.0746
Patient's Zip Code in Second Income Quartile (22% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.1222                    0.0635                 0.0595                    0.0059              0.0087              ‐0.0155
                          [‐0.1917,‐0.0526]***        [‐0.0203,0.1473]      [0.0231,0.0959]***      [0.0022,0.0097]***     [‐0.0070,0.0245]     [‐0.0457,0.0148]
Mean MA Before                    0.2108                    0.5354                 0.1600                    0.0039              0.0051               0.0848
Patient's Zip Code in Third Income Quartile (29% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0796                    0.0777                 0.0067                   ‐0.0026             ‐0.0100               0.0078
                          [‐0.0912,‐0.0679]*** [0.0400,0.1154]***             [‐0.0146,0.0281]         [‐0.0111,0.0059] [‐0.0141,‐0.0060]***    [‐0.0195,0.0351]
Mean MA Before                    0.1410                    0.7130                 0.0778                    0.0053              0.0122               0.0507
Patient's Zip Code in Fourth Income Quartile (33% of sample)
Ma*After                         ‐0.0160                    0.0334                 0.0109                    0.0007             ‐0.0043              ‐0.0247
                          [‐0.0214,‐0.0107]*** [0.0062,0.0606]**             [‐0.0020,0.0238]*        [‐0.0007,0.0021]   [‐0.0075,‐0.0010]** [‐0.0364,‐0.0131]***
Mean MA Before                     0.060                    0.8799                 0.0120                    0.0016              0.0051               0.0417
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using sample weights.
All specifications include state fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2009, annually. Omitted state: Alabama.
Source: CPS March Supplement 2004‐2009 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 4: Insurance by Race in CPS
                                    (1)                       (2)                     (3)                     (4)                  (5)                (6)
                                Uninsured                    ESHI                 Medicaid                Medicare              Military            Private
White (78% of sample)
MA*After                         ‐0.0568                    0.0473                  0.0261                  0.0002              ‐0.0047              ‐0.0121
                          [‐0.0691,‐0.0444]*** [0.0120,0.0827]***            [0.0000,0.0522]**        [‐0.0026,0.0030]  [‐0.0065,‐0.0029]***   [‐0.0224,‐0.0019]**
Mean MA Before                    0.1149                    0.7190                  0.0963                  0.0049               0.0078               0.0571
Black (11% of sample)
MA*After                         ‐0.1493                   ‐0.0094                  0.1636                 ‐0.0079               0.0085              ‐0.0056
                          [‐0.1774,‐0.1213]***        [‐0.0484,0.0296]      [0.1170,0.2103]*** [‐0.0138,‐0.0019]** [0.0036,0.0134]***           [‐0.0551,0.0440]
Mean MA Before                    0.2045                    0.5402                  0.2080                  0.0102               0.0000               0.0371
Hispanic (11% of sample)
MA*After                         ‐0.3239                   0.4516                  ‐0.1174                 ‐0.0007              ‐0.0029              ‐0.0067
                            [‐0.6683,0.0205]*       [0.3552,0.5479]***        [‐0.4071,0.1724]        [‐0.0023,0.0009]   [‐0.0053,‐0.0005]**    [‐0.0627,0.0493]
Mean MA Before                    0.4027                    0.2030                  0.3661                  0.0000               0.0000               0.0283
Asian (4% of sample)
MA*After                         ‐0.0754                   ‐0.0029                  0.0630                  0.0122              ‐0.0080              0.0111
                          [‐0.0999,‐0.0508]***        [‐0.0606,0.0549]      [0.0277,0.0983]***      [0.0061,0.0182]*** [‐0.0142,‐0.0019]**      [‐0.0373,0.0595]
Mean MA Before                    0.1796                    0.6308                  0.1275                  0.0027               0.0113              0.0481
Native American (1% of sample)
MA*After                         ‐0.1316                   ‐0.1769                  0.3094                 ‐0.0008               0.0025              ‐0.0026
                            [‐0.2802,0.0170]*         [‐0.4387,0.0849]        [‐0.0859,0.7047]        [‐0.0084,0.0068]     [‐0.0082,0.0131]     [‐0.0159,0.0107]
Mean MA Before                    0.1741                    0.7337                  0.0921                  0.0000               0.0000               0.0000
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using sample weights.
All specifications include state fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2009, annually. Omitted state: Alabama.
Source: CPS March Supplement 2004‐2009 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 5: Coefficients on Selected Covariates in NIS
                            (1) (preferred)       (2) (covariates)                               (2) (covariates cont.)                      (2) (covariates cont.)                      (2) (covariates cont.)
Dependent Variable            Uninsured             Uninsured
Ma*After                        ‐0.0231               ‐0.0228            Female                                  ‐0.0394      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0220          Charlson 6                  0.0255
                        [‐0.0300,‐0.0162]*** [‐0.0297,‐0.0158]***                                        [‐0.0453,‐0.0336]*** cm_dmcx        [‐0.0279,‐0.0161]***                         [0.0201,0.0308]***
MA*During                       ‐0.0129               ‐0.0131                 Gender Unknown                     ‐0.0058      AHRQ Comorb.            0.0720          Charlson 7                  0.0086
                        [‐0.0176,‐0.0083]*** [‐0.0177,‐0.0085]***                                           [‐0.0256,0.0139]  cm_drug         [0.0506,0.0933]***                          [0.0047,0.0124]***
2004 Q2                          0.0041                0.0036                 Black                               0.0067      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0009          Charlson 8                 ‐0.0333
                         [0.0025,0.0058]***    [0.0022,0.0050]***                                         [0.0019,0.0115]***  cm_htn_c          [‐0.0028,0.0010]                         [‐0.0407,‐0.0258]***
2004 Q3                          0.0044                0.0037                 Hispanic                            0.0362      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0115          Charlson 9                  0.0063
                         [0.0024,0.0065]***    [0.0018,0.0056]***                                         [0.0159,0.0565]***  cm_hypothy     [‐0.0142,‐0.0087]***                         [0.0020,0.0107]***
2004 Q4                          0.0038                0.0037                 Asian                               0.0187      AHRQ Comorb.            0.0044          Charlson 10                 0.0558
                         [0.0011,0.0065]***    [0.0010,0.0064]***                                         [0.0134,0.0240]***  cm_liver         [0.0004,0.0084]**                          [0.0427,0.0689]***
2005 Q1                          0.0020                0.0025                 Native American                     0.0008      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0332          Charlson 11                 0.0130
                           [‐0.0034,0.0074]      [‐0.0027,0.0077]                                           [‐0.0120,0.0137]  cm_lymph       [‐0.0408,‐0.0256]***                         [0.0071,0.0189]***
2005 Q2                          0.0059                0.0062                 Other Race                          0.0353      AHRQ Comorb.            0.0245          Charlson 12                ‐0.0036
                          [‐0.0004,0.0121]*     [0.0002,0.0122]**                                         [0.0167,0.0539]***  cm_lytes        [0.0203,0.0287]***                         [‐0.0060,‐0.0012]***
2005 Q3                          0.0112                0.0109                 Unknown Race                        0.0084      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0244          Charlson 13                ‐0.0193
                         [0.0037,0.0187]***    [0.0036,0.0182]***                                           [‐0.0043,0.0211]  cm_mets        [‐0.0293,‐0.0195]***                        [‐0.0244,‐0.0142]***
2005 Q4                          0.0093                0.0102                 Zip in First (Lowest)               0.0220      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0144          Charlson 14                ‐0.0066
                         [0.0024,0.0162]***    [0.0034,0.0170]***             Income Quartile             [0.0149,0.0291]***  cm_neuro       [‐0.0176,‐0.0111]***                        [‐0.0111,‐0.0021]***
2006 Q1                          0.0079                0.0095                 Zip in Second Income                0.0170      AHRQ Comorb.            0.0027          Charlson 15                 0.0248
                          [‐0.0005,0.0163]*     [0.0013,0.0176]**             Quartile                    [0.0107,0.0234]***  cm_obese         [0.0002,0.0053]**                          [0.0188,0.0309]***
2006 Q2                          0.0107                0.0118                 Zip in Third Income                 0.0092      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0439          Charlson 16                 0.0582
                          [0.0019,0.0195]**    [0.0033,0.0203]***             Quartile                    [0.0048,0.0137]***  cm_para        [‐0.0529,‐0.0349]***                         [0.0479,0.0686]***
2006 Q3                          0.0146                0.0157                 Zip in Unknown                      0.0470      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0140          Charlson 17                ‐0.0008
                         [0.0054,0.0237]***    [0.0067,0.0247]***             Income Quartile             [0.0138,0.0802]***  cm_perivasc    [‐0.0176,‐0.0105]***                           [‐0.0043,0.0028]
2006 Q4                                                                       Age                                 0.0039      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0061          Charlson 18                ‐0.0353
                                                                                                          [0.0030,0.0048]***  cm_psych       [‐0.0105,‐0.0018]***                        [‐0.0488,‐0.0219]***
2007 Q1                           0.0109                  0.0132              Age Squared                        ‐0.0001      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0043          Diagnosis count            ‐0.0047
                           [0.0030,0.0189]***      [0.0055,0.0210]***                                    [‐0.0001,‐0.0000]*** cm_pulmcirc    [‐0.0069,‐0.0016]***                        [‐0.0057,‐0.0038]***
2007 Q2                           0.0151                  0.0170              AHRQ Comorb.                       ‐0.0296      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0430          APRDRG                      0.0044
                           [0.0061,0.0241]***      [0.0082,0.0258]***         cm_aids                    [‐0.0385,‐0.0207]*** cm_renlfail    [‐0.0535,‐0.0325]***     Risk mortality      [0.0034,0.0054]***
2007 Q3                           0.0145                  0.0161              AHRQ Comorb.                        0.0901      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0283          APRDRG                      0.0013
                           [0.0049,0.0241]***      [0.0064,0.0258]***         cm_alcohol                  [0.0725,0.1077]***  cm_tumor       [‐0.0334,‐0.0231]***     Severity              [‐0.0005,0.0030]
2007 Q4                                                                       AHRQ Comorb.                        0.0063      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0489          APSDRG                      0.0014
                                                                              cm_anemdef                  [0.0038,0.0089]***  cm_ulcer       [‐0.0573,‐0.0405]***     Mortality Weight    [0.0009,0.0019]***
2008 Q1                           0.0120                  0.0154              AHRQ Comorb.                       ‐0.0191      AHRQ Comorb.           ‐0.0042          APSDRG                      0.0043
                            [0.0018,0.0222]**      [0.0052,0.0256]***         cm_arth                    [‐0.0251,‐0.0131]*** cm_valve       [‐0.0066,‐0.0017]***     LOS Weight           [0.0004,0.0083]**
2008 Q2                           0.0131                  0.0162              AHRQ Comorb.                       ‐0.0188      AHRQ Comorb.            0.0072          APSDRG                     ‐0.0056
                            [0.0033,0.0230]**      [0.0063,0.0262]***         cm_bldloss                 [‐0.0244,‐0.0133]*** cm_wghtloss     [0.0037,0.0107]***      Charge Weight      [‐0.0083,‐0.0028]***
2008 Q3                           0.0181                  0.0210              AHRQ Comorb.                       ‐0.0316      Charlson 1              0.0422
                           [0.0060,0.0303]***      [0.0088,0.0332]***         cm_chf                     [‐0.0386,‐0.0246]***                 [0.0331,0.0512]***
2008 Q4                           0.0164                  0.0202              AHRQ Comorb.                       ‐0.0157      Charlson 2              0.0086
                           [0.0055,0.0273]***      [0.0092,0.0313]***         cm_chrnlung                [‐0.0195,‐0.0119]***                 [0.0058,0.0115]***
Constant                          0.0708                  0.0373              AHRQ Comorb.                        0.0090      Charlson 3              0.0205
                           [0.0645,0.0772]***      [0.0196,0.0551]***         cm_coag                     [0.0070,0.0110]***                  [0.0139,0.0271]***
Hospital Indicators                 Yes                     Yes               AHRQ Comorb.                        0.0016      Charlson 4              0.0001
Covariates                          No             Yes, cont. next cols.      cm_depress                    [‐0.0007,0.0039]                    [‐0.0021,0.0023]
N (Nonelderly)                  23,860,930             23,860,930             AHRQ Comorb.                       ‐0.0570      Charlson 5             ‐0.0094
R Squared                         0.0659                  0.0939              cm_dm                      [‐0.0688,‐0.0452]***                [‐0.0131,‐0.0058]***
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
95% bootstrapped CI, blocks by state, 1000 reps: +++ Significant at .01, ++ Significant at .05, + Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means weighted using discharge weights.
Coefficients on hospital fixed effects not reported. Omitted categories: MA*Before, 2004 Q1, Male, White, Zip in Fourth Income Quartile.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 6: Inpatient and Pediatric Quality Indicators in NIS
Inpatient Quality Indicators                  Improvement? MA* After                Improvement? MA* After, Risk Adjusted         N, Mean MA Before
IQI 1 Esophageal Resection Volume                               0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0000]           N 0.0000 [0.0000,0.0000]**       23,847,297 0.0002
IQI 2 Pancreatic Resection Volume                           Y ‐0.0001 [‐0.0001,‐0.0000]***        N 0.0000 [‐0.0001,‐0.0000]***    23,847,297 0.0002
IQI 4 AAA Repair Volume                                         0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0000]                0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0000]     23,847,297 0.0004
IQI 6 Percut. Transluminal Cor. Angioplasty, Volume         Y ‐0.0010 [‐0.0019,‐0.0002]**             ‐0.0006 [‐0.0013,0.0001]     23,847,297 0.0162
IQI 7 Carotid Endarterectomy, Volume                        Y ‐0.0001 [‐0.0002,‐0.0000]***        Y ‐0.0002 [‐0.0002,‐0.0001]***   23,847,297 0.0013
IQI 8 Esophageal Resection Mortality                           ‐0.0010 [‐0.1050,0.1031]               ‐0.0065 [‐0.1066,0.0936]             953 0.0357
IQI 9 Pancreatic Resection Mortality                            0.0252 [‐0.0196,0.0701]                0.0249 [‐0.0219,0.0716]           2,327 0.0257
IQI 11 AAA Repair Mortality                                 Y ‐0.0331 [‐0.0516,‐0.0146]***        Y ‐0.0305 [‐0.0477,‐0.0133]***         6,580 0.0731
IQI 12 CABG Mortality                                           0.0014 [‐0.0017,0.0045]           N 0.0040 [0.0006,0.0073]**           108,373 0.0132
IQI 13 Craniotomy Mortality                                 Y ‐0.0107 [‐0.0183,‐0.0031]***        Y ‐0.0078 [‐0.0159,0.0003]*           66,356 0.0423
IQI 14 Hip Replacement Mortality                               ‐0.0004 [‐0.0010,0.0003]               ‐0.0001 [‐0.0008,0.0006]          89,199 0.0000
IQI 15 AMI Mortality                                        N 0.0131 [0.0104,0.0158]***           N 0.0135 [0.0114,0.0157]***          216,870 0.0210
IQI 16 Congestive Heart Failure (CHF) Mortality             N 0.0037 [0.0024,0.0050]***           N 0.0040 [0.0025,0.0054]***          269,453 0.0162
IQI 17 Acute Stroke Mortality                                   0.0014 [‐0.0031,0.0058]           N 0.0153 [0.0104,0.0202]***          149,772 0.0813
IQI 18 Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage Mortality                N 0.0029 [0.0004,0.0054]**                 0.0008 [‐0.0016,0.0033]         159,381 0.0133
IQI 20 Pneumonia Mortality                                  N 0.0021 [0.0001,0.0041]**            N 0.0040 [0.0023,0.0057]***          328,652 0.0221
IQI 21 Cesarean Delivery Rate                               N 0.0078 [0.0037,0.0120]***           Y ‐0.0024 [‐0.0044,‐0.0003]**      3,477,744 0.2653
IQI 22 VBAC Rate Uncomplicated                              Y ‐0.0107 [‐0.0186,‐0.0027]***        N 0.0061 [0.0021,0.0101]***          515,576 0.1397
IQI 23 Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy Rate                    Y ‐0.0362 [‐0.0452,‐0.0273]***        Y ‐0.0401 [‐0.0503,‐0.0298]***       219,424 0.8138
IQI 25 Bilateral Cardiac Catheterization Rate               Y ‐0.0380 [‐0.0416,‐0.0344]***        Y ‐0.0372 [‐0.0407,‐0.0338]***       568,498 0.1372
IQI 26 CABG Area Rate                                       Y ‐0.0003 [‐0.0005,0.0000]*                0.0000 [‐0.0003,0.0002]     23,847,297 0.0043
IQI 27 PCTA Area Rate                                       Y ‐0.0009 [‐0.0017,‐0.0001]**             ‐0.0005 [‐0.0011,0.0002]     23,847,297 0.0155
IQI 28 Hysterectomy Area Rate                                   0.0003 [‐0.0007,0.0012]               ‐0.0005 [‐0.0013,0.0004]     23,847,297 0.0147
IQI 29 Laminectomy or Spinal Fusion Area Rate               Y ‐0.0005 [‐0.0009,‐0.0001]**              0.0002 [‐0.0003,0.0008]     23,847,297 0.0145
IQI 30 Percut. Transluminal Cor. Angioplasty, Mort.             0.0042 [0.0030,0.0053]***         N 0.0046 [0.0035,0.0058]***          345,200 0.0062
IQI 31 Carotid Endarterectomy, Mortality                    Y ‐0.0026 [‐0.0044,‐0.0008]***        Y ‐0.0023 [‐0.0046,0.0000]*           27,336 0.0037
IQI 32 AMI Mortality WO Transfer                            N 0.0148 [0.0110,0.0187]***           N 0.0118 [0.0086,0.0149]***          142,418 0.0267
IQI 33 Primary Cesarean Delivery Rate                       N 0.0095 [0.0058,0.0132]***           Y ‐0.0017 [‐0.0036,0.0001]*        2,962,168 0.1710
IQI 34 VBAC Rate All                                        Y ‐0.0089 [‐0.0169,‐0.0009]**              0.0012 [‐0.0033,0.0057]         588,227 0.1350
Pediatric Quality Indicators
PDI 90 Overall PDI                                          N 0.0048 [0.0033,0.0062]***                0.0003 [‐0.0008,0.0014]       3,085,305 0.0228
PDI 91 Acute PDI                                            N 0.0007 [0.0000,0.0013]**                 0.0000 [‐0.0006,0.0005]       3,085,305 0.0077
PDI 92 Chronic PDI                                          N 0.0041 [0.0030,0.0052]***                0.0003 [‐0.0004,0.0011]       3,085,305 0.0151
PDI 1 Accidental Puncture or Laceration                     Y ‐0.0003 [‐0.0004,‐0.0001]*** Y ‐0.0003 [‐0.0004,‐0.0001]***            3,085,305 0.0014
PDI 2 Pressure Ulcer                                        N 0.0011 [0.0002,0.0021]**           N 0.0007 [‐0.0001,0.0016]*            319,153 0.0027
PDI 5 Iatrogenic Pneumothorax                                   0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0001]                0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0001]       2,768,569 0.0003
PDI 6 Pediatric Heart Surgery Mortality                     Y ‐0.0473 [‐0.0623,‐0.0323]*** Y ‐0.0706 [‐0.0819,‐0.0593]***               19,902 0.0301
PDI 7 Pediatric Heart Surgery Volume                            0.0001 [‐0.0004,0.0007]                0.0003 [‐0.0003,0.0010]       3,085,305 0.0191
PDI 8 Postoperative Hemorrhage or Hematoma                  N 0.0015 [0.0002,0.0028]**                 0.0009 [‐0.0005,0.0023]         115,041 0.0014
PDI 9 Postoperative Respiratory Failure                     N 0.0068 [0.0034,0.0101]***          Y ‐0.0049 [‐0.0075,‐0.0024]***         94,474 0.0099
PDI 10 Postoperative Sepsis                                 N 0.0056 [0.0009,0.0103]**                ‐0.0022 [‐0.0074,0.0030]          89,923 0.0221
PDI 11 Postoperative Wound Dehiscence                       N 0.0024 [0.0016,0.0033]***          N 0.0022 [0.0014,0.0030]***            81,672 0.0004
PDI 12 Cent. Venous Catheter‐Related Blood. Infect.         Y ‐0.0017 [‐0.0021,‐0.0013]*** Y ‐0.0018 [‐0.0022,‐0.0015]***            2,397,245 0.0065
PDI 13 Transfusion Reaction                                     0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0000]                0.0000 [‐0.0000,0.0000]       3,085,305 0.0000
PDI 14 Asthma Admission Rate                                   ‐0.0006 [‐0.0024,0.0012]               ‐0.0003 [‐0.0022,0.0016]         956,902 0.0126
PDI 15 Diabetes Short‐term Comp. Admissions                    ‐0.0001 [‐0.0004,0.0001]               ‐0.0002 [‐0.0004,0.0001]         245,451 0.0000
PDI 16 Gastroenteritis Admission Rate                       N 0.0018 [0.0011,0.0026]***                0.0005 [‐0.0004,0.0015]       1,052,379 0.0053
PDI 17 Perforated Appendix Admission Rate                   N 0.0117 [0.0043,0.0192]***               ‐0.0004 [‐0.0049,0.0041]         108,432 0.0173
PDI 18 Urinary Tract Admission Rate                         N 0.0097 [0.0081,0.0113]***          N 0.0010 [0.0005,0.0014]***         3,085,305 0.0241
NQI 1 Iatrogenic Pneumothorax in Neonates                   N 0.0003 [0.0000,0.0006]**           N 0.0009 [0.0007,0.0011]***         3,085,305 0.0023
NQI 2 Neonatal Mortality                                    N 0.0060 [0.0038,0.0081]***          N 0.0027 [0.0008,0.0047]***         3,085,305 0.0320
NQI 3 Neonatal Blood Stream Infection                       Y ‐0.0594 [‐0.0751,‐0.0437]*** Y ‐0.0150 [‐0.0221,‐0.0079]***               69,873 0.2609
PSI 17 Birth Trauma ‐ Injury to Neonate                     N 0.0009 [0.0003,0.0015]***                0.0004 [‐0.0002,0.0009]       3,085,305 0.0099
PQI 9 Low Birth Weight                                      Y ‐0.0091 [‐0.0145,‐0.0037]*** Y ‐0.0132 [‐0.0177,‐0.0086]***            1,062,131 0.1855
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
Y and N indicate statistically significant gains and losses, respectively.
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported. All specifications and means are weighted using discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Risk adjusters include six sets of risk adjustment variables: demographic characteristics, the number of diagnoses on the discharge record, individual
components of the Charlson Score measure of comorbidities, AHRQ comorbidity measures, All‐Patient Refined (APR)‐DRGs, and All‐Payer Severity‐
adjusted (APS)‐DRGs. See Appendix 2.
Regressions in this table estimated in the sample of nonelderly discharges.
IQI 19 Hip Fracture Mortality and IQI 24 Incidental Appendectomy in the Elderly Rate did not vary for nonelderly.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 7: Robustness to Included States in NIS
                                           (1)                      (2)                      (3)                    (4)
                                       Uninsured             Length of Stay         Log Length of Stay     Emergency Admit
All States
MA*After                                ‐0.0231                  ‐0.0504                  ‐0.0012                ‐0.0202
                                [‐0.0300,‐0.0162]*** [‐0.0999,‐0.0008]**             [‐0.0111,0.0086]     [‐0.0397,‐0.0007]**
N (Nonelderly)                        23,860,930               23,913,183               23,913,183             23,913,983
Mean MA Before                           0.0643                   5.4256                   1.4267                 0.3868
Mean Non‐MA Before                       0.0791                   5.0770                   1.3552                 0.3591
Mean MA After                            0.0352                   5.3717                   1.4355                 0.4058
Mean Non‐MA After                        0.0817                   5.0958                   1.3596                 0.3745
Northeast
MA*After                                ‐0.0160                  ‐0.0293                  ‐0.0070                ‐0.0293
                                 [‐0.0309,‐0.0011]**        [‐0.2007,0.1421]         [‐0.0551,0.0411]     [‐0.0500,‐0.0085]**
N (Nonelderly)                         4,510,280                4,511,992                4,511,992              4,512,094
Mean Non‐MA Before                       0.0790                   5.6529                   1.4163                 0.4281
Mean Non‐MA After                        0.0613                   5.6453                   1.4203                 0.4425
New England
MA*After                                ‐0.0159                  ‐0.0021                   0.0170                ‐0.0411
                                [‐0.0193,‐0.0125]***        [‐0.1276,0.1233]         [‐0.0214,0.0554]     [‐0.0749,‐0.0072]**
N (Nonelderly)                         1,369,181                1,370,420                1,370,420              1,370,438
Mean Non‐MA Before                       0.0450                   5.3462                   1.3890                 0.3337
Mean Non‐MA After                        0.0408                   5.3576                   1.3840                 0.3324
All, No ME, VT, CA
MA*After                                ‐0.0236                  ‐0.0537                  ‐0.0022                ‐0.0202
                                [‐0.0311,‐0.0161]***       [‐0.1082,0.0008]*         [‐0.0129,0.0085]      [‐0.0417,0.0013]*
N (Nonelderly)                        21,067,733               21,119,253               21,119,253             21,119,708
Mean Non‐MA Before                       0.0837                   5.0926                   1.3606                 0.3653
Mean Non‐MA After                        0.0871                   5.0996                   1.3644                 0.3813
25 Most Insured
MA*After                                ‐0.0246                  ‐0.0477                   0.0056                ‐0.0066
                                [‐0.0367,‐0.0126]*** [‐0.0817,‐0.0138]***            [‐0.0012,0.0124]       [‐0.0623,0.0491]
N (Nonelderly)                         8,028,553                8,057,249                8,057,249              8,057,439
Mean Non‐MA Before                       0.0595                   4.9274                   1.3424                 0.3300
Mean Non‐MA After                        0.0638                   4.9342                   1.3438                 0.3426
Balanced Panel (Only Hospitals That Appear in Data in Every Possible Quarter)
MA*After                                ‐0.0273                   0.1087                   0.0297                 0.0244
                                 [‐0.0500,‐0.0045]**        [‐0.0872,0.3045]        [‐0.0038,0.0633]*       [‐0.0705,0.1193]
N (Nonelderly)                          768,541                  770,696                  770,696                770,699
Mean MA Before                           0.0461                   5.4089                   1.4104                 0.4701
Mean Non‐MA Before                       0.0714                   4.6790                   1.3037                 0.2769
Mean MA After                            0.0279                   5.4701                   1.4323                 0.4902
Mean Non‐MA After                        0.0800                   4.6364                   1.2969                 0.2720
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported.
All specifications and means weighted using discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
"All States" sample includes all states in the 2004‐2008 NIS. Does not include AL, AK, DE, ID, MS, MT, ND, NM.
"New England" sample includes MA, CT, NH, VT, ME, RI. "Northeast" sample includes New England, NY, NJ.
"25 Most Insured" includes the top half of states in terms of initial levels of insurance from the CPS.
In decreasing order of insurance, "25 Most Insured" includes: MN, HI, IA, NH, ME, WI, MA, VT, KS, RI, NE, MI, ND (not in
NIS), CT, PA, OH, M0, SD, DE (not in NIS), VA, MD, TN, KY, UT.
"Balanced Panel" only includes states that appear in every possible quarter of the data. These hospitals are in AZ (2), CA,
CO (2), GA, MA (2), MD, MN, NC, NE, OH, TN, TX (4), UT, WA (4), WV (2).
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
Appendix Table 8: Insurance and Outcomes in Low vs. High Uninsured Hospitals in NIS
                                     (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)
                                Uninsured               Length of Stay        Log Length of Stay       Emergency Admit
All Hospitals (100% of sample, including missing ages)
Ma*After                          ‐0.0153                  ‐0.0626                   0.0006                  ‐0.0367
                           [‐0.0201,‐0.0104]*** [‐0.1102,‐0.0150]**            [‐0.0090,0.0103]      [‐0.0585,‐0.0149]***
N (All Ages)                    36,282,073                36,343,449              36,343,449               36,345,238
N Hospitals                         3,090                    3,090                    3,090                    3,090
N Hospitals in MA                    48                       48                       48                       48
Mean MA Before                     0.0409                   5.8833                   1.5099                   0.4789
Mean Non‐MA Before                 0.0543                   5.6256                   1.4517                   0.4291
Mean MA After                      0.0226                   5.7516                   1.5084                   0.4912
Mean Non‐MA After                  0.0557                   5.5819                   1.4482                   0.4491
Only Hospitals that Appear in Data At Least Once Before Reform
Ma*After                          ‐0.0152                  ‐0.0651                  ‐0.0001                  ‐0.0369
                           [‐0.0202,‐0.0102]*** [‐0.1155,‐0.0147]**            [‐0.0104,0.0102]      [‐0.0596,‐0.0143]***
N (All Ages)                    30,390,240                30,441,321              30,441,321               30,442,760
N Hospitals                         2,315                    2,315                    2,315                    2,315
N Hospitals in MA                    40                       40                       40                       40
Mean MA Before                     0.0409                   5.8833                   1.5099                   0.4789
Mean Non‐MA Before                 0.0543                   5.6256                   1.4517                   0.4291
Mean MA After                      0.0230                   5.7678                   1.5085                   0.4856
Mean Non‐MA After                  0.0595                   5.5803                   1.4460                   0.4473
Low Uninsured Hospitals
Ma*After                          ‐0.0178                  ‐0.0895                   0.0019                  ‐0.0409
                           [‐0.0228,‐0.0129]*** [‐0.1522,‐0.0269]***           [‐0.0074,0.0112]      [‐0.0577,‐0.0241]***
N (All Ages)                    14,407,631                14,426,624              14,426,624               14,427,194
N Hospitals                         1,157                    1,157                    1,157                    1,157
N Hospitals in MA                    29                       29                       29                       29
Mean MA Before                     0.0303                   5.8769                   1.5058                   0.4431
Mean Non‐MA Before                 0.0210                   5.6142                   1.4487                   0.4087
Mean MA After                      0.0220                   5.7938                   1.5119                   0.4742
Mean Non‐MA After                  0.0295                   5.6036                   1.4438                   0.4306
High Uninsured Hospitals
Ma*After                          ‐0.0165                  ‐0.0260                  ‐0.0063                  ‐0.0086
                           [‐0.0246,‐0.0085]***       [‐0.0782,0.0263]         [‐0.0151,0.0024]         [‐0.0312,0.0140]
N (All Ages)                    15,982,609                16,015,279              16,015,279               16,016,149
N Hospitals                         1,158                    1,158                    1,158                    1,158
N Hospitals in MA                    11                       11                       11                       11
Mean MA Before                     0.0635                   5.8969                   1.5186                   0.5550
Mean Non‐MA Before                 0.0848                   5.6360                   1.4546                   0.4478
Mean MA After                      0.0314                   5.5593                   1.4808                   0.5769
Mean Non‐MA After                  0.0845                   5.5609                   1.4478                   0.4612
95% asymptotic CI clustered by state: *** Significant at .01, ** Significant at .05, * Significant at .10
MA*During always included but coefficient not always reported.
All specifications and means weighted using discharge weights.
All specifications include hospital fixed effects and time fixed effects for 2004 to 2008, quarterly.
Low Uninsured Hospitals have less than median uninsurance of 0.0398 before reform.
Sample sizes vary across specifications based on availability of dependent variable.
Source: HCUP NIS 2004‐2008 authors' calculations. See text for more details.
