                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND PRODUCTIVITY

                                            Nicholas Bloom
                                           John Van Reenen

                                        Working Paper 16019
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16019


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




This paper has been prepared for a chapter in the Handbook of Labor Economics Volume IV edited
by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter. We would like to thank the Economic and Social Research
Council for their financial support through the Center for Economic Performance. This survey draws
substantially on joint work with Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Eve Caroli, Luis Garicano, Christos
Genakos, Claire Lelarge, Ralf Martin, Raffaella Sadun and Fabrizio Zilibotti. We would like to thank
Orley Ashenfelter, Oriana Bandiera, Alex Bryson, David Card, Edward Lazear, Paul Oyer, John Roberts,
Kathy Shaw and participants in conferences in Berkeley and the LSE for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND PRODUCTIVITY

                                            Nicholas Bloom
                                           John Van Reenen

                                        Working Paper 16019
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16019


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




This paper has been prepared for a chapter in the Handbook of Labor Economics Volume IV edited
by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter. We would like to thank the Economic and Social Research
Council for their financial support through the Center for Economic Performance. This survey draws
substantially on joint work with Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Eve Caroli, Luis Garicano, Christos
Genakos, Claire Lelarge, Ralf Martin, Raffaella Sadun and Fabrizio Zilibotti. We would like to thank
Orley Ashenfelter, Oriana Bandiera, Alex Bryson, David Card, Edward Lazear, Paul Oyer, John Roberts,
Kathy Shaw and participants in conferences in Berkeley and the LSE for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2010 by Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Human Resource Management and Productivity
Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 16019
May 2010
JEL No. L2,M2,O32,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

In this handbook of labor economics chapter we examine the relationship between Human Resource
Management (HRM) and productivity. HRM includes incentive pay (individual and group) as well
as many non-pay aspects of the employment relationship such as matching (hiring and firing) and
work organization (e.g. teams, autonomy). We place HRM more generally within the literature on
management practices and productivity. We start with some facts on levels and trends of both HRM
and productivity and the main economic theories of HRM. We look at some of the determinants of
HRM – risk, competition, ownership and regulation. The largest section analyses the impact of HRM
on productivity emphasizing issues of methodology, data and results (from micro-econometric studies).
We conclude briefly with suggestions of avenues for future frontier work.


Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu

John Van Reenen
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kindom
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
   1. Introduction


Traditionally, labor economics focused on the labor market rather than looking inside the “black box”
of firms. Industrial sociologists and psychologists made the running in Human Resource Management
(HRM). This has changed dramatically in last two decades. Human Resource Management (HRM) is
now a major field in labor economics. The hallmark of this work is to use standard economic tools
applied to the special circumstances of managing employees within companies. HRM economics has a
major effect on the world through teaching in business schools, and ultimately what gets practiced in
many organizations.


HRM covers a wide range of activities. The main area of study we will focus on will be incentives and
work   organization.   Incentives   include   remuneration   systems   (e.g.   individuals   or   group
incentive/contingent pay) and also the system of appraisal, promotion and career advancement. By
work organization we mean the distribution of decision rights (autonomy/decentralization) between
managers and workers, job design (e.g. flexibility of working, job rotation), team-working (e.g. who
works with whom) and information provision.


Space limitations mean we do not cover matching (see Oyer and Schaffer, this Volume) or skill
development/training. Second, we will only devote a small amount of space to employee
representation such as labor unions (see Farber, this Volume). Third, we should also mention that we
focus on empirical work rather than theory (for recent surveys see Gibbons and Roberts, 2008, and in
particular Lazear and Oyer, 2008) and micro-econometric work rather than macro or qualitative
studies. Fourth, we focus on HRM over employees rather than CEOs, which is the subject of a vast
literature (see Murphy, 1999, or Edmans, Gabaix and Landier, 2008, for surveys).


Where we depart from several of the existing surveys in the field is to put HRM more broadly in the
context of the economics of management. To do this we also look in detail at the literature on
productivity dispersion.


The structure of the chapter is as follows. In Section 2 we detail some facts about HRM and
productivity both in the cross sectional and time series dimension. In Section 3 we look at the impact
of HRM on productivity with an emphasis on methodologies and the mechanisms. In Section 4 we


                                                  2
discuss some theoretical perspectives, contrasting the usual “Design” approach to our concept of HRM
as one example of “management as a technology”. In Section 5 we discuss some of the factors
determining HRM, focusing on risk, competition, ownership, trade and regulation. Section 6
concludes.




      2. Some facts on HRM and productivity


           2.1.    HRM practices


In the 1970s the general assumption was that incentive pay would continue to decline in importance.
This opinion was based on the fact that traditional unskilled jobs with piece-rate incentives were
declining, and white collar jobs with stable salaries and promotion based incentives were increasing.
Surprisingly, however, it appears (at least in the US) that over the last three decades a greater
proportion of jobs have become rewarded with contingent pay, and this is in fact particularly true for
salaried workers.


There are two broad methods of assessing the importance of incentive pay: Direct and Indirect
methods. Direct methods use data on the incidence of HRM, often drawn from specialist surveys.
Indirect methods use various forms of statistical inference, ideally from matched worker-firm data, to
assess the extent to which pay is contingent on performance. We deal mainly with the direct evidence
and then discuss more briefly the indirect evidence.


               2.1.1. HRM measured using direct methods


Incentive Pay
Individual incentive pay information is available from a variety of sources. Using the Panel Study of
Income Dynamic (PSID) Lemieux, McCleod and Parent (2009) estimate that about 14% of US prime
age men in 1998 received performance pay (see Figure 2.1). They define a worker as receiving
performance pay if any part of compensation includes bonus, commission or piece rate1 (data on stock
options and shares is not included). They find a much higher incidence of performance pay jobs (37%
on average between 1976-1998) defined as a job where a worker ever received some kind of

1
    Overtime is removed, but the question is imperfect pre-1993 which could lead to undercounting performance pay.

                                                             3
performance pay2. They also look at the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) which shows
coverage of performance pay jobs for men of 26% in 1988 to 1990.


Other papers deliver similar estimates of around 40% to 50% of US employees being covered by some
form of performance pay. For example, using the US General Social Survey Kruse, Blasi and Park
(2009) estimate that 47% of American workers were covered by some group incentive scheme in 2006.
Of this 38% of employees were covered by profit sharing, 27% by gain-sharing, 18% by stock
ownership (9% by stock options) and 4.6% by all three types. Lawler et al (2003) surveyed Fortune
1,000 corporations between 1987 and 2002 asking detailed questions on their HRM3. Using midpoints
of their results (which are in bands) Lemieux et al (2008) calculate that 44% of workers were covered
by incentive pay in 2002.


It is also interesting to look at the trends in incentive pay over time. In US data, Lemieux, McCleod
and Parent (2009) find that for the wider definition of performance pay (if the worker was eligible for
any performance related pay) the incidence rises from 38% in the 1970s to 45% in the 1990s (see
Figure 1). Interestingly, this rise in performance pay was mostly driven by increases in performance
pay for salaried workers, for whom this rose from 45% in the 1970s to 60% in the 1990s. In contrast
hourly paid workers have both lower levels and growth rates in performance pay. Lawler et al. (2003)
show similar rises in performance pay, increasing from 21% (1987) to 27% (1990) to 35% (1996) to
45% (2002). Lazear and Shaw (2008) also show some breakdown trends reproduced in Table 2.1,
showing again performance pay has clearly increased over time in the US.


In the UK the British Workplace Employment Relations Surveys (WERS) contains a cross section of
all establishments with 25 or more employees in the UK (over 2,000 in each year). There are
consistent questions in 1984, 1990 and 2004 on whether the firm used any form of performance/
contingent pay for workers both individually and collectively (e.g. team bonuses, Profit-related pay or
Employee Share Ownership Schemes). Figure 2.2 shows that 41% of UK establishments had
contingent pay in 1984, and this rose to 55% twenty years later. Two other points are noteworthy.
First, this time series change is driven by the private sector: not only was the incidence of incentive
pay very low in the public sector 10% or less, it actually fell over time (Lemieux et al 2009 exclude the

2
  The difference is somewhat surprising as it suggests that performance pay jobs only pay out infrequently, which doesn’t
comply with casual observation (e.g. piece rates will almost always pay something).
3
   The problem with the Lawler surveys is that the sampling frame is only larger companies compared to the more
representative individual level PSID. Furthermore, the response rate to the survey has declined rapidly from over 50% in
1987 to only 15% by 1999. This poses a serious concern that the time series trends are not representative even of larger
firms.

                                                           4
public sector in their US analysis). Second, the growth of incentive pay in the UK is primarily in the
1980s with no growth in the 1990s, similar to the US results shown in Figure 1.


So in summary, the evidence is that overall performance pay related covers about 40% to 50% of US
workers by the 2000s, and pay has been increasing over the last three decades, particularly over the
1970s and 1980s. A number of reasons suggested for the increase in performance related pay which we
will examine in detail in section 5 below.


Other HRM Practices
Turning to more general forms of HRM than pay, like self-managed teams, performance feedback, job
rotation, regular meetings, and training it becomes rather harder to summarize the existing information.
In the cross section there are a number of surveys with different sampling bases, response rates and
questions making them hard to compare. Perhaps the most representative example for the US is Black
and Lynch (2001, 2004) who helped collected information from a survey backed by the US
Department of Labor (used also by Cappelli and Neumark, 2001). In 1996, for example, about 17% of
US establishments had self-managed teams, 49% in formal meetings and 25% in job rotation. Lawler
et al. (2003)’s data of larger firms unsurprisingly shows a greater incidence of “innovative” HRM
practices. In their data for 1996, 78% of firms had self-managed teams and this covered at least 20% of
the workforce for just under a third of all corporations.


Bryson and Wood (2009) present an analysis of “high involvement” HRM using the UK WERS data
(see Table 2.2). About half of all UK establishments had “team-working” in 1998. More interestingly,
the WERS data allows an analysis of changes over time. The incidence of teamwork (as indicated by
“team briefings” has grown from 31% in 1984 to 70% in 2004 and “suggestion schemes” has grown
from 22% in 1984 to 36% 20 years later. Disclosure of Information regarding investment plans has
risen from 32% to 46% over the same period. Most other forms of innovative HRM look remarkably
stable, however, with the exception of incentive pay that has already been discussed.


Wider International Comparisons
To compare a wider basket of countries beyond the UK and US the best source of information is
probably the Bloom-Van Reenen (2007) surveys on general management practices. These have some
specific questions on HRM or “people management”, which have been collected from 17 countries.
Since we will refer to this work at several points we describe the methodology in a little detail as it is
somewhat different than the standard HRM surveys described above. The essential method was to start

                                                     5
with a grid of “best practices” in HR and non-HR management and then score firms along each of the
eighteen dimensions of this grid following an in-depth telephone interview with the plant manager.
These eighteen dimensions covered three broad areas: monitoring, target setting and people
management (see Appendix Table A1 for details). The people section covers a range of HR practices
including whether companies are promoting and rewarding employees based on worker ability and
effort; whether firms have systems to hire and retain their most productive employees; and whether
they deal with underperformers through retraining and effective sanctions. For example, we examine
whether employees that perform well, work hard and display high ability are promoted faster than
others.


To obtain accurate responses from firms the survey targetted production plant managers using a
‘double-blind’ technique. One part of this double-blind technique is that managers are not told they are
being scored or shown the scoring grid. They are only told they are being “interviewed about
management practices for a research project”. To run this blind scoring we used “open” questions
since these do not tend to lead respondents to a particular answer. For example, the first people
management question starts by asking respondents “tell me how does your promotion system work”
rather than a closed question such as “do you promote on ability (yes/no)”. Interviewers also probed
for examples to support assertions, for example asking “tell me about your most recent promotion
round”. The other side of the double-blind technique is interviewers are not told in advance anything
about the firm’s performance to avoid prejuduice. They are only provided with the company name,
telephone number and industry. Since the survey covers medium-sized firms (defined as those
employing between 100 and 10,000 workers) these would not be usually known ex ante by the
interviewers.


These management practices were strongly correlated with firm’s performance data from their
company accounts (total factor productivity, profitability, growth rates, and Tobin’s Q and survival
rates). These correlations are not causal but do suggest that HR practices that reward effort and
performance are associated with better firm performance. Other research shows that these practices are
also associated with better patient outcomes in hospitals (Bloom, Propper, Seiler and Van Reenen,
2009) and improved work-life balance indicators (Bloom, Kretschmer and Van Reenen, 2009).


Figure 2.3 shows the distribution of these people management practices across countries. The US
clearly has the highest average scores for people management. Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van
Reenen (2009) show that this appears to be due to a combination of the US being absolutely good at

                                                   6
managing firms across all 18 questions on average, and also having a particular advantage in people
(HR) management. Other countries with light labor regulation like Canada, Great Britain and Northern
Ireland also display relatively strong HR management practices. Interestingly Germany and Japan also
fare well, in large part reflecting the fact that these countries have generally well managed
manufacturing firms.


Figure 2.4 breaks out the people management score into three of the key areas in the overall people
management score, which are promotions, fixing/firing underperformers and rewards. What is clear is
that US firms have the globally highest scored practices across all three dimensions, but are
particularly strong on “fixing/firing” practices. That is, in the US employees who underperform are
most likely to be rapidly “fixed” (dealt with through re-training or rotated to another part of the firm
where they can succeed), or if this fails “fired” (moved out of the firm). In contrast in countries like
Greece and Brazil underperforming employees are typically left in post for several months or even
years before any action is taken to address them. In sub-section 4.1 we discuss reasons for these
patterns. Broadly speaking, the high levels of competition and low incidence of family firms are the
main contributing factors to the leading position of the US in overall management. On top of this, high
levels of education and weaker labor regulations give American firms a particular advantage in the HR
aspect of management.


Figure 2.5 displays the firm level distributions within each country for these management practices,
showing there is a wide dispersion of practices within every country. The US average score is the
highest because it has almost no firms with weak HR management practices, while Brazil and Greece
has a large tail of firms with poor HR management practices. This wide variation within each country
is what most of the prior micro literature has focused on, with Figure 2.5 showing this variation is
common across every country we have investigated.


           2.1.2. Measuring Incentive Pay through indirect methods


The indirect method has been common in labor economics mainly due to data constraints. Essentially
this method examines the correlation of workers’ remuneration with firm-specific characteristics that
should be important if pay is contingent on performance such as profitability, market value, etc. For
example, if there are profit-related pay schemes, increases in firm profits should cause increases in
worker pay. If pay was set solely on the external labor market, it should be unrelated to idiosyncratic


                                                   7
changes in the firm’s financial position. An advantage of this approach over the direct approach is that
many of the incentive schemes may not be explicitly written down as contracts. A disadvantage is that
the correlations between firm performance and pay we observe may be unrelated to incentive schemes
for econometric reasons - e.g. a positive demand shock may simultaneously raise a firm’s profitability
and mean it hires workers of an unobservably higher skill level. Further, to the extent we do credibly
identify a causal effect of firm performance on worker pay we cannot discern easily whether this is due
to explicit contracts, implicit contracts, union bargaining4 or some other model.


Having said this, there is substantial evidence that firm performance does matter a lot for worker
remuneration. This is clearest in the many studies of matched worker firm data which generally shows
an important role for firm characteristics in determining worker wages (e.g. Abowd, Kramarz and
Margolis, 1999). Simple OLS regressions of changes of wages on changes of firm's profitability tend
to find a positive effect (e.g. Blanchflower, Oswald and Sanfrey (1996), but these are likely to be
downward biased as shocks to wages will tend to reduce profitability. Using trade-based (Abowd and
Lemieux, 1993) or technology-based (Van Reenen, 1996) instrumental variables tends to significantly
increase the effect of firm performance on wages as we would expect. Matched worker-firm data is
now commonly available in a large number of countries (see the collection of papers in Lazear and
Shaw, 2008, for example). In the US, for example, Abowd, Haltiwanger and Lane (2008) use the
LEHD (Longitudinal Employer- Household Dynamics Program) covering about 80% of all employees.
They show that about one half of all individual wage variance is associated with individual
characteristics and about a half due to firm effects.


Although the focus of the literature has mainly been on explaining the distribution of wages at a point
in time Dunne, Foster, Haltiwanger and Troske (2004) show that between firm effects are important in
understanding the growing inequality of wages over time in the US. Faggio, Salvanes and Van Reenen
(2007) also find this for the UK and furthermore, offer evidence that the association of firm
performance with wages has grown stronger over time. This is consistent with the more direct
evidence discussed above that performance pay (explicit or implicit) may be more prevalent in recent
years.


         2.2.   Productivity dispersion


4
 Abowd (1989) looks at unexpected changes to wages and finds that shareholders wealth falls by an equal and opposite
amount. He interprets this as consistent with strongly efficient bargaining over the rents between unions and firms.

                                                         8
Research on firm heterogeneity has a long history in social science. Systematic empirical analysis first
focused on the firm size distribution measured by employment, sales or assets. Most famously, Gibrat
(1931), characterized the size distribution as approximately log normal and sought to explain this with
reference to simple statistical models of growth (i.e. Gibrat’s Law that firm growth is independent of
size). In the 1970s as data became available by firm and line of business, attention focused on
profitability as an indicator of performance (e.g. Kwoka and Ravenscraft, 1986). Accounting
profitability can differ substantially from economic profitability, however, and may rise due to market
power rather than efficiency.


In recent decades the development of larger databases has enabled researchers to look more directly at
productivity. The growing availability of plant-level data from the Census Bureau in the US and other
nations combined with rapid increases in computer power has facilitated this development.
Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2008) offer many examples of the cross country micro-
datasets now being used for productivity analysis.


One of the robust facts emerging from these analyses is the very high degree of heterogeneity between
business units (see Bartelsman and Doms, 2000). For example, Syverson (2004a) analyzes labor
productivity (output per worker) in US manufacturing establishments in the 1997 Economic Census
and shows that on average, a plant at the 90th percentile of the productivity distribution is over four
times as productive as a plant at the 10th percentile in the same four digit sector. Similarly, Criscuolo,
Haskel and Martin (2003) show that in the UK in 2000 there is a fivefold difference in productivity
between these deciles.


What could explain these differences in productivity, and how can they persist in a competitive
industry? One explanation is that if we accounted properly for the different inputs in the production
function there would be little residual productivity differences5. It is certainly true that moving from
labor productivity to total factor productivity (TFP) reduces the scale of the difference. For example, in
Syverson (2004) the 90-10 productivity difference falls from a factor of 4 to a factor of 1.9, but it does
not disappear.




5
 This is analogous to the historical debate in the macro time series of productivity between Solow, who claimed that TFP
was a large component of aggregate growth and Jorgenson who claimed that there was little role for TFP when all inputs
were properly measured (see Griliches, 1996). A similar debate is active in “levels accounting” of cross-country TFP (e.g.
Caselli, 2005).

                                                            9
These differences show up clearly even for quite homogeneous goods. An early example is Salter
(1960) who studied the British pig iron industry between 1911 and 1926. He showed that the best
practice factory produced nearly twice as many tons per hour as the average factory. More recently,
Syverson (2004b) shows TFP (and size) is very dispersed in the US ready mix concrete industry.
Interestingly, the mean level of productivity was higher in more competitive markets (as indicated by a
measure of spatial demand density) and this seemed to be mainly due to a lower mass in the left tail in
the more competitive sector. Studies of large changes in product market competition such as trade
liberalization (e.g. Pavcnik, 2002), foreign entry into domestic markets (Schmitz, 2005) or
deregulation (e.g. Olley and Pakes, 1996) suggest that the subsequent increase in aggregate
productivity has a substantial reallocation element6.


A major problem in measuring productivity is the fact that researchers rarely observe plant level prices
so an industry price deflator is usually used. Consequently, measured TFP typically includes an
element of the firm-specific price-cost margin (e.g. Klette and Griliches, 1994). Foster, Haltiwanger
and Syverson (2009) study 11 seven-digit homogeneous goods (including block ice, white pan bread,
cardboard boxes and carbon black) where they have access to plant specific output (and input) prices.
They find that conventionally measured revenue based TFP (“TFPR”) numbers actually understate the
degree of true productivity dispersion (“TFPQ”) especially for newer firms as the more productive
firms typically have lower prices and are relatively larger7.


Higher TFP is positively related to firm size, growth and survival probabilities. Bartelsman and
Dhrymes (1998, Table A.7) show that over a five year period around one third of plants stay in their
productivity quintile. This suggests that productivity differences are not purely transitory, but partially
persist.


Analysis of changes in aggregate productivity over time has shown that this productivity dispersion is
also important in explaining economic growth. For example, Baily, Hulten and Campbell (1992) find
that half of the change in US industry-level productivity is due to the reallocation of output from lower
productivity plants to those with higher productivity. This reallocation effect is partly due to the shift

6
  There is also a significant effect of such policy changes on the productivity of incumbent firms. Modelling the changing
incentives to invest in productivity enhancing activities, such as R&D, is more difficult in heterogeneous firm models, but
some recent progress has been made (e.g. Aw, Roberts and Xu, 2008).
7
  Foster et al (2009) show that measured revenue TFP will in general be correlated with true TFP but also with the firm
specific price shocks. Hsieh and Klenow (2007) detail a model where heterogeneous TFPQ produces no difference in TFPR
because the more productive firms grow larger and have lower prices, thus equalizing TFPR. In their model intra-industry
variation in TFPR is due to distortions as firms face different input prices.

                                                           10
in market share between incumbents and partly due to the effects of exit and entry. Bartelsman,
Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2008) show that the speed of reallocation is much stronger in some
countries (like the US) than others. There is also significant sectoral variation. For example, Foster,
Krizan and Haltiwanger, 2006, show that reallocation between stores accounts for almost all aggregate
productivity growth in the US retail sector.


In summary, there is a substantial body if evidence of persistent firm-level heterogeneity in firm
productivity (and other dimensions of performance) in narrow industries in many countries and time
periods. Differential observable inputs, heterogeneous prices and idiosyncratic stochastic shocks are
not able to adequately account for the remarkable dispersion of productivity. So what could account
for this? One long suggested factor is management practices, with authors going back at least to
Walker (1887) suggesting that management practices play an essential role in explaining differences in
performance across firms. 8




    3. The effects of HRM on productivity


So the question is do variations in variations in HRM practices play a role in driving differences in and
productivity? We find that the answer is “probably, yes”, although the empirical basis for this which
we survey in detail is surprisingly weak given the importance of the topic. In fact, as Syversson (2010)
notes in discussing management as a driver of productivity “no potential driving factor of productivity
has seen a higher ratio of speculation to empirical study”.


We should also state in advance that in this section we focus on productivity as the key outcome.
Many studies look at other outcomes such as worker turnover, absenteeism, worker perceptions, etc.
These are useful, but if they have no effect on productivity then in our view they are second order –
generally studies use them because they have no direct evidence on productivity (e.g. Blasi et al,
2009:4). We do not focus on measures of worker wellbeing such as job satisfaction or wages. Lazear
and Shaw (2008) suggest that some of the dramatic increase in wage inequality in the US, UK and
other country since the late 1970s is due to HRM practices. Lemieux et al (2009) and Guadalupe and
Cunat (2009a) also take this position, although the current state of the evidence is still limited. These


8
 Walker was an important character in the early years of the economics discipline as the founding president of the
American Economics Association, the second president of MIT, and the Director of the 1870 Economic Census.

                                                       11
are interesting outcomes in their own right, and may also feed through into productivity, but we are
space constrained and refer the reader to the wider literature were relevant.


An important issue is the correct way to econometrically estimate production functions and TFP.
Ackerberg et al (2007) have surveyed such methods in a recent Handbook chapter, and this is a lively
(but still unsettled) area of research. Many of the issues on econometric identification of the
parameters of conventional factors of production (such as labor or capital) are the same as those that
will be discussed in sub-section 3.2 below. There is also a growing literature on examining the impact
of worker characteristics (or “human resources” such as skills, gender, race, seniority and age) on
productivity through direct estimation in production functions rather than the traditional approach of
looking at these indirectly through including them in wage equations. Interested readers are referred to
recent examples of this approach in Moretti (2004), Hellerstein et al (1999) and Dearden et al (2006).


           3.1 Why should we expect to see an impact of HRM on productivity?


Before discussing issues of identification and the results from these studies, it is worth asking some
basic questions: (a) why is this an interesting empirical question? and (b) why would we expect to see
any positive average effect of HRM practices on productivity? Note that the answer to this question is
not specific to human resources, but any endogenously chosen organizational design of the firm.


One response is that we should not expect to see any effects. The design perspective on HRM
(discussed more fully in Section 3 below) assumes that all firms are optimizing their HRM practices.
This may vary between firms because of different environments – for example, variations in
technologies across industries – but each firm is still optimizing. Externally manipulating the firm to
“force” it to do something sub-optimal (e.g. adopt incentive pay schemes) can only harm the firm’s
performance. By contrast, using actual changes in the firm’s choices of HRM (such as Lazear’s (2000)
Safelite Glass paper discussed below) will show that firms improve productivity as they will be
optimizing so we expect any change to produce a positive outcome on average.


An important rejoinder to this is that firms maximize discounted profits, not productivity. It may
increase productivity to introduce a given HRM practice, but this may still reduce profits, which is
why firms have chosen not to adopt. One example is Freeman and Kleiner, 2005, who found that the
abolition of piece rates reduced productivity but increased profits as quality rose in the absence of

                                                   12
piece rates. This is analogous to any factor input such as capital – increasing capital per hour will
increase output per hour, but the firm already takes this into account in its maximization program.
Thus, just as we are interested in estimating the parameters of a conventional production function for
capital and labor, we may be interested in the parameters associated with an HRM augmented
production function even if all management practices are chosen optimally.


A second reason for studying the effect of HRM on productivity is that if we do see any effect, we are
interested in the mechanisms through which this effect is working. For example, we expect the
introduction of incentive pay to affect the type of workers who want to join and leave the firm. How
important are these sorting and selections effect relatively to the pure incentive effect? Moreover, even
if we expect a positive effect, we may not be so interested in the average effect but rather how this
varies with observable characteristics of sub-groups of workers, or of the firm or of its environment.
Theory suggests that changing HRM will have heterogeneous effects in this way, so this places some
more testable restrictions on the data.


Finally, we describe below theories that regard some management practices partially as a technology.
In this case the investigation of the productivity effects of HRM is analogous to examining the effects
of the diffusion of any “hard” technology such as computers or hybrid corn. With a new technology we
generally expect to see slow and staggered diffusion across firms. Some of this is due to firms
optimizing given heterogeneous costs and benefits in a full information world. But slow diffusion may
also be due to the differential arrival rate of information about the new technology. More subtly, the
optimal HRM type may have changed over time. For example, performance pay may now be optimal
in many sectors where previously it was unprofitable due to rapid falls in the cost of Electronic
Resource Planning systems (such as SAP) that measure worker output (but not effort) more accurately
and rapidly. If the “management as technology” perspective is correct, we would expect to see
positive productivity effects from the adoption of these new HRM.




           3.2 HRM and productivity: the identification problem


The typical study in the HRM and productivity literature in Personnel Economics examines the change
in HR policy (typically an incentive pay reform) in a single firm and a key concern is the effect on
worker productivity. As Shaw (2009) points out this set-up looks extremely similar to the literature on


                                                   13
policy evaluation and its concern with correctly identifying treatment effects. Of course, in standard
policy evaluation the arena is usually larger than a single firm - a country, state or country; and the
policy maker the government rather than the CEO. Nevertheless, all the many issues germane to
identifying treatment effects are present and we discuss these links in this sub-section. For a longer
discussion on different treatment effects (Local Average Treatment Effects, Marginal Treatment
Effects, etc.) and estimation strategies (IV, control function, regression discontinuity design, matching,
etc.) see Lee (this volume) or Blundell and Costa-Dias (2008).


To be precise, let dit represent the treatment status of individual i at time t. Potential outcomes

(productivity) are yit1 and yit0 under the treated and non-treated scenarios. These are specified as

yit1   c  D i  uit for the treated and y0t1         c  uit for the non-treated where D i is the effect of the policy

on individual i, c the common intercept and uit the unobservable error. We assume that the policy

effects are heterogeneous over individuals. This allows us to write the potential outcome equation as:


                                                       yit   c  D i d it  uit


There are a variety of treatment effects that we may be interested in. The traditional one in the
homogenous treatment case is the average treatment effect (ATE) defined as the average outcome if an
individual was assigned at random to the treatment group, E (Di ) . More commonly, we can only

identify the Average Treatment on the Treated effect (ATT) which is the average effect for the
individuals who went through the program at some point, E (D i | di                      1) , where di indicates an
individual who is assigned to treatment, even if they are not currently being treated.


Consider the model where each individual i is observed before and after the policy change at times
to  k and t1 ! k respectively. The popular Difference in Differences (DD) estimator makes the

assumption that the error term, uit , takes a variance components form: uit                  Ki  W t  H it , where Ki is
correlated with di , W t is a common time effect, but H it is orthogonal to the other right hand side

variables.
                                                yit     c  D i d it  Ki  W t  H it                                (1)


Sequential differencing eliminates the fixed effect and the time effect so that


                                                                 14
                               D DID { ( yt1  yt1 )  ( yt0  yt0 ) E (Di | d1 1)
                                           1    0         1     0
                                                                                       ATT


Where ytd is the average outcome in group d at time t. Under the difference in difference assumptions
we recover the average effect of treatment on the treated. This is equivalent to adding in time dummies
and individual fixed effects in estimating equation (1).


Most of the HR studies have longitudinal data so they are able to do the first difference ( yt11  yt10 ) .

However, many studies do not have a control group in the firm who are not treated, thus there is no
second difference. This is a drawback because the second difference controls for unobservable time
shocks that are common to the two groups but unobserved to the econometrician. In other words, a
major concern is that the supposed effect of the HRM policy is actually just some other event
simultaneously dated with the introduction of the program.


In fact, many of the studies discussed below do have some more variance than just before and after for
a single organization. First, the object of study may be a few firms in a narrowly defined industry
(which is the usual strategy in Industrial Organization). Second, there may be variation in the
introduction of the policy across different sub-units within the firm (e.g. different plants, different
geographical regions9, different production lines, different teams, etc.). Exploiting this form of
variation, however, highlights the classical assignment problem - even if the macro time shock is
common between the two groups, the decision to adopt the policy for plant A and not to adopt it for
plant B is unlikely to be exogenous.


To see this, consider an assignment rule which is dit               1 if d it* ! 0 and dit   0 otherwise, where d it* is a
latent index defined by the linear rule:
                                                d it*   1(J Z it  Xit t 0)
                                                                                                                      (2)


In other words, plants that introduce the HRM policy may also be those that the CEO thinks are most
likely to benefit from it. If this could all be captured by observables then we would be able to control
for this bias. But we are unlikely in most datasets to have such a rich set of controls.


9
 Examining the branches of a multinational firm across different countries is an attractive strategy – e.g. Lafontaine and
Srinivasan (2009)

                                                              15
The credibility of the identification of treatment effects from cross-plant variation will hinge on the
assignment rule of equation (1), which is of course a selection equation. Lazear (2000), for example,
argues that the rollout of the policy across regions within Safelite Glass was essentially unrelated to
differential potential benefits being determined by geography. Bandiera et al (2007) examine whether
similar productivity increases occurred at the same time in the season in a previous year when the
policy experiment was not in place (a placebo test).


Having information on productivity prior to the policy is clearly helpful in considering selection.
Lazear (2000) and Bandiera et al (2007) can show that workers who ex ante had lower productivity
were less likely to be selected into employment ex post. Since the selection mechanism in both papers
means the more able workers are more likely to be employed the ATT effect will be an upper bound of
the effect on the compliers (those who stay employed).


What is the advantage of single firm studies? Single firm studies are now the dominant form of
methodology in Personnel economics, but given the problem of the absence of an obvious control
group, one might wonder whether this is such a good idea. Usually it is thought that focusing on a
single firm enables researchers to control for many aspects that would be impossible to deal with in a
larger cross-firm study. But what does this exactly mean?


Consider the possibility that we have multiple firms j = 1,…, J as well as multiple workers, i = 1,…,I,
and the difference in difference assumptions hold. Further, let us assume that there is some exogenous
within firm variation that enable us to identify the ATT from a single firm estimation strategy.


                                         yijt   c  D ij dijt  Kij  W jt  H jit                        (3)


If each firm j is “different” in the sense it has different time shocks ( W jt ), then estimating equation (3)

by including a common time shock W t as is typically done in the cross firm literature (e.g. Black and

Lynch, 2004) will generally produce inconsistent estimate of the ATT effect. However, one could
include firm*time dummies in equation (3) and recover the ATT in each firm j if the treatment
randomly varied by worker within each firm. This would clearly be more informative than just
recovering the ATT for one firm alone.



                                                        16
As second possible advantage of single firm strategies is that we may simply not have comparable
policies across firms, in the sense that the policy changes d ijt are not measured in the same units. To

some extent this is true, but there are ways in which different policies can be made comparable. In the
work on tax policies for example, we need to calculate what effect a tax reform has on the incentives
facing individuals. If policies are incomparable then the generalizability of such studies is severely
limited.


A third possible advantage of single firm studies is sheer institutional detail. Knowing a single firm
well may make it possible to collect more detailed information and rule out many of the alternative
explanations that might explain the results.


All three possible advantages of confining attention to a single firm strike us as differences in degree
rather than in kind. The future of the field may be to move away from purely single firm studies to
consider larger numbers of firms who are subject to HRM policy interventions where we have better
ways of measuring the relevant management policy in a comparable way. One way to do this is to
explicitly run experiments on firms, for example Karlan and Valdiva (2009) randomize the provision
of training for the owners of micro-enterprises in Peru, including some HRM training, and find some
significant positive impact of sales and growth. Bruhn, Karlan and Schoar (2010) provide management
training for small firms in Mexico, and again find some evidence for significant improvements on a
range of performance metrics. Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts (2010) run experiments
on large Indian firms to introduce a modern management practices, including modern HR practices
around piece-rate pay for workers and pay for performance for managers, and find large effects on
productivity and profitability. While this literature is at an early stage the broad results are that
introducing modern HRM practice into firms in developing countries leads to significant
improvements in performance. It would clearly be helpful to have more such studies, and particularly
in developed countries.


           3.3 Econometric studies of the productivity impact of HRM


There are a huge number of studies here which we attempt to summarize in Table 3.1. Before
discussing in detail, here is our four point summary.
   1. First, high quality studies generally show that there is a positive effect on productivity of
       incentive pay, both individual bonuses and (more surprisingly) group bonuses. This seems true


                                                   17
       across many sectors, including the public sector (see, for example, the Prentice et al, 2007
       survey).
   2. Second, in addition to a pure incentives effect, there is usually also an important selection
       effect generating higher productivity – productivity increases because high ability workers are
       attracted to organizations offering higher powered incentives.
   3. Third, the introduction of new forms of incentive pay is generally more effective when
       combined with other “complementary” factors. There are complements within the bundles of
       HRM practices (e.g. team work and group bonuses), and between some HRM practices and
       other firm characteristics (e.g. decentralization and information technology).
   4. Fourth, there are many examples of perverse incentives, for example, when rewards are tied to
       specific periods of time so that workers manipulate commissions to hit quarterly targets.
   5. Fifth, incentive pay schemes tend to be associated with greater dispersion of productivity as the
       effects are stronger on the more able workers, and this is stronger than the selection effect
       (which pushes towards reduced dispersion)




We divide this sub-section into general HRM studies, individual incentive pay, group incentive pay
and distortions.


       3.3.1 General HRM Studies


There are a huge number of studies that have correlated various aspects of the firm’s performance on
various aspects of its HRM (recall Table 3.1 for some of the measures used). There is generally a
strong and positive correlation between HRM and productivity.


The better studies use micro data and pay careful attention to the measurement issues and need to
control for many covariates. Black and Lynch (2001) examine various aspects of “high performance”
workplaces including profit related pay but also Total Quality Management, benchmarking, self
managed teams, recruitment strategies, etc. This was from a rich cross sectional survey that they
helped design (the EQW-NES) that could be matched to plant-level panel data from the Census
Bureau. They estimated production functions controlling for conventional inputs such as labor, capital
and materials, but also included a large number of these HRM practices. They found relatively few
practices were significantly related to total factor productivity - profit sharing for non-managers and

                                                  18
benchmarking were two of the stronger ones. The Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) management scores
also show high correlations of HR management scores with labor productivity, as illustrated in the
regressions in Table 3.2. A significant correlation is also apparent when other controls are added
(columns (2) and (3)) or alternative measures of performance are used such as profitability, sales
growth and firm survival (columns (4) through (6)). Of course none of these results are causal in the
sense that cross-sectional correlations between HR and productivity may be driven by reverse
causality, or correlations with other omitted factors as discussed above.


Some studies have tried to get a better handle on causation by using panel data on management
practices to try and control for fixed cross-sectional differences between firms. In Black and Lynch
(2004) the authors analyzed a second wave of the EQW-NES data so they could examine changes
between 1996 and 1993. Again, some practices (such as profit related pay) showed up as informative
in the cross section, but HRM practices were usually insignificant after controlling for fixed effects
(only “re-engineering was significant). Cappelli and Neumark (2001) come to a similar conclusion also
examining the same data.


Since many of these practices appear to be highly correlated some researchers have aggregated them
into a smaller number of summary measures. Huselid (1995) and Huselid and Becker (1996) did this in
combining questions of his survey of HR managers into two principal components – “employee skills
and organization” and “employee motivation”. They found that in the cross section one or other of
these factors was positively and significantly related to productivity, profitability and Tobin’s Q.
However, like Black and Lynch (2004), once fixed effects were included these factors were not
significant.


The disappointing results for the absence of any “effect” in the time series dimension could be due to
the fact that there genuinely is no relationship between productivity and HRM practices. Under this
interpretation the cross sectional results are due to a spurious correlation with a time-invariant
unobservable. Alternatively, there may be a downward endogeneity bias in the time-series because, for
example, because negative productivity shocks are positively correlated with the introduction of new
practices. Nickell, Nicolistsas and Patterson (2001) argue that firms organizationally innovate when
they are doing badly and this would cause such a downward bias. Another factor is measurement error,
which if it is of the classical form can cause attenuation bias towards zero. This is likely to be
particularly problematic for HRM practices if they do not change much over time and are measured
with substantial error.

                                                   19
        3.3.2 Individual Incentive Pay


A pioneering study is Lazear (2000) who looked at the replacement of a flat rate hourly pay system by
a piece rate pay system for windshield installers in the Safelite Glass Company. In this firm each
employee has a truck and drives to the homes of people who have broken car windshields and installs a
new one. Looking 19 months before and after the introduction of the incentive pay plan, Lazear found
that productivity increased by around 44% after the policy change, with about half of this due to
selection effects and half from the same individuals changing their behavior. The selection effects are
because less productive workers left the company and more productive workers joined, presumably
attracted by the higher powered incentives.


More recently, Bandiera, Barankay and Rasul (2007) engineered a change in the incentive pay system
for managers in a UK fruit farm. All the workers (fruit pickers) were on piece rate pay, but prior to the
policy change the managers were paid a flat rate, whereas afterwards there was a strong element of pay
tied to the performance of the workers they managed. The average picker’s productivity rose by 21%
after the introduction of performance related pay and at least half of this was due to improved
selection. The remainder of the effect is due to managers focusing their efforts more on the workers
were it had the greatest marginal effect. Examining the mechanism through which this happened,
Bandiera et al (2009a) gathered information on social connections from their survey. They found that
prior to the introduction of incentive pay managers favored workers to whom they were socially
connected irrespective of the workers’ ability. After the introduction of performance bonuses they
targeted their efforts towards high ability workers regardless of whether they were socially connected
or not. This had the effect of increasing the dispersion of productivity (as well as the level).


Freeman and Kleiner (2005) examine the elimination of piece rates for a US shoe manufacturer. They
focused on two plants of the same firm who switched at different times and focused on what happened
to productivity (monthly shoes produced per worker) and profits before and after the change in the pay
scheme. Consistent with the other “insider” studies, productivity fell after the workers were put on a
flat hourly rate. Interestingly, the authors show that profits rose after the change which they attribute in
part to improved quality with flat pay, plus a variety of other managerial changes complementary to
flat rate pay.




                                                    20
A criticism of these studies is that the workers who are treated are not random. The firm who
introduced the policy presumably believed there would be some benefits from doing so, thus it is hard
to rule out the idea that there may have been some other contemporaneous change that affects worker
productivity. Shearer (2004) addresses this problem in his study of tree planters in British Columbia.
He worked with the company employing the planters and designed an experiment where all workers
were randomly assigned to the incentive pay group for some days and flat hourly time rates for others
(so the same worker is observed under both systems). He cannot look at selection effects, but found
that the pure incentive effect was to increase productivity by around 22%, very similar to Lazear
(2000).


Another example of cleaner identification is Lavy (2009) who exploits a quasi-experiment in Israeli
schools where teachers were offered individual bonuses based on their relative performance as
indicated by pupil scores in math and English exams. School assignment was based on a rule
determined by past matriculation results and this gives several identification methods including a
regression discontinuity design around the threshold. He finds significant improvements in teacher
performance and no evidence of distortions. Interestingly, the improvement in performance appeared
to be due to changes in teaching methods and management. Not all evaluations of performance pay for
teachers are so positive, although Lavy’s (2007) survey does suggest that the weight of evidence is in
favor and more so for individual incentive pay than for group incentives, which we turn to in the next
sub-section.


In summary, these studies do suggest that individual incentive pay increases productivity. Other
studies also show evidence that incentives affect employee behavior, but the precise “incentive effect”
on productivity are not so easy to interpret10.


          3.3.3 Group Incentive Pay
In Section 2 we saw that collective payment by results (such as team bonuses) has become much more
important over the last 30 years or so. In the US almost half of employees participate in such schemes
(see Section 2). There has been a recent review of the effects of such schemes in Blasi, Freeman,
Mackin and Kruse (2009) who consider over 100 studies. In general a positive association is revealed
between group incentive schemes and company performance, but with substantial diversity in results.
The average estimated increase in productivity associated with employee ownership and profit sharing

10
 For example see Gaynor, Rebitzer and Taylor (2004); Groves, Hong, McMillan and Naughton (1994) and Fernie and
Metcalf (1999).

                                                     21
is 4.5%11. A survey of UK schemes by the UK Treasury (Oxera, 2007) found a mean effect across
studies of 2.5% and larger effects for share ownership schemes12. Combinations of such schemes with
other HRM practices were found to be particularly effective – e.g. employee involvement in teams.


A recent example of this literature would be Bryson and Freeman (2009) who use the 2004 UK WERS
survey discussed in Section 2 to relate various measures of company performance to the presence of
incentive pay. They find that employee share ownership schemes are associated with 3.3% high value
added per worker compared to no other form of incentive pay, but other forms of group incentive pay
are insignificant. As with most of the other studies, the problem is that there are many potential
omitted variables that are not controlled for, so we are concerned whether this is a causal effect or
simply an association with an unobservable13. Jones and Kato (1995) go one step further as they have
panel data on ESOPs and bonuses in Japanese firms. Switches to ESOPS were associated with 4-5%
higher productivity after 3-4 years. Although panel data is an improvement, there is still the problem
that the adopting firms are non-random as discussed in sub-section 3.2.


Boning, Ichinowski and Shaw (2007) examine the introduction of team-based systems (including
group incentive pay) in a distinct product line across 36 mini-mills. These mini-mills take scrap metal
and recycle it into steel bars used, for example, in freeways. They find team-based work (including
team bonuses) are associated with 6% higher productivity, especially in more complex products which
indicates the importance of the complementarity between HRM and the wider strategy of the firm (see
sub-section 3.4).


Hamilton, Nickerson and Owan (2003) study the shift by a US garments manufacturer from individual
pay towards group pay (“gain-sharing”). This coincided with a more general change in the firm’s
production strategy to produce smaller more custom-made batches (reflecting demand from their major
customer – retail clothing stores). This “modular” approach required more team work so group
bonuses were more appropriate incentives. Productivity rose by about 18% and this increase was
stronger for more heterogeneous teams. The authors suggest that this came from exploiting unused
collaborative skills of workers. Surprisingly given the free rider problem, the more productive workers




11
   On employee ownership see Kruse and Blasi (1997). On profit-sharing and gain-sharing see Weitzman and Kruse (1990).
12
   10 of the 13 studies of profit related pay were positive and 7 out of the 10 studies of share ownership.
13
   The study does not control for capital inputs or fixed effects, although some of the other studies do.

                                                         22
were earlier to switch. This suggests some non-pecuniary benefits and also positive peer effects (see
below)14.


Boning et al (2007) and Hamilton et al (2003) have the advantage that some of the unobservable
shocks are controlled for by focusing on a narrower group of individuals (working in a single industry
or a single firm). Although they still face the issue of endogeneity as there is no random assignment,
their intimate knowledge of the change enables them to examine the mechanisms through which group
pay influences productivity in a richer manner. Bloom et al. (2010) do randomly assign firms to
interventions including the introducing performance related pay and find a 10% improvement in
productivity.


Burgess et al (2007) obtain something that is closer to random assignment by examining the
introduction of a group incentive system in the UK tax collection agency. The preliminary results from
this work suggest that group bonuses were effective in significantly raising productivity. Also in the
public sector, Lavy (2002) finds that group bonuses for Israeli school teachers were highly effective in
raising performance (compared to simply increasing school resources). Schools were given awards for
improvements in dropout rates, matriculation rates and credits. The effects were stronger for weak
students. Finally, Baiker and Jacobson (2007) find that group incentives in the form of keeping a
greater share of the value of seized assets caused police productivity to rise in catching drug offences.


In summary, there does then, appear to be evidence that group incentive schemes also raise
productivity which is surprising given the free rider problem. Overall, the evidence is weaker here than
that for individual incentive pay, in our opinion.


       3.3.4 Distortions due to incentive pay


The studies in the previous sub-sections suggested that individuals do respond to pay incentives and
generally in a way that usually increases productivity. The theoretical literature has emphasised many
ways in which incentive pay can cause distortions which could reduce productivity. First, employees
are more risk averse than firms and incentive pay increases the risks faced by workers. Thus it may
discourage some high ability (but risk averse) workers from joining the firm and encourage excessive



14
  Knez and Simester (2001) also found productivity increases following the promise of a company-wide bonus for
improvements in on-time takeoffs in Continental Airways.

                                                     23
risk taking15. Second, firms cannot always credibly commit to reward performance ex post. For
example, Gibbons (1987) details a model where only the worker knows the difficulty of job and the
true action. He shows how this generates a “ratchet effect” where workers will restrict output unless
the employer can commit not to use the information it obtains from learning the difficulty of the task.
Third, measures of the worker’s productivity are imperfectly related to inputs (worker effort). Baker
(1992) shows how incentive pay tied to a measureable output will cause workers to increase effort to
improve the measured output and reduce effort on the unmeasured output (e.g. quantity instead of
quality in Lazear, 1986)16.


Given the difficulty with tying incentives to objective measures what about the common practice of
using supervisors’ subjective measures of performance? Several papers have modeled the optimal mix
of incentives based on imperfect objective measures and perfect (but unverifiable) subjective
measures17. The problem with subjective measures is that although they provide stronger incentives
workers have to trust that the firm does not renege ex post, which is a particular danger with
unverifiable information. Furthermore, there will still be the problem of the gap between actual and
measured effort. This can mean (i) employees engage in “influence activity” to alter supervisors’
decisions in their favor (e.g. Milgrom and Roberts, 1988)18; (ii) there may be favoritism on the behalf
of supervisors for particular workers (Prendergast and Topel, 1996)19; (iii) the supervisor and
employee may hold different opinions about employee’s performance (MacLeod, 2003).


Empirical work has tended to focus on the potential distortions in explicit incentive schemes. One key
distortion that occurs is the measurement period. Asch (1990) examines US Navy recruiters who were
incentivized based on their ability to enlist sailors (partly through measurement and some also through
explicit payments). This was based on annual quotas, so only affected those who were close to missing
their quota. In addition, the effect was extremely strong near year end, but weak afterwards, causing
inconsistent efforts over time. Courty and Marshke (2004) analyze managers of job training centers
and show that managers work very hard at the end of the measurement period, but generated some

15
   Much of the remuneration of many financial workers, such as traders is based on an annual bonus. Since this can never
be less than zero it may encourage excessively risky positions.
16
   Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) have a similar finding in the context of a multi-tasking model where incentive contracts
can cause agents to under or over invest sub-optimally in different tasks. This could explain the well-known phenomenon
of “teaching to the test”. This what led performance related pay to increase productivity but reduce productivity in Freeman
and Kleiner (2005), as workers measured increased output of shoes but at the expense of unmeasured quality.
17
   For example see Baker, Gibbons and Murphy (1994), Bull (1987) and MacLeod and Malcomson (1989).
18
   This may be a reason why some firms commit to promoting based on seniority rather than subjective assessments of
performance.
19
   MacLeod (2003) shows how this will act as a multiplier effect on discrimination, making the discriminated group suffer
further from lower effort.

                                                            24
costs in the form of lower training quality. Glewwe, Elias and Kremer (2003) examined a school-wide
incentives program in Kenya. The program randomly assigned fifty elementary schools to a treatment
group eligible for monetary incentives (21-43% of monthly salary). All teachers in winning schools
received rewards based on average test score performance and dropout rates. Student scores improved
significantly in the treatment schools for the two years the program was in place. But this appeared to
be due solely to teachers conducting test preparation outside of regular class and there were no long-
run effects on pupil performance. This appeared to be a classic case of incentives simply causing
“teaching to the test”.


One might think that since these are examples from the public sector it is no surprise that incentives
are poorly designed. Yet there are also many private sector examples. Oyer (1998) shows that firms
typically build incentives around fiscal years. Consequently, firms sell more (at lower margins) near
the end of the fiscal year compared to the middle of the year, and even less just at the start of the
accounting year. Larkin (2007) looks at large software company and shows that salesmen acted on
their incentives to shift effort towards the end of their measurement period. Compared to the
counterfactual of no incentive contracts it is unclear whether these imperfect incentive contracts reduce
overall productivity (although Larkin argues that there is a 6-8% cost in potential revenue)20.


A more subtle form of distortion can occur between types of individual incentive pay systems when
workers have social preferences. Many economists (e.g. Lazaer, 1989) have puzzled over why relative
performance benchmarks are not used more commonly in pay systems given their desirable properties
(i.e. common time specific shocks outside the employees’ control are removed). Bandiera, Barankay
and Rasul (2005) examined a change of incentive pay among workers their firm from a system based
on relative performance to piece rates based on absolute performance. They found that productivity
increased by 50% as a result of the experiment and attributed this to the fact that workers have social
preferences (using their measures of friendship networks). Under a relative performance system a
worker who increases his effort puts a negative externality on other workers under a relative system,
but has no such affect under a piece rate system.


Overall, there is clear evidence that distortions often in response to incentive pay schemes, especially
when badly designed. Nevertheless, the evidence that many performance pay schemes – whether

20
   Chevalier and Ellison (1997) show that calendar year non-linearities lead to persistent distortions for mutual fund
managers risk profiles. These are not chosen by the firm, however. We have even personally exploited year end incentives
to buy cheap data in the past by agreeing with a salesman that he can choose each year which quarter we buy data from him
(so he can use this to hit a quarterly target he would otherwise narrowly miss) in return for a 50% reduction in price.

                                                          25
individual or group - can raise productivity suggests that these distortions are not generally
overwhelming.


               3.3.5 Labor Unions
A related literature is on the productivity impact of labor unions, an important human resource policy
choice (see Freeman and Medoff, 1984). One recent attempt at an identification strategy here is
DiNardo and Lee (2004) who exploit a regression discontinuity design. In the US a unions must win a
National Labor Relations Board election to obtain representation, so one can compare plants just above
the 50% cut-off to plants just below the 50% cut-off to identify the causal effects of unions. In contrast
to the rest of the literature, DiNardo and Lee (2004) find no effect of unions on productivity, wages
and most other outcomes. The problem, of course, is that union effects may only “bite” when the union
has more solid support from the workforce. Farber (this volume) discusses labor unions in more detail.


More generally, there is the question of whether unions inhibit incentive pay. Arguments can be made
both ways. Although figure 2.1 is suggestive of the rise in incentive pay moving in the opposite way to
the fall in union power and unions are certainly associated with lower pay dispersion within firms,
Brown (1990) found no relationship with performance pay.


           3.4 Complementarities


One of the key reasons why firms may find it difficult to adjust their organizational form is that there
are important complementarities between sets of organizational practices. Milgrom and Roberts (1990)
build a theoretical structure where such complementarities (or more precisely, super-additivities) mean
that firms optimally choose clusters of practices that “fit together”. When the environment change so
that an entrant firm would use this group of optimal practices, incumbent firms will find it harder –
they will either switch a large number together or none at all.


This has important implications for productivity analysis. The effects of introducing a single practice
will be heterogeneous between firms and depend on what practices they currently use. This implies
linear regressions of the form of equation (1) may be misleading. To see this consider that rather than a
single HRM practice ( dit ) there are two management practices, m1 and m2 and their relationship with

productivity is such that TFP (the yit considered here) increases by more when they are used together.



                                                    26
                           yit   c  E1mit1  E 2 mit2  E12 ( mit1 * mit2 )  Ki  W t  H it          (4)


A simple version of the complementary hypothesis is E12 ! 0 . A stronger form is that the disruption

caused by just using one practice used alone actually reduced productivity, E1  0, E 2  0 . In this case a

regression which omits the interaction term may actually only find only a zero coefficient on the linear
terms.


The case study literature emphasizes the importance of complementarities. Econometrically, testing for
their existence poses some challenges, however, as pointed out most clearly by Athey and Stern
(1998). A common approach is a regression of practice 1 on practice 2 (and more) with a positive
covariance (conditional on other factors) indicating complementarity. It is true that complements will
tend to covary positively, but this is a very weak test. There could be many other unobservables
causing the two practices to move together. Essentially, we need instrumental variables for at least one
of the practices (e.g. Van Biesebroeck, 2007), but this is hard to obtain as it is unclear what such an
instrument would be - how could it be legitimately excluded from the second stage equation? In
classical factor demand analysis we would examine the cross price effects to gauge the existence of
Hicks-Allen complements versus substitutes, i.e. does demand for practice 1 fall when the price of
practice 2 rises (all else equal). Analogously, we would like to observe some cost shock to the
adoption of practice 1 that is uncorrelated with the error term in the practice 2 adoption equation.
Unfortunately, such tests are particularly hard to implement because there are generally not market
prices for the organizational factors we are considering.


An alternative strategy is to work straight from the production function (or performance equation more
generally). In an influential paper Ichinowski, Prennushi and Shaw (1997) estimate a version of
equation (4) using very disaggregate panel data on finishing lines in integrated US steel mills using
eleven human resource practices (including incentive pay, recruitment, teamwork, job flexibility and
rotation). Their measure of productivity is based on downtime - the less productive lines were idle for
longer. They find that introducing one or two practices has no effect, but introducing a large number
together significantly raises productivity. Although the endogeneity problem is not eliminated, the
controls for fixed effects, looking at very disaggregated data and a performance measure suited to the
sector (downtime) helps reduce some of the more obvious sources of bias. Gant, Ichinowski and Shaw
(2002) show that the productivity benefits of team working in steel plants appear to be due to faster
problem solving because of tighter horizontal interactions and networks between workers. They use

                                                            27
detailed surveys of who is talking to who to show that plants involved with innovative HRM systems
have this feature.


In addition to endogeneity concerns, there is a further problem with interpreting a positive estimate of
E12 in equation (1) as evidence of complementarities. The true model may be one where there is a
single latent factor for “good HRM management” and the many individual HRM measures may be
(noisy) signals of this latent factor. This will generate positive covariance between the practices and
could also cause the interaction to be positive. Thus, some care is required in the interpretation of the
production function coefficients.


Another aspect is the complementarity between HRM practices and other features of the firm. New
technology is often discussed in this context and we turn to this next (see also section 5).


           3.5 The Role of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)


One of the key productivity puzzles of recent years has been why the returns to the use of information
and communication technologies appear to be so high and so heterogeneous between firms and
between countries. For example, Brynjolffson and Hitt (2003) find that the elasticity of output with
respect to ICT capital is far higher than its share in gross output (see also Stiroh, 2004). This reversed
the well known Solow Paradox that one could find computers everywhere except the productivity
figures. Not only was there evidence for large and significant returns at the micro-level, US
productivity growth accelerated at the macro level from 1995 onwards. A substantial fraction of this
appears to be linked to the production and use of ICT (e.g. Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh, 2008), and the
greater pay-off to ICT usage seems to be a reason why European productivity growth was much slower
than that in the US since the mid 1990s (ending the catching up process).


One explanation for these phenomena was that effective use of ICT also requires significant changes in
firm organization. Changing the notation of (4) slightly we could write


                                        yit   E c cit  E mit  E cm (c * m)it  uit                   (5)


Where c in ln(ICT capital) and m is an HRM practice. The hypothesis that E cm >0 would be consistent
with complementarity between some HRM practices and ICT. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt

                                                      28
(2002) try to test this directly by surveying the organizations of large US firms on decentralization and
team work (for a cross section) and combining this with data on ICT (from a private company Harte-
Hanks) and productivity from Compustat. They find evidence that E cm >0. Bloom, Sadun and Van
Reenen (2010) broaden the sample to cover firms in seven European countries and find evidence of
complementarity of ICT with the Bloom-Van Reenen measure of HR management discussed in
Section 2. They also show that their results are robust to controlling for firm fixed effects. Careful
econometric case studies (e.g. Baker and Hubbard, 2004; Bartel, Ichinowski and Shaw, 2007) also
identify differential productivity effects of ICT depending on organization form. We will return to the
issues of complementarity between HRM, technology and human capital in section 5.




4 Two perspectives on HRM and productivity: Design and Technology


In thinking about the reasons for variations in HRM and productivity a contrast can be drawn between
two possible approaches. The first, which is the now classic approach of Personnel Economics we
label the “design” approach. The view here is that the HRM practices we observe are chosen by a
profit maximising firm: they are explicit strategic choices of the firm, and variations in HRM reflect
variations in the firm’s environment.


A second approach is becoming more common but has not been closely linked to labor economics. We
label this the “managerial technology” approach because of the recent stress in diverse fields of
economics, such as trade, public and macro, but above all Industrial Organization that there are large
and persistent differences in firm productivity (see sub-section 2.2 above). In this view some aspects of
HRM could be considered as a technology or “best practice” in the jargon. Adopting these forms of
HRM would improve productivity in a typical firm. This leads on naturally to the question of why all
firms have not adopted such practices. We discuss this below, but one immediate explanation is that all
technologies have some diffusion curve whereby not all firms immediately adopt them. For example, it
took American car manufacturers decades to accept and then implement Japanese style “lean
manufacturing” techniques pioneered by Toyota. Informational constraints (and other factors we
discuss below) could be an explanation for the slow diffusion of major managerial innovations.


The firm heterogeneity inherent in the managerial technology perspective mirrors the traditional labor
economist’s emphasis on heterogeneity amongst workers. Interestingly, the many recent contributions

                                                   29
in labor economics have found that fundamental features of the labor market such as the persistent
dispersion in equilibrium wage distribution for similar workers cannot be easily understood without
appealing to some sort of firm heterogeneity (e.g. Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002; Cahuc, Postel-Vinay
and Robin, 2006). Such models are generally silent on how this firm heterogeneity comes about, but
their existence seems important in quantitatively matching features of wage dispersion in real labor
markets.


The Design and Technology perspectives are not mutually exclusive, of course. As economists, we
believe that there is always some element of maximization. The managerial technology perspective
highlights, however, that some firms are constrained by being less productive than others. We believe
that this is an important empirical phenomenon which can explain many puzzling facts and requires
integration into the dominant design paradigm. We overview both perspectives and refer readers who
want more depth to the surveys in Gibbons and Waldman (1999), Malcomson (1999), Prendergast
(1999), Lazear (1999) and especially Lazear and Oyer (2009) which summarizes the most recent
theory and some more recent empirical evidence.


           4.1 The Design Perspective


The economics of contracts (see Bolton and Dewatripont, 2005, for an overview) and the economics of
organizations (see Gibbons and Roberts, 2009) have made huge strides in recent decades. HRM or
Personnel economics is a sub-class of this broader field with a focus on explaining the type of
institutions we observe in real employment contracts and organization.


Prior to the emergence of Personnel economics, the study of HRM was dominated by industrial
psychologists and sociologists who emphasised institutions and culture as determining the internal
organization of firms. Generalizations were eschewed. Traditionally labor economists focused on labor
demand and supply, unemployment and investment in education, issues that saw the firm as a single
unit rather than a complex organization and so had little to directly say on the structure of pay,
promotions and design of work within firms. This started changing in the 1970s partly as new
techniques of agency and contract theory allowed a more systematic treatment of activity inside
companies.




                                                  30
The design perspective borrows three key principles from economics. First, firms and workers are
rational maximizing agents (profits and utility respectively). Secondly, it is assumed that labor and
product markets must reach some sort of price-quantity equilibrium, which provides some discipline
for the models. Finally, the stress is very much on private efficiency with an emphasis on why some
employment practices which may look to be perplexing and inefficient on the surface (e.g. mandatory
retirement and huge pay disparities for CEOs) may actually be (at least privately) optimal.


The key feature of the design approach is that the HRM practices we observe are chosen by firms to
maximize profits in an environment that departs from perfectly competitive spot markets. Unlike the
standard Personnel Management texts, Personnel Economics leads to sharper predictions and
generalizations: it is not the case that “every workplace is fundamentally different”. However, the
design approach puts the reason for heterogeneity in the adoption of different practices as mainly due
to the different environments firms face – say in the industry’s technology, rather than inefficiencies.
The managerial technology view, described next, sees a large role for inefficiencies.


           4.2 The managerial technology perspective


                       4.2.1 What are HRM best practices?


The large dispersion in firm productivity discussed in sub-section 2.2 motivates an alternative
perspective that some types of HRM (or bundles of HRM practices) are better than others for firms in
the same environment. There are three types of these best practices. First, there are some practices that
have always been better throughout time and space (e.g. not promoting gross incompetents to senior
positions) or collecting some information before making decisions. Second, there may be genuine
managerial innovations (Taylor’s Scientific Management; Toyota’s Lean Manufacturing System;
Demming’s Quality movement, etc.) in the same way there are technological innovations. There are
likely to be arguments over the extent to which an innovation is real technical progress or just a fad or
fashion. It is worth recalling that this debate historically occurred for many of the “hard” technological
innovations which take for granted now such as computers and the Internet. Thirdly, many practices
may have become optimal due to changes in the economic environment over time, as the design
perspective highlights. Incentive pay may be an example of this: piece rates declined dramatically in
the late 19th Century, but incentive pay appears to be making somewhat of a comeback (see sub-
section 2.1.1). Lemieux et al (2008) suggest that this may be due to advances in ICT – companies like


                                                   31
SAP make it much easier to measure output in a timely and robust fashion, making effective incentive
pay schemes easier to design21. In these circumstances, some firms may be faster than others in
switching to the new best practice. The differential speed of adjustment to the new equilibrium can be
due to information differences, complementarities (see sub-section 3.4) and agency issues.


Notice that there is nothing in what we have said which is specifically tied to HR in this description. If
productivity dispersion is due (at least in part) to differential managerial quality then this applies both
to the HR and non-HR parts. We next examine some of the theories of management that could help
account for productivity dispersion (of which HRM is a subset).


                         4.2.2 Theories of management quality


The large-scale productivity dispersion described in Section 2 poses serious challenges to the
representative firm approach. It has always been germane to Industrial Organization, but there has
been a wholesale re-evaluation of theoretical approaches in several fields. For example, in
international trade the dominant paradigm has already started to shift towards heterogeneous firm
models. This is due to the increasing weight of empirical evidence documenting the persistent
heterogeneity in firm export patterns (exporters tend to be larger and more productive). Melitz (2003)
follows Hopenhayn (1992) in assuming that firms do not know their productivity before the pay a sunk
cost to enter an industry, but when they enter they receive a draw from a known distribution.
Productivity does not change over time and firms optimize subject to their constraint of having high or
low productivity. Firms who draw a very low level of productivity will immediately exit as there is
some fixed cost of production they cannot profitably cover. Those who produce will have a mixture of
productivity levels, however. A natural interpretation of this set-up is that entrepreneurs found firms
with a distinct managerial culture which is imprinted on them until they exit, so some firms are
permanently “better” or “worse” managed. Over time, the low productivity firms are selected out and
the better ones survive and prosper. There is some stochastic element to this, however, so in the steady
state there will always be some dispersion of productivity.


Identifying the permanent productivity advantage in this model as “managerial quality” is consistent
with the tradition in the panel data econometric literature. Indeed, Mundlak’s (1961) introduction of
the original fixed effects panel data model was designed to control for this unmeasured managerial

21
  Hard technological advances have also facilitated managerial innovations such as Just in Time. Keane and Feinberg
(2007) stress the importance of these improved logistics for the growth of intra-firm trade between the US and Canada.

                                                         32
ability (the title of his paper was “Empirical Production Function Free of Management Bias”). Rather
than just treat this as a nuisance parameter however, more recent attempts have tried to measure
management directly.


Imperfect competition is one obvious ingredient for these models. With imperfect competition firms
can have differential efficiency and still survive in equilibrium. With perfect competition inefficient
firms should be rapidly driven out of the market as the more efficient firms undercut them on price. In
Syverson (2004b), for example, there is horizontal product differentiation based on transport costs so
firms have local market power. He shows theoretically and empirically that increases in competition
will increase average productivity by reducing the mass of less productive plants in an area.


Another important element is “frictions”. Costs of adjustment are ubiquitous in capital investment and
have usually been found for labor, especially skilled labor (see Bond and Van Reenen, 2007, and
Bloom 2009 for surveys). Thus, firms facing asymmetric shocks will adjust differentially to their new
conditions only slowly over time even if they all have identical adjustment cost technologies. In such
an environment, low TFP firms will not immediately vanish as there is an option value to remaining
active in the sector. The Melitz model could be regarded as a limiting case of introducing frictions
where the TFP draw cannot be altered over time by say investing in improving management. The
managerial factor is “trapped” as there is no direct market for it as it cannot be transferred between
firms. When the firm exits, so does the productivity advantage – entrepreneurs take a new draw if they
enter again. In reality, adjustment costs can take more general forms and are likely to be important as
management practices and organizational forms can adjust.


The management quality measures in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) can be interpreted as the
permanent draw from the productivity distribution when firms are born. Alternatively, it may reflect
that some individuals have superior managerial skill and can maintain a larger span of control as in
Lucas (1978). More generally, management quality could evolve over time due to investments in
training, consultancy, etc.


A common feature of these models is that management is partially like a technology, so there are
distinctly good (and bad) practices that would raise (or lower) productivity. We believe that this is an
important element in management quality, and the traditional models that seek to understand
technological diffusion (e.g. Hall, 2003) are relevant for understanding the spread of managerial
techniques.

                                                   33
                 4.2.3 “Behavioral” explanations of management


None of the exposition of the Managerial Technology perspective has relied on any “Behavioral
economics”, in the sense of non-optimizing agents. Of course, one potential explanation for the non
adoption of seemingly profitable HRM practices could be behaviorally based. One line of the literature
focuses on managerial over-confidence, in which managers are excessively optimistic about their own
abilities and the investment returns of their firms. In the case of HRM they may believe their current
policies are optimal and so no changes are needed. The other focuses on managerial faults like
procrastination towards undertaking profitable activities, so they may believe they need to adopt more
modern HRM practices but repeatedly defer actually doing this.


Managerial overconfidence
This builds on the well known result from the psychology literature showing routine overconfidence in
individuals over their abilities. For example, Svenson (1981) showed that 82% of students placed their
driving ability in the top 30%. Exacerbating this is attribution bias, whereby managers attribute good
performance to their own ability, despite this often being due to luck, leading to more senior managers
to become increasing overconfident. Since senior managers often have few peers to correct them, this
type of over-confidence can persist. Malmendier and Tate (2005) show that overconfident managers –
defined as those who hold excessively hi portfolios of their companies share (failing to diversify) -
undertake excessively high investments that are less profitable on average, less well regarded by stock-
markets and more internally financed22.


Procrastination
Another literature has pointed out the procrastination – or failure to take known optimal actions – by
individuals and managers. For example, Duflo, Kremer and Robinson (2009) show how Kenyan maize
farmers do not use fertilizer despite returns of over 100% to the investment, unless they are provided
with some form of commitment mechanism like advanced buying of the fertilizer. Similarly, Conley
and Udry (2009) show how pineapple farmers in Ghana also under-use fertilizer in their farms, again


22
   Likewise the Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) survey asked managers the question “Excluding yourself, please score your
firms management practices on a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 is worst practice, 10 is best practice and 5 is average”. The
average response from managers was 7.1, and was correlated at only 0.035 with each firm’s actual labor productivity. This
suggests that to the extent that managers are reporting their self assessment accurately, they are substantially over rating
their managerial ability, and also struggling to benchmark this against their actual management ability.


                                                            34
despite having the resources to purchase this and without any superior savings mechanism. This type
of behavior is certainly not limited to developing countries – for example, Choi, Laibson and Madrian
(2008) show that many employees of US firms are directly losing money from not making investments
in 401K plans which have matching top-ups by employers and permit instant withdrawal .


In all cases the behavior is irrational from a standard optimizing framework in that agents are aware of
utility maximizing actions but do not take them. One framework for explaining these actions goes back
to O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999), who propose a model in which agents are present-biased and as
least partially naïve, systematically underestimating the odds they will be impatient in the future.
Hence, agents defer taking improving actions today under the belief they will take them in future, but
never do. As a result agents repeatedly procrastinate on taking profitable actions, like introducing
modern HRM practices into their firms.


               4.3 The two perspectives: Summary


In the Design approach firms at every point are choosing their optimal set of management practices
and no firm is more efficient than another based on these. In management science, “contingency
theory” (e.g. Woodward, 1958) is akin to this. Any coherent theory of management has firms choosing
different practices in different environments, so there will always be some element of contingency. For
example, Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) show that firms appear to specialize more in investing in
“people management” (practices over promotion, rewards, hiring and firing) when they operate in a
more skill-intensive industry. If we examine the relative scores by country for monitoring and target
setting practices compared to people management, the US, India and China have the largest relative
advantage in people management, and Japan, Sweden and Germany the largest relative advantage in
monitoring and target setting management. The systematic difference in the relative scores of different
types of management across countries also suggests that there may be some specialization in areas of
comparative advantage, perhaps due to labor market regulation. Figure 4.1 shows some evidence for
this. The cross country differences in people management are related to the degree of labor market
regulation (lightly regulated countries such as the US and Canada do better than heavily regulated
countries such as France, Brazil and Greece).


The interesting question is whether there really are any “universals”, i.e. some practices that would be
unambiguously better for the majority of firms? If this is so, why are they not adopting them? The


                                                  35
answer to this question is identical to that of the adoption of any new technology – there are costs to
adoption in the form of information, incentives, regulatory constraints, externalities, etc. These will
vary somewhat by time and place and we turn to some of these factors next.




5 Some determinants of HRM practices


Given the dispersion in HRM practices and productivity outlined in section 2 we naturally turn to the
question of why such variations exist. The large span of theories and empirical work makes it
impossible to discuss all areas of the determinants of HRM, so focus on some key themes.


           5.1 Insurance and incentive pay


One of the most basic features of performance pay from the design perspective is the incentive vs.
insurance trade-off. A first best contract could be written on effort, but the essence of the principal
agent problem is that the agent’s effort is not perfectly observable. An obvious way to solve the
principal agent problem is for the principal to sell the firm to the agent whose incentives would then be
aligned with value maximization. This does sometimes happen in market stalls and some other
contexts, but it is exceptional in the modern economy.


A fundamental reason for this is that individuals are more risk averse than firms. A flat salary provides
insurance to an employee because when the firm experiences a negative shock his wage will remain
constant (assuming that he is not laid off). Consider a contract that is partially base salary and partially
tied to a measure of employee output (a signal of effort). The observable measure of worker output is a
function of effort and stochastic factors: these might be measurement error in the signal or truly
exogenous shocks to output. The greater the variance of the noise relative to the signal, the greater is
the risk that the employee is forced to bear. Thus, in order to attract the employee to supply his labor to
the firm (the participation constraint), the lower will be the weight attached to the employee’s
measured output in the optimal contract. Thus, there is a trade-off between risks and incentives.


Prendergast (1999) analyzed this in detail and lamented that the evidence here did not really give great
support to the basic insurance-incentive trade off. For example, Garen (1994) examines the degree to
which CEO compensation is linked to performance (the “” in a linear contract). The relationship

                                                    36
between  and the noisiness of performance measures should be negative, but appeared to be
statistically zero in his data. Brown (1990) examining a wider range of occupations also finds little
relationship between incentive pay and the riskiness of the environment,


Prendergast (2000, 2002a, 2002b) looks at this evidence in more detail and offers several possible
explanations. In Prendergast (2002a) risky environments will be ones were the manager’s private
information is more valuable. This is because the uncertainty in this environment will make it much
more likely that the agent knows what the “right” thing is to do rather than the principal. In such
circumstances delegating decisions to the agent become more attractive. In other words, the increased
cost of incentive pay in terms of lower insurance to an employee in a risky environment has also to be
set against the higher value of employee’s information. Thus, uncertain environments increase the
value of giving more decision rights to employees which will increase the probability of incentive pay
even though the insurance mechanism leans in the opposite way. Prendergast (2002a) hypothesizes
that because the degree of delegation is hard to control for at the same time as environmental
uncertainty, this is why the effects of uncertainty on incentive pay have been empirically ambiguous.


Prendergast‘s point is a specific example of a more general principle in terms of the incentives to
decentralize when it is hard for the principal to learn about the “right action” in a noisy environment.
We describe this model in more detail in sub-section 5.4 below and show that there is string of
empirical evidence that more uncertain/heterogeneous environments do cause greater decentralization
as Prendergast suggests (Acemoglu et al, 2007). Whether this resolves the empirical problem of
insurance vs. incentive pay is still unclear, however23.




             5.2 Product Market Competition


From the “management technology” perspective, it is clearer why competition has a positive effect on
best practice HRM. Adam Smith, for example, wrote that “Monopoly...is a great enemy to good
management.”24 Higher product market competition as indexed by say an increase in consumer price

23
   There have been attempts to combine information on delegation and incentive pay (e.g. Adams, 2005 and DeVaro and
Kurtulus, 2007), but both incentive pay and delegation are exogenous variables so some additional exogenous variation is
needed to be conclusive. Wulf (2007) finds that for managers at the same level incentive pay is less prevalent when there is
more volatility. More recent work has found some support for the incentives-risk trade off by gathering more direct
measures of risk aversion (Bandiera et al, 2010) or modeling the matching process between principals and agents
(Ackerberg and Botticini, 2002).
24
   The Wealth of Nations, Book I Chapter XI Part I , p.148

                                                            37
sensititivity will tend to drive the less productive firms out of the market. Firms have have failed to
adopt better HR management practices will tend to exit, so this should imporve the HR management
quality and productivity in the average firm. To the extent that incentive pay and some of the other
Bloom and Van Reenen HR practices really so increase productivity, the time series trends identified
in section 2 might be due to increases in global competition caused by deregulation and globalization.


Effort to improve managerial practices may also increase through incentive effects on incumbent
firms. Schmidt (1997) formalizes the intuition that tougher competition will bring the interests of the
managerial agent more into line with the firm’s owners. In his model managers have borrowing
constraints so lose wealth when their firm goes bankrupt. High levels of competition increase
bankruptcy risk and increase managerial effort.


Theoretically, however, the effects of competition on the form of incentive pay is ambiguous from the
design perspective. The analysis in Vives (2008) is very useful as he shows that higher powered
incentives can be considerd in some respects as an investment in non-tournament R&D. The firm
invests in an HR system that has a fixed cost but lowers marginal costs as the improved managementr
increases productivity of all factors. Consider again an increase in consumer price sensitivity as an
index of product market competition. The “stakes” are now higher: through greater managerial effort a
firm can reduce marginal costs this and will have a larger effect on relative market share or relative
profitability than when competition is lower. On the other hand, higher competition means that profits
are lower in the industry, so any given performance contract will generate lower expected benefits
because for a given effort level the profit related part of pay will be lower. This is the standard
Schumpeterian reason for expecting lower innovative effort in high competition industries.


Vives (2008) shows that there are other forces at play when we allow endogenous entry and exit even
for symmetric firms. In general, the average firm will be larger in equilibrium as the more intense
competition induces exit, and the larger firms will have a greater incentive to introduce productivity
increasing HR practices the fixed costs of introducing them over a large sales base. Thus, allowing for
entry will tend to strengthen the positive effect of competition, as firms will in equilibrium be larger so
have higher sales to spread fixed costs.


What about the empirical evidence? The evidence from Figure 2.4 suggested that HR management
practices were better in the US where competitive selection forces are likely to be very strong. More
formally, we can look at the conditional correlation between the HR management score and indicators

                                                    38
of competitive intensity. Whether measured by trade openness, the industry inverse Lerner Index or
simply the number of perceived rivals competition is robustly and positively associated with higher
management practice scores both with and without firm fixed effects (see Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and
Van Reenen, 2009). Note that the obvious endogeneity bias here is to underestimate the importance of
competition as better managed firms are likely to have higher profit margins, lower import penetration
ratios and drive out their rivals25. Bloom, Propper, Seiler and Van Reenen (2010) use political
competition as an instrumental variable to account for unusually high numbers of hospitals in some
areas of the country in the UK public healthcare system (hospitals are rarely closed down in politically
marginal constituencies). They find that the positive effects of competition grow stronger when
endogeneity is taken explicitly into account.


Consistent with these general results on the positive association of competition on explict measures of
HR management, there is other evidence which also gets closer to causal effects when focuing
explicitly on incentive pay. Guadalupe and Cunat (2009a) show that the pay-performance sensitivity
for US CEOs is stronger when import competition is stronger (as measured by tariffs). Guadalupe and
Cunat (2009b) they show a similar result using US banking deregulation as an exogenous shift to
competition. And in Guadalupe and Cunat (2005) they also find that the correlation between pay and
firm performance (for UK workers and exectutives) strengthens with competition using the exchange
rate appreciation in 1996 which differentially affected traded and non-traded sectors.


            5.3 Ownership and governance


The managerial technology perspective suggests that organizations with poor governance are less
likely to use appropriate HR management techniques. In particular, there has been a lively debate on
the performance effects of family firms (e.g. Bertrand and Schoar, 2006). Firms which are both family
owned and family run (typically by the eldest son – primogeniture) are very common, especially in
developing countries. Figure 5.1 plots a the averages of the Bloom-Van Reenen HR management
scores by ownership category. Firms that are family owned and family managed (“Family, family
CEO”) tend to be badly managed on average, while the family owned but externally managed
(“Family, external CEO”) look very similar to dispersed shareholders. Government-owned firms also
score very managed, while firms owned by Private Equity score well.

25
   There is a literature examining how incentive pay contracts can be used as commitment devices to tougher competition
(e.g. Aggarwal and Samwick, 1999). They find evidence of lower pay-performance sensitivity in firms with more volatile
stock prices.

                                                          39
This finding is robust to more systematic controls for other covariates (see Bloom and Van Reenen,
2007). Family ownership per se is not correlated with worse HR management practices, it is when
family ownership is combined with the CEO being chosen as the eldest son that the quality of
management appears to be very poor. This is consistent with the idea that limiting the talent pool to a
single individual is not the optimal form of CEO selection. It is also consistent with Perez-Gonzalez
(2006) and Bennesden, Nielson, Perez-Gonzales and Wolfenzon (2007) who find that inherited family
control appears to cause worse performance. This result is strengthened by using the gender of the
eldest child as an instrumental variable for family management as families usually only relinquish
control and bring in external managers when faced with a severe crisis.


Another dimension of ownership is whether the firm is domestic or multinational. Bloom, Genakos,
Sadun and Van Reenen (2009 found that there is a “pecking order” in management scores with purely
domestic firms at the bottom, firms that export but do not produce overseas next and multinational
firms at the top26. This is broadly consistent with Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004). In fact,
multinational subsidiaries tend to have better HR management in every country (see Figure 5.2),
consistent with the idea that they can “transplant” some of their HR practices overseas. This is
important as it suggests that a mechanism for management practices to diffuse internationally is
through the investments of overseas firms.


Some direct evidence on the importance of this mechanism is presented in Bloom, Sadun and Van
Reenen (2010). As noted in sub-section 3.5 they found that US firms appear to be much more effective
in using IT to improve their productivity, and this in turn is related to American firms’ greater use of
modern HRM practices (incentive pay, careful hiring, rigorous appraisals and promotions, etc.). They
show that the subsidiaries of US multinationals in Europe have higher IT productivity than comparable
multinational affiliates, use more of these HRM practices and have higher productivity, primarily from
their superior use of IT. They argue that the US advantage in HRM practices could account for about
half of the faster productivity growth in the US (over Europe) post 1995.


            5.4 Work Organization: The example of decentralization
An important aspect of HRM is work design – how are roles ascribed to different jobs? In this sub-
section we focus on one aspect of design which we label “decentralization”. For example, how many

26
 Osterman (1994) also finds that firms who sell in international markets are more likely to have adopted an “innovative
work practice (teams, job rotation, TQM or Quality Circles).

                                                          40
decision rights are delegated from the CEO to the plant manager? How much control over the pace of
work is delegated from the plant manager to the production worker? This is perhaps the most widely
studied theoretical aspect of the workplace after pay incentives and there is a smaller, but growing
empirical literature.


Note that decentralization is distinct from managerial spans of control. These are distinct concepts as
the span and depth (number of levels) of a hierarchy are compatible with different power relationships
between the levels. Nevertheless there is some evidence that the move towards delayering over the last
twenty years has been associated with decentralization (see Rajan and Wulf, 2006), and we will touch
on this below.


                        5.4.1 Measurement of decentralization
A key factor in any organization is who makes the decisions? A centralized firm is one were these are
all taken at the top of the hierarchy and a decentralized firm is where decision-making is more evenly
dispersed throughout the hierarchy. An extreme case of decentralized organization is a market
economy where atomistic individuals make all the decisions and spot contract with each other. The
origin of many of the debates on decentralization has their origins in the 1930s over the relative merits
of a market economy relative to a centrally planned one.


How can this concept be operationalized empirically? One way is to look at the organization charts of
firms (“organogram”) as graphical representations of the formal authority structure. One of the best
studies in this area is Rajan and Wulf (2006) who use the charts of over 300 large US corporations
1987-1998 to examine the evolution of organizations (e.g. how many people directly report to the CEO
as a measure of the span of control). They find that the number of people reporting to the CEO has
been rising over the period because intermediate managers – particularly the COO (Chief Operations
Offices) – have been removed. Whether the lower levels have obtained more power because their
immediate bosses (the COOs) have gone, or less power because they are now dealing directly with the
CEOs is not clear. What is clear is that these large US corporations have been delayering
systematically over time by removing senior managerial layers, leading to more junior managers
reporting directly in to the CEO. Hence, this highlights the differences between measuring
organizational shape (the number of layers in an organization) and real power (where the actual
decisions are made).




                                                   41
Observing whether a firm is decentralized into profit centers is useful, as this is a formal delegation of
power - the head of such a business unit will be performance managed on profitability. If the firm is
composed of cost (or revenue) centers this indicates less decentralization. If the firm does not even
delegate responsibility at all, this is more centralized. Acemoglu, Aghion, Lelarge, Van Reenen and
Zilibotti (2007, henceforth AALVZ) use this distinction.


Unfortunately, as Max Weber and (more recently) Aghion and Tirole (1997) stressed, formal authority
is not the same as real authority as the company organogram may not reflect where real power lies. A
criticism of AALVZ is that just using profit centers as an indicator is rather crude and a better way is
directly survey the firms themselves. Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009) measure decentralization
from the central headquarters (CHQ) to the plant manager over investment, hiring, marketing and
product introduction, and combine these four indictors into one (mean-zero) decentralization index. As
with the index of management quality in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) decentralization displays
considerable variation across firms. There is also a large difference across countries as shown in Figure
5.3. Interestingly, the US, UK and Northern European countries are the most decentralized and
Southern Europe and the Asian countries the most centralized.


                       5.4.2 Theories of decentralization


The basic trade off in the decentralization decisions is between the efficient use of local information
(see Radner, 1993) favoring delegation and the principal-agent problem where the agent has weaker
incentives to maximize the value of the firm than the principal (on the trade-off see Aghion and Tirole,
1997).


The benefits from decentralization arise from at least three sources. First, decentralizing decision-
making reduces the costs of information transfer and communication. In a hierarchical organization,
information that has been processed at lower levels of the hierarchy has to be transferred upstream.
This induces a cost due to the need that information be codified and then received and analyzed at
various levels (Bolton and Dewatripont, 1994). When decision-making is decentralized, information is
processed at the level where it is used so that the cost of communication is lower. Second,
decentralization increases firms’ speed of response to market changes (Thesmar and Thoenig, 1999).
One reason for this is that hierarchical organizations are characterized by a high degree of
specialization of workers. Any response to market changes involves the coordination of a great number


                                                   42
of activities so that overall firm's reaction speed is low. When responsibility is transferred downstream,
it is most often delegated to teams of workers, generally involved in multi-tasking. This allows a
swifter reaction to market changes given that coordination involves a limited number of multi-skilled
workers. Finally, decentralization of decision-making may increase productivity through rising job
satisfaction. Delegation of responsibility goes along with more employee involvement, greater
information sharing and a greater participation of lower level staff.


Turning to the costs of decentralization, we highlight four of them. First, costs arise from the risk of
duplication of information in the absence of centralized management. Workers are now in charge of
analyzing new pieces of information. With decentralization the risk of replication in information
processing increases, both across individuals and across teams. A related risk is that of an increase in
the occurrence of “mistakes” as there is less co-ordination. A second standard cost is the loss of co-
ordination efficiencies as externalities between units are not internalized (e.g. plants producing
substitutable products will tend to price too low) - see Alonso, Dessein and Matouschek (2008) for a
general discussion. A third cost is that decentralization makes it more difficult to exploit returns to
scale (Thesmar and Thoenig, 2000). The reason for this is that as multi-tasking develops returns to
specialization decreases so that large-scale production becomes less beneficial. Finally,
decentralization may reduce workers' efficiency if the increase in responsibility that it implies induces
rising stress (Askenazy, 2001). In this case, productivity may be directly affected and/or reduced
through lower job satisfaction.


                       5.4.3 What influences decentralization?
We divide our analysis into the examination of three groups of factors that influence decentralization:
technological (complexity, ICT and heterogeneity), economic (human capital and competition) and
cultural.


Complexity
Some basic factors determine decentralization. All else equal a larger firm will require more
decentralization than a small firm. A sole entrepreneur does not need to delegate because he is his own
boss, but as more workers are added, doing everything by himself is no longer feasible. Penrose (1959)
and Chandler (1962) stressed that decentralization was a necessary feature of larger firms, because
CEOs do not have the time to take every decision in large firms. Similarly as firms expand in their
scope both geographically and in product space, local information will become more costly to transmit


                                                    43
so this will also favor decentralization. Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009) find that larger firms
and plants owned by foreign multinationals are significantly more likely to be decentralized. This is
likely to be because of increased complexity27.


Information and Communication Technology
Garicano (2000) formalizes the idea of the firm as a cognitive hierarchy. There are a number of
problems to be solved and the task is how to solve them in the most efficient manner. The simplest
tasks are performed by those at the lowest level of the hierarchy and the “exceptional” problems are
passed upwards to an expert. The cost of passing problems upwards is that communication costs are
non-trivial. The benefit of passing the problem upwards is that it economizes on the cognitive burden
of lower level employees.


This framework was designed to address the impacts of ICT. Interestingly, information technologies
have different implications for decentralization than communication technologies. Consider again the
decentralization decision between the central headquarters and plant manager. When communication
costs fall through (for example) the introduction of a company intranet, it is cheaper for the plant
manager to refer more decisions to the corporate officers. So communication technologies should
cause centralization. By contrast, technologies that make it easier for the plant manager to acquire
information (e.g. Enterprise Resource Planning software, ERP like SAP) means that decentralization
should increase. An example in law firms would be Lexus Nexus that enables junior lawyers to
quickly find relevant cases without consulting a more senior associate or partner.


Bloom, Garicano, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009) test this theory and find considerable empirical
support. Computer networks (reducing communication costs) significantly increase centralization,
whereas tools to help managers access more information significantly increase decentralization. The
magnitude of the effect is substantial. An increase in the use of Enterprise Resource Planning usage by
60% (the average difference in ICT between Europe and the US) is associated with an increase of the
index of their plant manager’s autonomy index by 0.025 which is equivalent to a large increase in the
supply of human capital (roughly the same as the increase in US college graduates between 1990 and
2000). The finding that information technology is a complement with a particular form of HRM
(decentralization) is consistent the productivity evidence discussed in sub-section 3.5.



27
   Colombo and Delmastro (2004) also find that complexity related variables are associated with decentralization in their
Italian firms.

                                                           44
On experimental evidence Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts (2010) find that as
management practices improve firms decentralize decision making. This is because better management
practices improve information collection and dissemination, so the principals (the firm’s owners)
decentralize more decisions to their agents (the plant managers). With greater levels of information the
owners are more relaxed about plant managers taking decisions as they know they can check the
outcomes. For example, they know that if the plant managers start stealing output this will be much
more rapidly detected with daily output monitoring, so is now far less likely to occur.


Heterogeneity
AALVZ present a model of decentralization in which firms learn about how to implement a new
technology from other firms in their industry. The new technology on average improves productivity,
but there is heterogeneity in the benefits from introducing it, so not all firms should do things in the
same way. The set-up is of a principal (central headquarters) deciding whether or not to delegate to a
local agent (plant manager) who is better informed about the technology but has imperfectly aligned
incentives. As more firms experiment with the technology in the same industry the principal has a
better public history of information about the right way to implement the new technology, so has less
need to decentralize to the agent.


One key result follows: the greater the heterogeneity of the industry the more decentralized will be the
average firm. Heterogeneity here means that “right” way to implement the technology has a larger
variance, so the opportunity to learn from other firms is circumscribed because what is good for my
neighbor is less likely to be what is good for me. As discussed earlier, this is akin to Prendergast
(2002a) – the more uncertain the environment the greater the value of local knowledge. Two other
implications are that, first, the more innovative the technology (i.e. closer to the frontier), the less will
be known about how to use it so the greater will be the likelihood of decentralization. Second, if a firm
can learn from its past experience, older firms will be less likely to delegate than younger firms.


AALVZ measure decentralization using both formal measures of whether firms are organized into
profit centers and “real” survey measures of the power managers have over hiring decisions. Their
results are illustrated in Figure 5.4, where Panel A shows there is an upward relationship between




                                                     45
decentralization and heterogeneity28, Panel B shows decentralization is higher among firms closer to
the technological frontier, and Panel C shows older firms appear more centralized than younger firms.


Human Capital
One of the reasons for the renewed interest in organizational change by labor economists was the
attempt to understand why technology seemed to increase the demand for human capital, and thus
contribute to the rise in wage inequality experiences by the US, UK and other countries since the late
1970s (e.g. Machin and Van Reenen, 1998, 2008). Many theories have been proposed (see Autor,
Levy and Murnane, 2003, for a review), but one hypothesis is that lower IT prices increased
decentralization incentives for the reasons outlined in Garicano (2000)’s model discussed above.
Further, decentralization could be complementary with skills because more educated workers are
better able to analyze and synthesize new pieces of knowledge so that the benefits of the local
processing of information are enhanced. Second, the cost of training them for multi-tasking is lower
and they are more autonomous and less likely to make mistakes.


This has three main implications: (i) Decentralization leads to skill upgrading within firms. This is due
to the fact that the return to new work practices is greater when the skill level of the workforce is
higher; (ii) a lower price of skilled labor relative to unskilled labor will accelerate the introduction of
organizational changes associated with decentralization; (iii) Skill intensive firms will experience
greater productivity growth when decentralizing.


Caroli and Van Reenen (2001) find support for all three predictions. They estimate production
functions (with the relevant interactions), skill share equations and organizational design equations. A
novel feature of this approach is that because labor is traded in a market, it is possible to use local skill
price variation to examine the complementarity issues. They find that higher skill prices make
decentralization less likely, consistent with “skill biased organizational change”29.


Product Market Competition



28
   The authors show that the anomalous first decile is due to the disproportionate number of older and less productive firms
in this decile (this is controlled for in the regressions). Kastl, Martimort and Piccolo (2008) also find more innovative firms
(as measured by R&D intensity) are more decentralized.
29
   Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009) also find robust empirical evidence that firms with more skilled employees are
more decentralized. Bartel, Shaw and Ichinowski (2007) also find human capital complementary with “innovative” HR
practices.


                                                             46
If competition has made swift decisions more important than this will have increased the salience of
local knowledge, leading to greater decentralization under the framework discussed above. Similarly if
competition reduces the agency problem decentralization is more likely. There are countervailing
forces however. For example, a larger number of firms help learning which in the AALVZ framework
will reduce the need to decentralize.


The empirical evidence is clearer cut. Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2010) find a robust positive
association between competition and decentralization. A similar positive correlation was reported in
AALVZ and Marin and Verdier (2008). All of these are cross sectional studies. Guadalupe and Wulf
(2009) use the Rajan and Wulf (2006) panel data on the changing organizational structure of firms
over time. They argue that the Canadian-US Free Trade Agreement (FTA) in 1989 constitutes an
exogenous increase in competition for US firms in the industries where tariffs were removed.
Exploiting this policy experiment they find that competition is associated with delayering (increasing
span for CEO) and that this is likely to also reflect increased delegation.


Culture
In recent years, economists have started to take cultural factors more seriously in determining
economic outcomes (e.g. Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2006; Grief, 1994). Part of this is due to the
influence of Putnam (1993) on the importance of social capital and the finding that trust is important in
a number of economic dimensions (e.g. see Knack and Keefer, 1997, on economic growth or Guiso,
Sapienza and Zingales, 2009, on foreign trade).


Trust is an obvious candidate from improving delegation incentives as it will relieve the agency
problem that the delegated agent will steal from the principal. Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009)
observe more delegation in countries where rule of law is strong. However, contracts are never
perfectly enforceable and this leaves a role for trust to help generate more delegation. And indeed trust
also appears important – they also find a higher level of trust in the region where a firm is located is
associated with a significantly greater degree of decentralization. They also exploit the fact that they
have many subsidiaries of multinational firms so they can construct measures of trust in the country of
origin (the multinational’s headquarters) and location (country were affiliate is set up), and find that
both of these seem to matter for decentralization. Further, using the bilateral trust between countries
from they find that when trust between pairs of countries is high, decentralization is more likely (even
after controlling for region of location and country of origin fixed effects). This suggests that trust can


                                                    47
affect the structures of global firms and that some aspects of organization are transplanted abroad as
suggested by recent theories of international trade.


6. Conclusions
Human Resource Management (HRM) has changed dramatically in last two decades, with Personnel
Economics now a major field in labor economics. The mark of this work is to use standard economic
tools applied to the special circumstances of managing labor within companies. In surveying the
literature we have detected several broads themes:


First, although there have been significant improvements in measuring management in general and
HRM in particular, we are struck by the scarcity of high quality data. This is especially true in the time
series dimension where our basic understanding of trends even in the more easily measured
dimensions of HRM such as incentive pay is remarkably poor. This reflects a general paucity of data
on the internal structures of firms which needs to be addressed by researchers and statistical agencies.


Second, data concerns notwithstanding, there do appear to be some facts emerging. There is a
discernible trend towards the incidence of more incentive pay in recent decades (at least in the US and
the UK). More aggressive use of high powered-incentives on pay, promotions, hiring and firing is
more prevalent in the US and Northern Europe than Southern Europe and Asia. The data on
productivity is much better: we have shown wide distributions of productivity within and between
countries and HRM appears to mirror these patterns.


Third, there is suggestive evidence that certain types of HRM raise productivity. There is certainly a
robust positive cross sectional association between bundles of “modern” HRM practices and
productivity, but with some exceptions (e.g. Ichinowski et al, 1997) these are not robust in the time
series dimension. Studies of single or small groups of firms have been more successful in identifying a
positive association of changes in HRM policies (in particular individual and group incentive pay) and
productivity. But hard causal evidence of the type common in program evaluation elsewhere in labor
economics is rare and a major future research challenge is to generate better designs to test the causal
relationship.


Fourth, causality issue apart, there is suggestive evidence of widespread complementarities both
between different types of HRM practices and between HRM and other aspects of firm organization


                                                     48
(Milgrom and Roberts, 1990). Information and Communication Technology appears particular
important with several pieces of evidence that combining ICT with the right fit of HRM practices
makes a large difference for productivity.


Fifth, although the “Design” perspective of Personal Economics has led to powerful insights we have
argued that some types of HRM (and management in general) has technological aspects in the sense
that there are some practices that, on average, are likely to be the right ones for all firms to adopt.
Under this view, the productivity dispersion we observe is partially linked to the fact that some firms
that been slower to adopt these than others. Weak competition and poor governance in family run
firms are both associated with sub-optimal HRM practices, consistent with this “Managerial
Technology” perspective.


Finally, we have made substantial theoretical and empirical progress in one aspect of work
organization - the decentralization of decisions. Technological complexity, ICT, skill supply and social
capital all seem to foster more decentralization (although causality remains an issue again). It would be
good to see more efforts to drill down on other forms of work organization.


HRM and productivity is an exciting and lively field and has made great strides in the last two
decades. We see its future as being integrated in the general research programs of the economics of
organization and management which are becoming a major part of modern labor economics.




                                                   49
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abowd, John M., 1989. ‘The Effect of Wage Bargains on the Stock Market Value of the Firm’,
     American Economic Review, 79(4), 774-800.

Abowd, John M., Kramarz, Francis and David Margolis, 1999 ‘High Wage Workers and High Wage
     Firms’ Econometrica, 67(2), 251-333.

Abowd, John M., and Thomas Lemieux, 1993. ‘The Effects of Product Market Competition on
     Collective Bargaining Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada’, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 108(4), 983-1014.

Abowd, John H, Haltiwanger, John and Lane, Julia (2008) ‘Wage structure and Labor Mobility in the
     United States’, in Lazear, Edward, and Kathryn Shaw (eds) An International Comparison of the
     Structure of Wages within and across firms, Chicago: University of Chicago.

Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John Van Reenen and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2007.
     ‘Technology, Information and the Decentralization of the Firm’, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 122(4), 1759–1799.

Ackerberg, Daniel, Lanier Benkard, Steven Berry and Ariel Pakes, 2007. ‘Econometric Tools for
      Analyzing Market Outcomes’, in Handbook of Econometrics Volume 6A, eds. James Heckman
      and Edward Leamer. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Ackerberg, Daniel and Maristella Botticini (2002) ‘Endogenous Matching and the empirical
      determinants of contract form’ Journal of Political Economy, 110: 564-91

Adams, Christopher, 2005. ‘Agent Discretion, Adverse Selection and the Risk-Incentive Trade-Off’,
      Working Paper, Federal Trade Commission.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick, 1999. ‘The Other Side of the Trade-off: The Impact of
      Risk on Executive Compensation’, Journal of Political Economy, 107(1), 65-105.


Aghion, Philippe, and Jean Tirole, 1997. ‘Formal and Real Authority in Organizations’, Journal of
      Political Economy, 105(1), 1-29.

Aghion, Philippe, Eve Caroli and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, 1999. ‘Inequality and Economic Growth:
      The Perspective of the New Growth Theories’, Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4), 1615-
      1660.

Alonso, Ricardo, Wouter Dessein and Niko Matouschek, 2008. ‘When Does Coordination Require
      Centralization?’, American Economic Review, 98(1), 145-179.

Asch, Beth, 1990. ‘Do Incentives Matter? The Case of Navy Recruiters’, Industrial and Labor
      Relations Review, 43(3), 89-107.

Askenazy, Philippe, 2001. ‘Innovative Workplace Practices and Occupational Injuries and Illnesses in
      the United States’, Economic and Industrial Democracy 22(4), 485-516.

                                                50
Athey, Susan and Scott Stern, 1998. ‘An Empirical Framework for Testing Theories About
      Complementarity in Organizational Design’, NBER Working Paper 6600.

Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick J. Kehoe, 2005. ‘Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital’,
      Journal of Political Economy, 113(5), 1026-1053.

Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane, 2003. ‘The Skill Content of Recent Technological
       Change: An Empirical Exploration’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1279-1334.

Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts and Daniel Xu, 2008. ‘R&D Investments, Exporting, and the Evolution
      of Firm Productivity’, American Economic Review, 98(2), 451-456.

Azoulay, Pierre and Joshua Graff Zivin, ‘Peer Effects in the Workplace: Evidence from Star
      Extinction’.

Baily, Martin, Charles Hulten and David Campbell, 1992. ‘Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing
       Plants’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 187-249.

Baiker, Katherine and Mireille Jacobson 2007. ‘Finders Keepers: Forfeiture Laws, Policing, and Local
       Budgets’, Journal of Public Economics, 91(11-12), 2113-2136.

Baker, George, 1992. ‘Incentive Measures and Performance Measurement’, Journal of Political
       Economy, 100, 598-614.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons and Kevin Murphy, 1994. ‘Subjective Performance Measures in
       Optimal Incentive Contracts’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 1125-1156.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons and Kevin Murphy, 1999. ‘Informal Authority in Organizations’,
       Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15(1), 56-73.

Baker, George and Thomas Hubbard, 2004. ‘Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On Board
       Computers and Governance in US Trucking’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1443-
       1479.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay and Imran Rasul, 2005. ‘Social Preferences and the Response to
       incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 917-962.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, 2007. ‘Incentives for Managers and Inequality
      Among Workers: Evidence from a Firm-Level Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, 2009a. ‘Social Connections and Incentives in the
      Workplace: Evidence from Personnel Data’, LSE mimeo forthcoming in Econometrica.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, 2009b. ‘Team Incentives: Evidence from a Field
      Experiment’, LSE mimeo.

Bandiera, Oriana, Luigi Guiso, Andrea Prat and Raffaella Sadun (2010). ‘Matching firms, managers
      and incentives’, LSE mimeo.


                                                51
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. ‘How Does Information Technology Really
        Affect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement
        and Worker Skills’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1721-1758.

Bartelsman, Eric and Phoebus Dhrymes, 1998. ‘Productivity Dynamics U.S. Manufacturing Plants
       1972-1986’, Journal of Productivity Analysis, 9(1), 5-33.

Bartelsman, Eric and Mark Doms, 2000. ‘Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
       Microdata’, Journal of Economic Literature, 38(3), 569-594.

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger and Stefano Scarpetta, 2008. ‘Cross Country Differences in
       Productivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency’, University of Maryland mimeo.

Bennesden, Morten, Kasper Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-Gonzáles and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2007. ‘Inside
      the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance’, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 122(2), 647-691.

Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, 2006. ‘The Role of Family in Family Firms’, Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 20(2), 73-96.

Black, Sandra and Lisa Lynch. 2004. ‘What's Driving the New Economy? The Benefits of Workplace
       Innovation’, Economic Journal, 114(493), 97-116.

Black, Sandra and Lisa Lynch, 2001. ‘How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and
       Information Technology on Productivity’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3), 434–445.

Blanchflower, David, Oswald, Andrew and Sanfrey, Peter (1996) ‘Wages, Profits and Rent Sharing’,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 227-251.

Blasi, Joseph, Richard Freeman, Christopher Mackin and Douglas Kruse, 2009. ‘Creating a Bigger
        Pie? The Effects of Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Stock Options on Workplace
        Performance, in Shared Capitalism at Work: Employee Ownership, Profit and Gain Sharing,
        and Broad-based Stock Options, eds. Douglas Kruse, Joseph Blasi and Richard Freeman.
        University of Chicago Press.

Bloom, N, 2009, ‘The impact of uncertainty shocks’, Econometrica, 77 (3), May, 623-685.

Bloom N, Eifert, B, Mahajan, A, McKenzie, D and Roberts, J. 2009 ‘Does management matter:
      Evidence from India. Stanford mimeo.

Bloom, Nick and John Van Reenen, 2007. ‘Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
      Firms and Countries’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1341-1408.

Bloom, Nick and John Van Reenen, 2010. ‘Why do management practices differ across firms and
      countries’, LSE/Stanford mimeo forthcoming Journal of Economic Perspectives

Bloom, Nick, Christos Genakos, Ralf Martin and Raffaella Sadun, 2008. ‘Modern Management: Good
      for the Environment or Just Hot Air’, NBER Working Paper 14394.



                                                52
Bloom, Nick, Christos Genakos, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen, 2009. ‘Management Matters’,
      LSE/Stanford mimeo.

Bloom, Nick, Tobias Kretschmer and John Van Reenen, 2009. ‘Work-life Balance, Management
      Practices and Productivity’, in International Differences in the Business Practice and
      Productivity of Firms, Richard Freeman and Kathy Shaw (eds). Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.

Bloom, Nick, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen, 2010. ‘Americans do IT Better: American
      Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle’, LSE/Stanford mimeo (revision of NBER
      Working Paper 13085).

Bloom, Nick, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen, 2009. ‘The Organization of Firms Across
      Countries’, Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No 937.

Bloom, Nick, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen, 2010. ‘Does Product Market Competition Lead
      firms to decentralize?’, forthcoming, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings

Bloom, Nick, Luis Garicano, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen, 2009. ‘The Distinct Effects of
      Information Technology and Communication Technology on Firm Organization’, Centre for
      Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 927.

Bloom, Nick, Carol Propper, Stephan Seiler and John Van Reenen, 2009. ‘Management Practices in
      Healthcare’, Stanford/LSE mimeo.

Bolton, Patrick and Mathias Dewatripont, 1994. ‘The Firm as a Communication Network’, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 109(4), 809-839.

Bolton, Patrick and Mathias Dewatripont, 2005. Contract Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. ‘Opportunity Counts: Teams and the
      Effectiveness of Production Incentives’, Journal of Labor Economics, 25(4), 613-650.

Blundell, Richard and Costa-Diaz, Monica, 2008. ‘Alternative Approaches to Evaluation in Empirical
      Micro-economics’, CEMMAP working Paper no. 26/08, forthcoming in Journal of Human
      Resources

Bond, Steve and Van Reenen, John (2007) ‘Micro-econometric models of investment and
      employment’ in Heckman, James and Leamer, (eds) Handbook of Econometrics Volume 6A
      Chapter 65 4417-4498

Bresnahan, Timothy, Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin Hitt, 2002. ‘Information Technology, Workplace
      Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence’, Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 117(1), 339-376.

Brown, Charles, 1990. ‘Firms’ Choice of Method of Pay’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43,
      165-182

Bruhn, M., D. Karlan, and A. Schoar (2010). ‘The Effect of Mentorship on SME Growth in Mexico’,
       University of Chicago, mimeo

                                               53
Brynjolfson, Erik and Lorin Hitt, 2003. ‘Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence’, Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 793–808.

Bryson, Alex and Richard Freeman 2009. ‘Work and Wellbeing’, National Institute Economic Review,
      209, 70-71.
Bryson, Alex and Stephen Wood 2009. ‘High Involvement Management’, in The Evolution of the
      Modern Workplace, eds. W. Brown, Alex Bryson, John Forth, and K. Whitfield. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.

Bull, Clive, 1987. ‘The Existence of Self-Enforcing Implicit Contracts’, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 102(1), 147-159.

Burgess, Simon, Carol Propper, Marisa Ratto, Vanessa von Hinke Kessler Scholder and Emma
      Tominey, 2007. ‘Smarter Task Assignment or Greater Effort: The Impact of Incentives on
      Team Performance’, Economic Journal.

Capelli, Peter and David Neumark, 2001. ‘Do ‘High-Performance’ Work Practices Improve
       Establishment-Level Outcomes?’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(4), 737-775.

Caroli Eve and John Van Reenen, 2001. ‘Skill Biased Organizational Change’, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 116(4), 1449-1492.

Caselli, Francesco, 2005. ‘Accounting for Cross Country Income Differences’ in Handbook of
        Economic Growth, eds Philppe Aghion and Durlauf, S. North-Holland: Elsevier.

Cahuc, Pierre, Postel-Vinay, Fabienne, and Robin, Jean-Marc (2006) “Wage Bargaining and On-The-
       Job Search” Econometrica, 323-364

Chandler, Alfred, 1962. Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the Industrial Enterprise.
      Cambridge: MIT Press.

Chevalier, Judith and Ellison, Glenn, 1997. ‘Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
       Incentives’, Journal of Political Economy, 105(6), 1167-1200.

Choi, James, David Laibson and Brigitte Madrian (2008). “$100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Suboptimal
   Investment in 401(k) Plans.” NBER Working Paper #11554.


Cristiner, Annalisa, Leoni, Riccardo, Sandrine, Labory and Gai, Alessandro, 2001, “New Work
        Practices in Italy. Adoption and Performance Effects”, University of Bergamo, mimeo.

Colombo, Massimo and Marco Delmastro, 2004. ‘Delegation of Authority in Business Organizations:
      An Empirical Test’, Journal of Industrial Economics, 52(1), 53-80.

Cooke, William, 1994. ‘Employee Participation Programs, Group-based Incentives, and Company
      Performance: A Union-nonunion Comparison’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47(4),
      594-609.



                                                 54
Corrado, C, Hulten, C and Sichel, D (2006) “Intangible Capital and Economic Growth” NBER
      Working Paper No. 11948

Courty, Pascal and Gerald Marshke, 2004. ‘An Empirical Investigation of Gaming Responses to
       Performance Incentives’, Journal of Labor Economics, 22(1), 23-56.

Criscuolo, Chiara, Jonathan Haskel and Ralf Martin, 2003. ‘Building the Evidence Base for
       Productivity Policy Using Business Data Linking’, Economic Trends, 600, 39-51.

Duflo, Esther, Kremer, Michael and Robinson, Jonathan (2009), “Nudging farmers to use fertilizer:
   theory and experimental evidence from Kenya”, Harvard mimeo.

Dunlop, John T. and David Weil. 1996. “Diffusion and performance of modular production in the US
      Apparel industry”. Industrial Relations 35(3) 334-355


DeVaro, Jed and Fidan A. Kurtulus, 2007. ‘An Empirical Analysis of Risk, Incentives, and the
      Delegation of Worker Authority’, Working Paper, University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

DiNardo, John and David Lee, 2004. ‘Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector
      Employers: 1984–2001’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 1383–1441.

DiNardo, John and David Lee (this volume) “Program evaluation and Research Design”

Easton, George and Sherry Jarrell, 1998. ‘The Effects of Total Quality Management on Corporate
       Performance: An Empirical Investigation’, Journal of Business 71(2), 253–307.

Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix and Augustin Landier, 2008. ‘A Multiplicative Model of Optimal CEO
     Incentives in Market Equilibrium’, Review of Financial Studies.

Faggio, Giulia, Salvanes, Kjell and John Van Reenen (2007) “The evolution of inequality in
       Productivity and Wages: Panel Data Evidence” Centre for Economic Performance Discussion
       Paper No. 821,

Falk, Armin and Andrea Ichino, 2006. ‘Clean Evidence on Peer Effects’, Journal of Labor Economics,
       24(1), 39-57.

Farber, Hank (this volume) “Unions”

Fernie, Sue and David Metcalf, 1999. ‘It's Not What You Pay it's the Way that You Pay it and that's
        What Gets Results: Jockeys' Pay and Performance’, Labour, 13(2), 385-411.

Foster, Lucia, C.J. Krizan, and John Haltiwanger, 2006. ‘Market Selection, Reallocation and
       Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s’, Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 88(4), 748-758.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and Chad Syverson, 2009. ‘Reallocation, Firm Turnover and
       Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability’, American Economic Review, 98(1), 394-
       425.


                                                 55
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, 1996. ‘Comparative Advantage, Information and the
       Allocation of Workers to Tasks: Evidence from an Agricultural Labor Market’, Review of
       Economic Studies 63(3), 347-374.

Freeman, Richard and Morris Kleiner, 2005. ‘The Last American Shoe Manufacturers: Decreasing
      Productivity and Increasing Profits in the Shift from Piece Rates to Continuous Flow
      Production’, Journal of Industrial Relations 44(2), 307-330.

Freeman, Richard and James Medoff, 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic Books.

Freeman, Richard, Joseph Blasi and Douglas Kruse, 2009. ‘Shared Capitalism at Work: Employee
      Ownership, Profit and Gain Sharing, and Broad-based Stock Options’, in Shared Capitalism at
      Work: Employee Ownership, Profit and Gain Sharing, and Broad-based Stock Options, eds
      Douglas Kruse, Joseph Blasi and Richard Freeman. University of Chicago Press.

Gant, Jon, Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw, 2002. ‘Social Capital and Organizational Change in
       High-Involvement and Traditional Work Organizations’, Journal of Economics & Management
       Strategy, 11(2), 289-328.

Garicano, Luis, 2000. ‘Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production’, Journal of
       Political Economy, 108(5), 874-904.

Gibbons, Robert. 1987. ‘Piece-Rate Incentive Schemes’, Journal of Labor Economics, 5(4), 413-29.

Gibbons, Robert and J. Roberts, 2008. The Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton:
      Princeton University Press.

Gibbons, Robert, and Michael Waldman, 1999. ‘Careers in Organizations: Theory and Evidence’ in
      Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card.
      Amsterdam: North Holland.

Gibrat, Robert, 1931. Les Inegalites Economiques, Sirey, Paris.

Garen, John, 1994. ‘Executive Compensation and Principal-Agent Theory’, Journal of Political
       Economy, 102(6), 1175-1199.

Gaynor, Martin, James Rebitzer and Lowell Taylor, 2004. ‘Physician Incentives in Health
      Maintenance Organizations’, Journal of Political Economy, 112, 915-931.

Glewwe, Paul, Ilias, Nauman and Kremer, Michael (2003) “Teacher Incentives” NBER Working
     Paper 9671

Greif, Avner, 1994. ‘Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
       Reflection on Collectivist and Individualistic Societies’, Journal of Political Economy, 102(5),
       912-50.

Griffith, Rachel and Andrew Neely, 2009. ‘Incentives and Managerial Experience in Multi-task
        Teams: Evidence from Within a Firm’, Journal of Labor Economics, 27(1), 49-82.



                                                  56
Griliches, Zvi, 1996. ‘The Discovery of the Residual: A Historical Note’, Journal of Economic
       Literature, 34(3), 1324-1330.

Groves, Theodore, Yongmiao Hong, John McMillan and Barry Naughton, 1994. ‘Autonomy and
      Incentives in Chinese State Enterprises’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 183-209.

Guadalupe, Maria and Vicente Cunat, 2005. ‘How Does Product Market Competition Shape Incentive
      Contracts?’ Journal of the European Economic Association MIT Press, 3(5), 1058-1082.

Guadalupe, Maria and Vicente Cunat, 2009a. ‘Globalization and the Provision of Incentives inside the
      Firm, Journal of Labor Economics (forthcoming).

Guadalupe, Maria and Vicente Cunat, 2009b. ‘Executive Compensation and Competition in the
      Banking and Financial Sectors’, Journal of Banking and Finance, 33, 439-474.

Guadalupe, Maria and Julie Wulf, 2007. ‘The Flattening Firm and Product Market Competition: The
      Effects of Trade Costs and Liberalization’, forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Applied

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2006. ‘Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?’,
       The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 23-48.

Guiso Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2009. ‘Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange’,
      forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Hall, Bronwyn, 1993. ‘R&D tax policy during the 1980s: Success or Failure?’ Tax Policy and the
       Economy 7, 1-36

Hall, Bronwyn, 2003. ‘Innovation and Diffusion’, in Handbook of Innovation, eds. Jan Fagerberg,
       Davis Mowery and Richard Nelson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hamilton, Barton H., Jack A. Nickerson, and Hideo Owan, 2003. ‘Team Incentives and Worker
      Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and
      Participation’, Journal of Political Economy, 111(3), 465-497.

Heckman, James and Jeffrey Smith, 2004. ‘The Determinants of Participation in a Social Program:
     Evidence from a Prototypical Job Training Program’, Journal of Labor Economics, 22(2), 243.

Hellerstein, Judith, , David Neumark and Ken Troske (1999) “Wages, productivity and worker
       characteristics: evidence from plant level production functions and wage equations”Journal of
       Labor Economics, 17, 409-446

Helpman Elhanhan, Marc Melitz and Stephen Yeaple, 2004. ‘Export Versus FDI with Heterogeneous
      Firms’, American Economic Review, 94(1), 300-316.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, 1991. ‘Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts,
      Asset Ownership, and Job Design’, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7, 24-52.

Hopenhayn, Hugo, 1992. ‘Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium’, Econometrica,
      60,1127–1150.


                                                57
Hsieh Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow, 2007. ‘Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India’,
       NBER Working Paper 13290.

Huselid, Mark, 1995. ‘The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices on Turnover,
       Productivity and Corporate Financial Performance’, Academy of Management Journal, 38,
       635-672.

Huselid, Mark and Brian Becker, 1996. ‘Methodological Issues in Cross-sectional and Panel Estimates
       of the Human Resource-firm Performance link’, Industrial Relations, 35, 400-422.

Ichino, Andrea, and Giovanni Maggi, 2000. ‘Work Environment and Individual Background:
       Explaining Regional Differentials in a Large Italian Firm’, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       115(3), 1057-1090.

Ichniowski, Casey, 1990. ‘Human Resource Management Systems and the Performance of U.S.
       Manufacturing Businesses’, NBER Working Paper 3449.

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi, 1997. ‘The Effects of Human Resource
       Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines’, American Economic
       Review, 87(3), 291-313.

Jones, Derek and Takao Kato, 1995. ‘The Productivity Effects of Employee Stock Ownership Plans
       and Bonuses: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data’, American Economic Review, 85(3), 391-
       414.

Jorgenson, Dale, Mun Ho and Kevin Stiroh, 2008. ‘A Retrospective Look at the US Productivity
       Growth Resurgence’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1), 3-24.

Kaldor, Nicholas, 1934. The Equilibrium of the Firm, Economic Journal, 44 (173) 60-76

Karlan, Dean and Martin Valdivia, 2009. ‘Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact Of Business Training on
       Microfinance Clients and Institutions’, Yale mimeo.

Kastl, Jacob, David Martimort and Salvatore Piccolo, 2008 ‘Delegation and R&D Incentives: Theory
        and Evidence from Italy’, Stanford mimeo

Kahn, Charles, Emilson Silva and James Ziliak, 2001. ‘Performance-based Wages in Tax Collection:
      The Brazilian Tax Collection Reform and its Effects, Economic Journal 111(468), 188–205.

Keane, Michael and Susan Feinberg (2008) ‘Advances in logistics and the growth of intra-firm trade:
       The case of Canadian Affiliates of US multinationals’ Journal of Industrial Economics, LV(4)
       571-632

Klette, Tor and Zvi Griliches, 1996. ‘The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When Output
        Prices are Unobserved and Endogenous’, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11, 343-361.

Knack Stephen and Philip Keefer, 1997. ‘Does Social Capital have an Economy Payoff? A Cross-
      country Investigation’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 12(4), 1251-1288.



                                                58
Knez, Marc and Duncan Simester 2001. ‘Firm-Wide Incentives and Mutual Monitoring at Continental
      Airlines’, Journal of Labor Economics, 19(4), 743-72.

Kruse, Douglas and Joseph Blasi, 1997. ‘Employee Ownership, Employee Attitudes, and Firm
       Performance’, in Handbook of Resource Management, eds. Mitchell, Daniel J.B., David Lewin
       and Mahumdad Zaidi. Greenwich, CT: JAI.

Kruse, Douglas, Joseph Blasi and Rhokuen Park, 2009. ‘Shared Capitalism in the US Economy:
       Prevalence, Characteristics, and Employee Views of Financial Participation in Enterprises’, in
       Shared Capitalism at Work: Employee Ownership, Profit and Gain Sharing, and Broad-based
       Stock Options, eds. Douglas Kruse, Joseph Blasi and Richard Freeman. University of Chicago
       Press.

Kwoka, John and David Ravenscroft, 1986. ‘Cooperation Versus Rivalry: Price-Cost Margins by Line
     of Business’, Economica, 53, 351-64.


La Porta R, Lopez-de-Silanes, F, Shleifer, A and Vishny, R. 1997 Trust in Large Organizations.
      American Economic Review, 87(2): 333-338.

Laeven, Luc and Christopher Woodruff, 2007. ‘The Quality of the Legal System, Firm Ownership, and
      Firm Size’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(4), 601-614.

Lafontaine, Francine and Srinivasan, Jagadeesh (2009) “Within Firm Labor Productivity across
       countries: A case study” in Richard Freeman and Katheryn Shaw (eds) International
       Differences in Business Practices and Productivity of Multinational Firms: A Case Based
       Approach, University of Chicago Press

Larkin, Ian, 2007. ‘The Cost of High-Powered Incentives: Employee Gaming in Enterprise Software
       Sales’, Working Paper, Harvard University.

Lavy, Victor (2002) “Evaluating the effect of Teachers’ Performance Incentives on Pupils’
      achievement”, Journal of Political Economy, 110(6) 1283-1317

Lavy, Victor (2007) “Using Performance-Based Pay to improve the Quality of Teachers” The Future
       of Children 7(1), 87-109

Lavy, Victor (2009) “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity and Grading ethics”,
      American Economic Review, 99(5) 1979-2011

Lawler, Edward, 1986. High Involvement Management. San Francisco: Josey-Bass.

Lawler, Edward, Susan Mohrman and Gerald E. Ledford Jr. 1995. Creating High Performance
       Organizations: Practices and Results of Employee Involvement and TQM in Fortune 1000
       Companies. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lawler, Edward, Susan Mohrman, and George Benson, 2001. Organizing for High Performance:
       Employee Involvement, TQM, Reengineering, and Knowledge Management in the Fortune
       1000. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.


                                                 59
Lawler, Edward and Susan Mohrman, 2003. Creating a Strategic Human Resources Organization: An
       Assessment of Trends and New Directions. Stanford University Press.

Lazear, E, 1986. ‘Salaries and Piece Rates’, Journal of Business, 9(3), 405-431.

Lazear, Edward, 1989. ‘Pay Equality and Industrial Politics’, Journal of Political Economy, 97, 561–
       80.

Lazear, Edward, 1995. Personnel Economics, Cambridge: MIT Press

Lazear, Edward, 1999. ‘Personnel Economics: Past Lessons and Future Directions’, Journal of Labor
       Economics, 17(2), 199-236.

Lazear, Edward, 2000. ‘Performance Pay and Productivity’, American Economic Review 90(5), 1346-
       1361.

Lazear, Edward and Paul Oyer, 2009. ‘Personnel Economics’, in Handbook of Organizational
       Economics, eds. Gibbons, E and Roberts, D J. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Lazear, Edward, and Kathryn Shaw, 2008. An International Comparison of the Structure of Wages
       within and across firms University of Chicago.

Lemieux, Thomas, W. Bentley MacLeod and Daniel Parent, 2009. ‘Performance Pay and Wage
      Inequality-super’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 1-49.

Lo, Desmond, Mrinal Ghosh and Francine Lafontaine, 2006. ‘The Role of Risk, Incentives, and
      Selection in Salesforce Compensation Contracts’, unpublished paper, Ross School of Business,
      University of Michigan.

Lucas, Robert, 1978. ‘On the Size Distribution of Business Firms’, Bell Journal of Economics, 9, 508-
       523.

Machin, Stephen and John Van Reenen, 1998. ‘Technology and changes in the skill structure:
      Evidence from seven OECD countries’ Quarterly Journal of Economics CXI, 113, 1215-44

Machin, Stephen and John Van Reenen, 2008. ‘Changes in Wage Inequality’, New Palgrave
      Dictionary of Economics (Bruce Weinberg and Chris Taber, eds)

Malcomson, James, 1999. ‘Individual Employment Contracts’, in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol.
      III, eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North Holland.

MacLeod, W. Bentley, 2003. ‘On Optimal Contracting with Subjective Evaluation’, American
     Economic Review, 93(1), 216-240.

MacLeod, W. Bentley and James M. Malcomson, 1989. ‘Implicit Contracts, Inventive Compatibility,
     and Involuntary Unemployment’, Econometrica, 57(2), 447-480.

Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier, 2008. ‘Corporate Hierarchies and the Size of Nations: Theory and
       Evidence’, Paris School of Economics mimeo.


                                                  60
Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti, 2008. ‘Peers at Work’, American Economic Review, 99(1), 112-
      145.

MacDuffie, John, 1995. ‘Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing Performance: Organizational
     Logic and Flexible Production Systems in the World Auto Industry’, Industrial and
     LaborRelations Review, 48(2), 197-221.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Tate, Geoffrey, (2005) Does Overconfidence Affect Corporate Investment?
   CEO Overconfidence Measures Revisited (with G. Tate). European Financial Management,
   November 2005, vol. 11 (5), pp. 649-659.


Melitz, Mark, 2003. ‘The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
       Productivity’, Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, 1988. ‘An Economic Approach to Influence Activities in
      Organizations’, American Journal of Sociology, 94(supplement), S154-S179.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, 1990. ‘The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology,
      Strategy, and Organization’, American Economic Review, 80(3), 511–28.

Mookherjee D. 2006 Decentralization, Hierarchies and Incentives: A Mechanism Design Approach.
     Journal of Economic Literature, 44(2): 367-390.

Moretti, Enrico, 2004. ‘Workers’ education, spillovers and productivity: Evidence from plant level
       production functions’ American Economic Review, 94, 656-690

Mundlak, Yair, 1961. ‘Empirical Production Function Free of Management Bias’, Journal of Farm
      Economics, 43, 44–56.

Murphy, Kevin, 1999. ‘Executive Compensation’, in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, eds.
      Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Nickell, Steve, Nicolistsas, D and Patterson, M, 2001. ‘Does Doing Badly Encourage Innovation?’,
       Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 63(1), 5-28.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (1999). “Doing it now or Doing it later.” American Economic
   Review, 89 (1), 103–124.


Olley, Steven and Ariel Pakes, 1996. ‘The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
       Equipment Industry’, Econometrica 64(6), 1263–1298.

Olson, Trond and Gaute Torsvik, 2000. ‘Discretion and Incentives in Organizations’, Journal of Labor
       Economics, 18(3), 377-404.

Osterman, Paul, 1994. ‘How Common Is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts It?’, Industrial
      and Labor Relations Review, 47(2), 173-188 .



                                                61
Osterman, Paul, 2006. ‘The Wage effects of High Performance Work Organizations in Manufacturing’
      Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 59(2), 187-204

Oxera, 2007. ‘Tax-advantaged Employee Share Schemes: Analysis of Productivity Effects’, HM
       Revenue and Customs Research Report No. 33.

Oyer, Paul, 1998, ‘Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on Business
      Seasonality’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 149-185.

Oyer, Paul and Schaefer, Scott (2010) ‘Personal Economics: Hiring and Incentives’, Stanford mimeo

Pavcnik, Nina, 2002. ‘Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from
       Chilean Plants’, Review of Economic Studies, 69,245–276.

Pendleton, Andrew, Keith Whitfield and Alex Bryson, 2009, ‘The Changing Use of Contingent Pay in
       the Modern British Workplace’, in The Evolution of the Modern Workplace, eds. William
       Brown, Alex Bryson, John Forth and Keith Whitfield. Cambridge University Press.

Penrose, Edith, 1959. Theory of the Growth of the Firm. New York: J. Wiley & Sons.

Pérez-Gonzáles, Francisco, 2006. ‘Inherited Control and Firm Performance’, American Economic
       Review, 96(5), 1559–1588.

Postel-Vinay, Fabienne and Robin, Jean-Marc (2002) “Equilibrium Search with Heterogeneous
       Workers and Firms” Econometrica, 70, 1295-1350

Prendergast, Canice, 1999. ‘What Happens Within Firms? A Survey of Empirical Evidence on
       Compensation Policies’, Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 7-63.

Prendergast, Canice, 2000. ‘What Trade-Off of Risk and Incentives?’, American Economic Review,
       90(2), 421-425.

Prendergast, Canice, 2002a. ‘The Tenuous Trade-Off between Risk and Incentives’, Journal of
       Political Economy, 110(5), 1071-102.

Prendergast, Canice, 2002b. ‘Uncertainty and Incentives’, Journal of Labor Economics, 20(2), S115-
       S137.

Prendergast, Canice and Robert Topel, 1996. ‘Favoritism in Organizations’, Journal of Political
       Economy, 104(5): 958–78.

Prentice, Graham, Simon Burgess and Carol Propper, 2007. ‘Performance-pay in the Public Sector: A
       Review of the Issues and Evidence’, Office of Manpower Economics.

Prescott, Edward and Michael Visscher, 1980. ‘Organization Capital’, Journal of Political Economy,
       88(3), 446-461.

Putnam, Robert, 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton NJ:
      Princeton University Press.


                                                62
Radner, Roy, 1993. ‘The Organization of Decentralized Information Processing’, Econometrica, 61(5),
      1109-1146.

Rajan R and Zingales, L. 2001 The Firm as a Dedicated Hierarchy: A Theory of the Origin and
      Growth of Firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 805-851.

Rajan, Raghuram and Julie Wulf, 2006. ‘The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel Data on the
       Changing Nature of Corporate Hierarchies’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4), 759-
       773.

Reed, Howard, Dearden, Lorraine and John Van Reenen, 2006. “Training and Corporate Productivity:
       Evidence from a panel of UK industries” Oxford Bulletin of Economic and Social Research
       (2006), 68, 4, 397-421

Salter, W G., 1960. Productivity and Technical Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schmitz, James, 2005, “What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic Recovery of the
      U.S. and Canadian Iron Ore Industries Following Their Early 1980s Crisis,” Journal of
      Political Economy, Vol. 113 (3) 582–625.

Shaw, K., 2009 “Insider Econometrics: A Roadmap with stops along the way”, Labor Economics

Shearer, Bruce, 2004. ‘Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives: Evidence from a Field Experiment’,
       Review of Economic Studies, 71(2), 513-534.

Stiroh, Kevin, 2004. ‘Reassessing the Role of IT in the Production Function: A Meta Analysis’,
        Federal Reserve Bank of New York mimeo.

Svenson, Ola, 1981, ‘Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers?’ Acta
   Psychologica 47, 143-148.

Syverson, Chad, 2004a. ‘Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion’, Review of Economics
       and Statistics 86(2), 534-550.

Syverson, Chad, 2004b. ‘Market Structure and Productivity: A concrete Example’, Journal of Political
       Economy, 112(6), 1181-1222.


Thesmar, David and Mathias Thoenig, 1999. ‘From Flexibility to Insecurity: How Vertical Separation
      Amplifies Firm-level Uncertainty’, Journal of the European Economic Association 5(6), 1161-
      1202.

Thesmar, David and Mathias Thoenig, 2000. ‘Creative Destruction and Organization Change’, The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1201-1237.

Van Biesebroeck, Johannes, 2007. ‘Complementarities in Automobile Production’, Journal of Applied
      Econometrics, 22, 1315-1345.

Van Reenen, John, 1996. ‘The Creation and Capture of Economic Rents: Wages and Innovation in a
      Panel of UK Companies’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, 443, 195-226.

                                                  63
Xavier Vives, 2008. ‘Innovation and Competitive Pressure’ Journal of Industrial Economics, 56(3),
       419-469,

Weitzman, Martin and Douglas Kruse, 1990. ‘Profit Sharing and Productivity", in Paying for
      Productivity: A look at the Evidence, ed. Blinder, A. The Brookings Institution, Washington,
      DC.

Wulf, Julie (2007) ‘Authority, Risk and Performance Incentives: Evidence from Division Manager
       Positions Insider Firms’, Journal of Industrial Economics, LV(1), 169-186

Woodward J. 1958 Management and Technology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Zabojnik, Jan, 2002. ‘Pay-Performance Sensitivity and Production Uncertainty’, Journal of Labor
Economics, 20(1), 1-22.




                                               64
              Table 2.1 Increases in Incentive pay in large publicly listed US firms

Year of Survey            More than 20% of              More than 20% of       More than 20% of
                            employees have               employees have        employees in teams
                         Individual incentives        gainsharing (e.g. team
                           (e.g. performance                bonuses)
                                bonuses)
                                   (1)                         (2)                     (3)
1987                               38                           7                      37

1990                               45                          11                      51

1993                               50                          16                      65

1996                               57                          19                      66

1999                               67                          24                      61



Source: Lawler et al (1995, 2001), Lawler and Mohrman (2003)




                                                 65
Table 2.2: Trends in General HRM using British WERS Survey

                                               1980      1984   1990   1998   2004   P value for
                                                                                     change
High involvement practices
Work organisation
     Team working                                                      49     54     0.11
     Functional flexibility                                            71     75     0.21
     Quality circles                                            30     39     28     0.45
     Suggestion schemes                                  22     26     30     36     0.00
Skill and knowledge acquisition
     Team briefings                                      31     42     49     70     0.00
     Induction training                                                76     90     0.00
     Training in human relations skills                                38     52     0.00
     Information disclosure about                        32     44     49     46     0.00
         investment plans
     Information disclosure about financial              56     56     60     58     0.47
         position
     Information disclosure about staffing               57     52     52     61     0.01
         plans
     Appraisals                                                        49     67     0.00
Work enrichment
     Job variety                                                       40     39     0.65
     Method discretion                                                 21     19     0.59
     Time control                                                      20     21     0.77
Motivational practices
     Motivation a major selection criterion                            84     80     0.11
     Internal recruitment                                              32     26     0.04
     Job security guarantees                                           6      10     0.01
     Single status                                                     63     61     0.57
     Profit-related pay                                         42     46     45     0.31
     Share-ownership scheme                    14        23     31     24     28     0.00
Total quality management
     Self-inspection                                                   53     44     0.01
     Records on faults and complaints                                  64     62     0.52
     Customer surveys                                                  47     53     0.05
     Quality targets                                                   39     55     0.00
     Training in problem solving                                       23     23     0.90
     Just-in-time production                                           35     32     0.47


Notes: The following variables relate to practices as they pertain to the core non-managerial
occupation at the workplace; team-working (equals 1 if 80%+ core employees in teams); functional
flexibility; appraisals (equals 1 if all core employees appraised); work enrichment. Single status is if
core workers are treated the same as managers in terms of benefits such as pensions

Source: Bryson and Wood (2009) based on UK WIRS/WERS data




                                                    66
                                         Table 3.1 Studies of the “effects” of HRM on productivity

Panel A: General HRM Practices

Study                       Data                             HRM measures                   Method                      Results
Bartel, Ichinowski and Shaw US Valve manufacturing,          Teams, incentive pay and Site visits plus a telephone      Modern HRM practices
(2007)                      panel data on one plant and      basic and technical training   survey matched to US        associated with the adoption
                            survey data on 212 plants                                       Census data (the LRD)       of new IT technologies
Black and Lynch (2001)      1993              EQW-NES        Large variety including self- Cross sectional OLS. Using   Profit sharing for non-
                            Educational Quality of the       managed        teams,   profit Census panel use GMM-       managers         significantly
                            Workforce            National    sharing, job rotation, unions, DIF to estimate plant       related     to   productivity
                            employer      Survey.      An    Total Quality Management productivity and relate this      (stronger in union firms)
                            establishment level surveys      (TQM),          benchmarking, to HRM practices
                            of US plants (in all private     communication, meetings,
                            sector    with     over    20    training, etc.
                            employees) matched to
                            Census manufacturing data
                            1987-1993
Black and Lynch (2004)      1993 and 1996 EQW-NES            See Black and Lynch (2001)   OLS in cross section and Profit sharing significantly
                            matched to Census data.                                       long-differences, regressions related to productivity in
                            72% response rate in 1993                                                                   cross       section,     but
                            and 78% in 1996. In 1996                                                                    insignificant in changes
                            1,493 in cross section, 284 in
                            panel
Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen 1,633 firms in 7 European        People management score OLS production functions           Complementarity between
(2010)                      countries. Cross section of      (see section 2) over careful with and without fixed        IT and people management.
                            management data in 2006          hiring, performance pay, effects                           Higher coefficient on IT for
                            combined with panel of           merit-based         promotion,                             subsidiaries     of      US
                            firm-level accounting data       fixing/firing, etc.                                        multinationals (compared to
                            and IT data from Harte-                                                                     other         multinationals)
                            Hanks                                                                                       accounted for     higher IT
                                                                                                                        productivity




                                                                       67
Cappelli and Neumark (2001)    EQW-NES (see Black and Large variety including Estimate cross sectional                  Almost       all      variables
                               Lynch,                 2004). teamwork, profit sharing, OLS and 2 long-differenced       insignificant in cross section
                               Manufacturing only - match job rotation, etc.                equations: 1993-1977 and    and panel in productivity
                               in plants from 1977. N=433                                   1996-1977. Assumption is    equations (a few more in
                               (1993-77); N=666 (1996-                                      that workplace practices allwage equations). Profit
                               1977)                                                                                    sharing*self managed team
                                                                                            zero in 1977 so level in later
                                                                                            period can be treated as a  interactions      significantly
                                                                                            difference                  positive
Caroli and Van Reenen (2001)   UK (re-organization) and 3 equations with dependent OLS cross section and long-          Evidence for “Skill-biased
                               French           (delayering) variables as (i) growth of differences                     organizational        change”.
                               establishment level data.     skill       shares;       (ii)                             Organizational         changes
                                                             organizational          form                               appear to (i) increase
                                                             (delayering     in   France,                               demand for more skilled
                                                             general        organizational                              workers; (ii) have larger
                                                             change in UK); (iii)                                       positive       effect        on
                                                             productivity                                               productivity when combined
                                                                                                                        with more skilled workers.
                                                                                                                        Regions with lower costs of
                                                                                                                        skills are more likely to
                                                                                                                        introduce       organizational
                                                                                                                        change.
Cooke (1994)                   Manufacturing     firms   in Employee participation and       OLS                        Value     added      increases.
                               Michigan                     group incentives                                            Wages also increase (but by
                                                                                                                        less than value added)
Cristini et al (2001)          100 Italian manufacturing Adoption of HRM practices           Cross-sectional survey and Find      HRM         practices
                               firms                     around job-rotation, team           panel performance data     clustered across firms, and
                                                         work and selective hiring                                      associated with improved
                                                         and performance pay                                            firm level performance
Easton and Jarrell (1998)      Publicly quoted firms     TQM                                 Matching techniques        Positive effect of TQM on
                                                                                                                        financial performance
Griffith and Neely (2009)      Introduction of “Balanced Scorecard a mix of several          Look at monthly data for 3 No effect at the mean.
                               Scorecard” in single UK factors.     Individual and           years before and after the Productivity dispersion rises
                               retail firm               group performance taken             roll-out of the program    – more able managers
                                                         into account                                                   increase by more.




                                                                         68
Huselid (1995)                   Survey of senior HR           Uses Principal Components          OLS     regressions   with One or both variables
                                 executives (28% response      to get 2 factors analysis          dependent variables: sales significant in each of 3
                                 rate). 826 large (100+        from 13 questions. (1)             per employee, profitability performance equations
                                 employees) publicly quoted    employee      skills    and        and Tobin’s q
                                 US firms in 1991.             organization (8 items); (2)
                                                               employee motivation (3
                                                               items). Sum these.
Huselid and Becker (1996)        Repeat     Huselid     (1995) As Huselid (1995)                  OLS and FE regressions Sum is significant in cross
                                 survey to get cross section                                      with dependent variables as section, but insignificant in
                                 and panel data in 1993. 740                                      profitability and Tobin’s q panel dimension
                                 responses (20% rate) and
                                 218 firms in panel
Ichinowski (1990)                65    business     units   in                                    OLS                        Clusters      of      practices
                                 manufacturing. 7% response                                                                  (including enriched job
                                 rate                                                                                        design) associated with
                                                                                                                             better financial performance
Ichinowski, Prennushi       and Integrated steel mills. Steel    Introduction on an HRM           OLS regressions with fixed Large        increases       in
Shaw (1997)                     finishing lines. Monthly         system on 7 dimensions –         effects.                   productivity from adopting
                                productivity is downtime         incentive pay; careful hiring;                              innovative HRM system
                                due to defects rates. 36 mills   teams; training; information                                (scores highly on all
                                and 17 companies over 5          sharing; broad job design                                   dimensions). Adopting one
                                years. Essentially this is       and job security.                                           or two practices do not help.
                                team      which       operates                                                               Find practices tend to be
                                finishing line.                                                                              clustered           suggesting
                                                                                                                             complementarities.
MacDuffie (1995)                 A 1989-1990 survey of                                                                       Finds bundles of practices
                                 human resource practices in                                                                 clustered across plants, and
                                 62 automotive assembly                                                                      that this bundles
                                 plants.
Osterman (2006)                  National      Establishment     High-performance                OLS                           Increased     wages    from
                                 Survey (NES). Uses panel of     workplace        organization,                                adoption       of      high-
                                 around 800 US private           defined      as     employee                                  performance        workplace
                                 sector establishments (see      involvement       in      self-                               organization, appears due to
                                 Black and Lynch, 2004)          managing       teams,     job-                                increase productivity
                                                                 rotation and quality circles



                                                                            69
Panel B: Individual Incentive Pay

Study                        Data                            Incentive                        Method                          Result
Bandeira, Barankay and Rasul Workers on a UK soft fruit      Piece-rate pay (bonus for        Mid-season change in bonus      Relative bonus led to lower
(2005)                       picking farm. Daily field       amount of fruit picked) and      system from relative pay to     picking rates, particularly if
                             productivity data of workers,   relative performance pay         piece-rate pay                  the rest of the comparison
                             and the peer groups they        (bonus for amount of fruit                                       group        were      friends,
                             interact with.                  picked relative to rest of the                                   especially if they could
                                                             picking group).                                                  mutually               monitor
                                                                                                                              performance.          Suggests
                                                                                                                              workers internalize impact of
                                                                                                                              their performance on their
                                                                                                                              colleagues.
Bandeira, Barankay and Rasul Managers on UK soft fruit       Performance      bonus     to    Mid-season       change    in   Pickers’           productivity
(2007)                       picking farm. Daily field       manager depending on             payment        system      by   increases by 21% (at least
                             productivity data on workers    average worker (fruit picker)    company       (designed    by   half is selection). Variance
                             under manager.                  productivity in the day.         researchers)      in    2003.   of      productivity       (and
                                                             Previously flat hourly wage      Include manager and field       earnings) increases because
                                                                                              fixed effects.                  managers target their effort
                                                                                                                              towards more able workers.
                                                                                                                              Selection      effect    arises
                                                                                                                              because managers drop the
                                                                                                                              less able workers from their
                                                                                                                              teams.
Bandeira, Barankay and Rasul As in Bandeira, et al (2007). Individual (from flat hourly Mid-season       change         in    Under flat pay productivity
(2009a)                      Also use 3 measures of wage)                               payment        system           by    of a worker 9% higher when
                             social connectedness: same                                 company      (designed          by    socially      connected      to
                             nationality; live in close                                 researchers) in 2003                  manger, but under incentive
                             proximity to each other on                                                                       pay this difference is zero.
                             farm; arrived at similar time                                                                    After       incentive      pay,
                             on farm                                                                                          productivity of highly able
                                                                                                                              increases and less able
                                                                                                                              decreases.            Average
                                                                                                                              productivity lower because
                                                                                                                              of favoritism.


                                                                        70
Study                        Data                           Incentive                     Method                          Result
Bandeira, Barankay and Rasul As in Bandeira, et al (2007)   Change in the type of team    Fruit pickers are in teams of   Both interventions increase
(2009b)                      but this time a change in      incentive – feedback vs.      c.5. Engineer a change from     sorting: high ability want to
                             2005. Survey of friends.       tournament                    team piece rates to (i) give    work with each other).
                                                                                          feedback, then (ii) give        Productivity increases by
                                                                                          tournament prize                24% with tournament (string
                                                                                                                          incentive      effect)    but
                                                                                                                          decreases by 14% with
                                                                                                                          feedback (because sorting
                                                                                                                          reduces social ties). Note
                                                                                                                          cannot look at causal effect
                                                                                                                          of group vs. individual pay
Fernie and Metcalf (1999)      413 British jockeys (184 in Some employed on fixed         (i)     Random        effects   Large incentive effects –
                               balanced panel)             retainers and others offered   controlling for bookie's        those facing prizes supply
                                                           prizes for winning races.      estimates of horse and race     much more effort. Switching
                                                           Different    prizes   across   likely success.; (ii) control   to lower powered incentives
                                                           races.                         for jockey fixed effects for    reduces effort.
                                                                                          small      sample      where
                                                                                          incentives reduced due to
                                                                                          new owner
Foster and Rosenzweig (1996)   Agricultural workers in                                    Piece rate workers vs. flat Conditional on calorie intake
                               Philippines. Body weight                                   rate workers                  piece rate workers lose more
                               changes for those on                                                                     weight. But calories for
                               different types of pay.                                                                  piece rate higher overall due
                               Weight changes a proxy for                                                               to higher wages.
                               effort
Freeman and Kleiner (2005)     US Shoe manufacturer.        Switch      away      from    OLS      regressions with
                                                                                                               Workers productivity higher
                               Monthly data on shoes        individual piece rates to     dummies for pay regimes.
                                                                                                               under piece rates pay by 6%.
                               produced (And scheduled      hourly pay. Also coincided    Monthly trend and other
                                                                                                               But profits increased with
                               production) 1991-1994 in 2   with other changes to         controls             abolition due to lower
                               plants                       management – continuous                            inventory, higher quality,
                                                            production                                         and more frequent product
                                                                                                               changes.
Griffith and Neely (2009)      Introduction of “Balanced Scorecard a mix of several Look at monthly data for 3 No effect at the mean.
                               Scorecard” in single UK factors.     Individual and years before and after the Productivity dispersion rises
                               retail firm               group performance taken roll-out of the program       – more able managers
                                                         into account                                          increase by more.

                                                                      71
Study                          Data                           Incentive                        Method                   Result
Kahn, Silva and Zilak (2001)   Brazilian tax collection       Individual      and     group    Look 3 years before and 75% increase in rate of
                               authority.       Productivity  incentives introduced in         after scheme introduced. growth     of    fines    per
                               measured by number of          1989.        Objective and                                inspection. Problem that
                               inspections and amount of      subjective       performance.                             extortion may also increase
                               fines collected from tax       Large: bonuses 70% of
                               evaders                        additional fines collected
Lavy (2009)                    Israeli    teachers.  Policy   Policy      introduced      of   Schools treated based on a       Significant improvement in
                               introduced in 50 schools in    awarding bonuses based on        policy rule - threshold based    teacher         performance.
                               December 2000.                 pupils pass rates and scores     on     1999      matriculation   Appears to be through
                                                              in matriculation exams in        results with error. Consider     changes in teaching methods.
                                                              English and math. Rank           18 schools in treatment and      No evidence of distortions.
                                                              order tournament. Only           18 in control.
                                                              about a third of eligible
                                                              teachers      won      awards
                                                              (ranged from 6-25% of
                                                              salary)
Lazear (2000)                  Safelite Glass Company Individual (from flat hourly             Change in payment system         44% increase in productivity
                               (windshield installers). 2,755 wage to per windshield)          by       company.       OLS      (22%       incentive,   22%
                               workers over 19 month                                           regressions with and without     selection from new hires, not
                               period.    29,837      person                                   fixed effects                    from leavers)
                               months
Shearer (2004)                 One firm of tree planters in 9 male workers randomized          Random assignment (design 20% increase in productivity
                               British Columbia (Feb-July). in and out of piece rate and       doesn’t allow him to look at (22% in structural model)
                                                              hourly rate (so same worker      selection)
                                                              observed       under      both
                                                              systems). Up to 16 days per
                                                              worker.

Panel C: Group Incentive Pay




                                                                          72
Study                           Data                          Incentive                   Method                        Result
Baiker and Jacobson (2007)      US Police Departments         1984 Comprehensive Crime OLS                              10% increase in fraction
                                                              Control act provided police                               returned       to      police
                                                              departments opportunity to                                department associated with a
                                                              share in proceeds of drug-                                $0.19 increase in values of
                                                              related asset seizures                                    seizures.     Police    work
                                                                                                                        strategically putting greater
                                                                                                                        emphasis on possession
                                                                                                                        (high cash component) rather
                                                                                                                        than drugs sales.
Blasi, Freeman, Mackin and Survey of 100+ studies on                                                                    Average       increase     in
Kruse (2009)                   group incentives (“shared                                                                productivity by 4.5%
                               capitalism”)
Boning, Ichinowski and Shaw One product line in US steel Proportion of mills with OLS regressions with fixed Productivity rises 6% with
(2007)                         mini mills (bars from problem solving teams rises effects                               teams and effect strongest
                               recycled steel). 36 mills (20 by 10% to 50%                                             when products are complex;
                               firms) over 5 years                                                                     incentive pay also associated
                                                                                                                       with higher productivity
Burgess,     Propper,   Ratto, UK HM Customs and Excise Office         managers given OLS              Difference   in Team productivity increased.
Scholder and Tominey (2007)    (tax collection department) incentive on team bonus. 2 Differences                      Main       effect    through
                               April-Dec 2002. Weekly treatment teams (N=154 in 3                                      selection     where      most
                               data. Look at yield and time offices bonus equal across                                 efficient    workers     were
                               (mainly on “trader audit”)    all workers), another N= 158                              allocated to the more
                                                             in 6 offices bonus varied                                 incentivized task.
                                                             according to grade). One
                                                             blind control (N=281)
Hamilton, Nickerson and Owan US        unionized    garment Change from individual OLS with person effects and No evidence of free-riding.
(2003)                         manufacturer (Koret in piece rate to teams with time effects. Dummy for On average productivity rose
                               Napa), 1995-1997. Weekly group based incentives pay. team membership. Puzzle of 18%.              Increased use of
                               production data on sewing Production from Taylorist to more able switching first collaborative skills. Gains
                               function for women’s skirts, “modular” in response to (some lost income) and greater                   for       more
                               pants, etc. 288 employees demands for more flexible having the same exit rate as heterogeneous teams. More
                               (20,627 person-weeks)         batches     from     retailers least able. Assumes due to productive workers switched
                                                             Workers       have      some non-pecuniary benefits of earlier, so 4% is selection,
                                                             discretion over when they team work.                      14% effect on same workers.
                                                             switch.


                                                                        73
Study                      Data                      Incentive                Method                                     Result
Jones and Kato (1995)      109     large   unionized ESOPs     (presence) and OLS        estimation      of              Introduction     of     ESOP
                           manufacturing firms in Bonuses (amount of bonus production functions with                     increases productivity 4-5%,
                           Japan 1973-1980           per worker)              fixed effects. No IV for                   takes 3-4 years of this effect.
                                                                              incentive pay introduction                 A 10% increase in bonus per
                                                                                                                         employee leads to a 1%
                                                                                                                         increase in productivity the
                                                                                                                         following year.
Knez and Simester (2001)   Continental         Airlines  Continental airlines in 1995.    Regress change in on-time      Significant    increase     in
                           Personnel data. Productivity  Promised $65 monthly             departures     on     full     productivity.          Mutual
                           measured      by    on-time   bonus to all employees if        outsourced and partially       monitoring in team based
                           departure rate. 648 airports  firm-wide goals met. Used        outsourced. Control for        production.
                           over 22 months                outsourced            airports   lagged performance.
                                                         (Continental’s     operations
                                                         managed by outside workers
                                                         who were not covered by
                                                         scheme) as a control group.
Lavy (2002)                Israeli teachers. February Compares introduction of            Compared      results    in Significant improvement in
                           1995 competition announced group bonuses (based on             treatment and control group teacher         performance.
                           for monetary bonus to pupil performance) with                  by 1997.                    Incentive pay more cost
                           secondary school teachers.    more schools resources.                                      effective    than     general
                                                         Awards tied to average                                       increase    in     resources.
                                                         student credit, matriculation                                Stronger effects for weaker
                                                         diplomas and dropout rates.                                  students
                                                         62 schools eligible, one third
                                                         won. $1.5m disbursed, about
                                                         75% went to teacher pay
                                                         (Bonuses only 1-3% of
                                                         average salary).
Mas and Moretti (2008)     Supermarket          checkout                                  Within a 10 minute work        High productivity clerks
                           clerks;    all    supermarket                                  interval,           personal   increase the productivity of
                           transactions in 6 stores                                       productivity rises by 1.7%     low productivity clerks, but
                                                                                          when working in front of a     only if the high productivity
                                                                                          peer who is 10% more           clerk can observe the low
                                                                                          productive than average.       productivity clerk.



                                                                     74
Panel D Distortions associated with incentive pay schemes

Asch (1990)                     US Navy Recruiters          Individual (Recruiters paid Non-linear incentives          If Navy recruiters near their
                                                            & measured) based on                                       targets they worked harder,
                                                            enlisted sailors                                           especially nearer the end of
                                                                                                                       the year.
Chevalier and Ellison (1997)    Mutual fund managers        At end of year managers                                    Distortion present for many
                                                            have an incentive to change                                years
                                                            level of risk
Coutry and Marschke (2004)      Managers of Federal job Group (budget of training Choice of termination date           Managers act to increase
                                training centres (JTPA). 16 office)     and   nonlinear. (up to 90 days after end of   payouts near end of each
                                agencies                    Bonuses augment operating training)                        measurement period. Quality
                                                            budget of agencies by 7% on                                of overall training fell.
                                                            average                                                    Strategic behavior lowers
                                                                                                                       program graduates wages
                                                                                                                       and therefore welfare
Glewwe, Ilias, and Kremer Kenyan schools (50 schools 2 year program offering Randomized control trial                  Test       scores   improved
(2003)                    in treatment group).       school wide bonuses to                                            significantly for treatment
                                                            teachers. Awards given if                                  group the 2 years when the
                                                            schools improved test scores                               program ran. But after
                                                            and reduced dropout rates                                  finished no lasting gain. No
                                                                                                                       improvement in drop-out
                                                                                                                       rates. Teacher attendance
                                                                                                                       and methods did not change.
                                                                                                                       Teachers put on extra exam
                                                                                                                       preparation classes to “cram”
                                                                                                                       for tests.
Larkin (2007)                   Salespeople in a Software Bonuses given when sales                                     Costs firm 6-8% in potential
                                Firm                      people hit their targets.                                    revenue
                                                          Distortions induced from
                                                          salespeople     substituting
                                                          sales across periods, and
                                                          giving discounts if they are
                                                          going to just miss their
                                                          targets



                                                                       75
Oyer (1998)   Executives and salespeople        Effort high at end of fiscal
              in General study of firms         year and low at beginning
              with different fiscal end
              years




                                           76
                                                   Table 3.2 Performance and people management practices


                                         (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                       (5)               (6)
                                         Ln(Sales/             Ln(Sales/             Ln(Sales/             Profitability             Sales growth      Survival
      Dependent variable
                                         employee)             employee)             employee)             (ROCE)


      People             Management      0.299                 0.178                 0.142                 1.417                     0.041             0.49a
                                         (0.028)               (0.021)               (0.024)               (0.701)                   (0.013)           (0.26a)

      Ln(Capital/                                                                    0.115
      Employee)                                                                      (0.014)

                                                                                     0.078
      %College Degree
                                                                                     (0.014)


      Country        &       industry
                                         No                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                       Yes               Yes
      dummies
      General controls                   No                    No                    Yes                   Yes                       Yes               Yes

      Noise Controls                     No                    No                    Yes                   Yes                       Yes               Yes

      Firms                              3,380                 3,380                 3,380                 2,369                     2,298             3,627
      Observations                       29,390                29,390                29,390                20,141                    19,568            3,627

Note: All columns estimated by OLS with standard errors are in parentheses under coefficient estimates clustered by firm, except for column (7) which is estimated by Probit
(we report marginal effects at the sample mean). Survival is defined as firms who are still in operation in Spring 2009 (including if they have been taken over by another firm).
Sample of all firms with available accounts data at some point between 2000 and 2008. Management score has a mean of 2.973 and a standard-deviation of 0.664. “Country
and industry dummies” includes a full set of 17 country and 162 SIC 3-digit dummies. “General controls” comprise of firm-level controls for ln(average hours worked) and
ln(firm age). “Noise controls” are 78 interviewer dummies, the seniority and tenure of the manager who responded, the day of the week the interview was conducted, the time
of the day the interview was conducted, the duration of the interviews and an indicator of the reliability of the information as coded by the interviewer. All regressions include
a full set of time dummies. “People Management” is the firm-level people management score covering pay, promotion, hiring, firing, retaining employees, consequence
management and human capital targets. “% College Degree” is the share of employees with a college degree (collected from the survey). “Profitability” is ROCE which is
“Return on Capital Employed” and “Sales growth” is the 5-year growth of sales. Survival is equal to zero if a firm exited due to bankruptcy/liquidation by the end of 2008
and one otherwise.a marginal effect and standard error multiplied by 100. The sample mean of non-survival is 2.1% so the marginal effect of -0.49 implies one management
point is associated with 23.5% (=0.49/2.1) lower exit rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009) data
                                                                                       77
Figure 2.1 Incidence of Performance Pay, US men in PSID, 1976-1998




Source: Lemieux, McLeod and Parent (2009)
Notes: Male heads of household earning between $1 and $100 per hour. Self employed and public sector excluded. 30,424
observations on 3,181 workers. Performance pay in current year=1 if any part of compensation includes bonus, commission
or piece rate. Stock options and shares are not included. A performance pay job is one where the worker ever receives some
performance pay over the life of the job-match.
Figure 2.2 Trends in performance Pay 1984-2004, UK




Source: Pendleton, Whitfield and Bryson (2009).
Notes: This data is derived from the UK Workplace Employment Relations Surveys (WERS) in 1984, 1990 and 2004. This is
a representative sample of all UK establishments with over 25 employees. Although there were other WERS in 1980 and
1998 the questions are not consistent. The consistent question relates to the incidence of any form of contingent pay for
workers (Individual, Collective – such as team bonuses, Profit-related pay or Employee Share Ownership Schemes). The
incidence of contingent pay grew from 41% to 56% by 1990, but fell to 55% in 2004. The data relates to whether there was
any incidence of this type of pay – we do not know how many workers were covered or what proportion of their remuneration
was contingent.
Figure 2.3 HR management practices across countries
                                                                                                                       # firms
                 US                                                                                                      695
           Canada                                                                                                        336
         Germany                                                                                                         270
             Japan                                                                                                       122
     Great Britain                                                                                                       762
  Northern Ireland                                                                                                       92
          Sweden                                                                                                         270
            Poland                                                                                                       231
Republic of Ireland                                                                                                      102
          Australia                                                                                                      382
            France                                                                                                       312
               Italy                                                                                                     188
              India                                                                                                      620
             China                                                                                                       524
          Portugal                                                                                                       140
              Brazil                                                                                                     559
           Greece                                                                                                        171

                     2.4         2.6         2.8             3            3.2                                        3.4
               HR management scores,
                             scores from 1 (worst practice) to 5 (best practice)
Notes: Averages taken across a random sample of the population of medium sized (100 to 5000 employee) manufacturing
firms within each country. 5,850 observations in total. Firms per country in the right column. Scores firms on seven practices
around pay, promotions, retention and hiring, where high scores. Source: Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009)
Figure 2.4 Promotions, fixing/firing, and rewards practices by country
                                                                            Effort & merit based promotions (black)
                                                                                                   Fixing/firing
                 US                                                                                underperformers (grey)
             Japan                                                          Rewards for good performance (white)
             China
          A t li
          Australia
            France
         Germany
            Poland
           Canada
  Northern Ireland
              India
               Italy
Republic of Ireland
     Great Britain
          Portugal
          Sweden
           Greece
              Brazil

                        2                 2.5                  3                 3.5                  4
              HR management scores, from 1 (worst practice) to 5 (best practice)
Note: Averages taken across a random sample of medium (100 to 5000 employee) manufacturing firms within each country.
5,850 observations in total. Source: Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009)
    Figure 2.5 Firm level distribution of HR management by country
                  Australia                      Brazil                       Canada                        China




    1
    .5
    0 5
    1.5
                  France                        Germany                    Great Britain                    Greece




    1.5
    1
    .5
y
    0
                   India                        Ireland                        Italy                        Japan




    1
    .5
    0 5
    1.5
                  Poland                        Portugal                      Sweden                         US




    1.5
    1
    .5
    0
          1   2       3       4   5   1     2      3       4   5    1     2      3     4     5    1     2     3      4     5

          Firm level average HR management scores, from 1 (worst practice) to 5 (best practice)
    Notes: Bars are the histogram of the density at the firm level on a country by country basis. Randomly sampled from all medium
    sized (100 to 5000 employee) manufacturing firms in each country. Source: Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009)
Figure 4.1 Labor market regulation and HR management practices




                             4
                           3.4
                                     US




                           3.2
                                           Canada




                           3
                                                                                                 Germany
                                                       GreatJapan
                                                             Britain




         ment practtices
                                                       Northern Ireland                 Poland   S d
                                                                                                 Sweden
                                          Australia        Republic of Ireland




                           2.8
                                                                                                                    France
                                                                                         Italy

                                                                           ChinaIndia




HR managem
                                                                                                      Portugal
                                                                                                   Brazil




                           2.6
                                                                                                           Greece




                           2.4
                                 0                          20                       40                                60
                                                      World Bank Employment Rigidity Index
Notes: World Bank index from the Doing Business database, http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/EmployingWorkers/
Source: Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009)
Figure 5.1 Ownership and HR management

        5 Sh
        5+ Shareholders
                h ld

            Private Equity

  Family, external CEO

                 Managers
                     g

                       Other

      Private Individuals

     Family, family CEO

                   Founder

              Government


                              2.3                2.5                2.7                2.9                3.1
                                                  HR management practices
Note: Averages taken across a random sample of medium (100 to 5000 employee) manufacturing firms within each country.
5,850 observations in total. Source: Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009)
Figure 5.2 Multinationals take good HR management practices abroad
                                                                                              Foreign multinationals
                                                                                              Domestic firms

                  US
          Canada
         Germany
             Japan
     Great Britain
            Poland
          Sweden
         Australia
Republic of Ireland
  Northern Ireland
                Italy
               India
             China
              Brazil
            France
          Portugal
           Greece

                          2                        2.5                        3                        3.5
                                                  HR management practices
Note: Averages taken across a random sample of medium (100 to 5000 employee) manufacturing firms within each country.
5,850 observations in total. Source: Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009)
Figure 5.3 Decentralization of firm decision making by country

   Greece
     Japan
       India
     China
    Poland
    France
 Portugal
        Italy
Germany
          UK
          US
  Sweden

                               -.5                                 0                                 .5
                        (more centralized)         Decentralization index           (more decentralized)
Note: High (positive) scores means plant managers have more autonomy of plant level investment, hiring, new products and
marketing from the corporate head-quarters. Low (negative) scores means plant managers have little autonomy and mainly follow
instructions from their corporate head-quarters. Averages taken across a random sample of medium (100 to 5000 employee)
manufacturing firms within each country. 5,850 observations in total. Source: Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009a).
Figure 5.4 Factors associated with decentralization
5.4A Industry heterogeneity         5.4B Proximity to technological frontier




5.4C Firm age
                                    Notes: Decentralization defined in terms of p percentage
                                                                                           g of firms
                                    that are profit centers (rather than cost centers). Data from 3570
                                    firms in French COI national survey.

                                    Source: Acemoglu, Aghion, Le Large, Van Reenen and Zilibotti
                                    (2007).
                                    (2007)
