                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 UNDERSTANDING CREATIVITY

                                          David W. Galenson

                                         Working Paper 16024
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16024


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Understanding Creativity
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 16024
May 2010
JEL No. Z11

                                                 ABSTRACT

The discipline of economics has traditionally refused to study the behavior and achievements of specific
individuals. Yet creativity – a primary source of the technological change that drives economic growth
– is largely the domain of extraordinary individuals or small groups. For the first time in the history
of the discipline, within the last decade economists have begun to study how these extraordinary individuals
make their discoveries, and the results have been dramatic.

Research done to date has demonstrated that artistic innovators can usefully be divided into two types.
Experimental innovators seek to record their perceptions. They proceed tentatively, by trial and error,
building their skills gradually, and making their greatest contributions late in their lives. In contrast,
conceptual innovators use their art to express ideas and emotions. The precision of their goals allows
them to plan their work, and execute it decisively. Their most radical new ideas, and consequently
their greatest innovations, occur early in their careers.

The research that has established these patterns has several central components. A key element is
the systematic measurement of an artist’s creativity over the course of the life cycle: this not only establishes
when the artist made his greatest contribution, but also provides an objective identification of his greatest
innovation. This facilitates another key element of the research, the categorization of the artist as experimental
or conceptual. This effectively depends on whether the artist works inductively, building his contribution
incrementally from observation, or deductively, creating his innovation as a consequence of a new
idea.

These patterns have been established empirically, by a large number of studies of important practitioners
of a wide range of arts. It is now time to extend economic research on creativity, by applying this analysis
to other intellectual domains. It is important to recognize that economists’ failure to study individuals
has prevented them from understanding the sources of the contributions of the most productive people
in our society. Breaking this disciplinary taboo may now allow us not only to understand, but perhaps
also to increase, the creativity of these remarkable individuals, and to help others to follow them.


David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
                                                 3



Introduction

       Economists have long believed that innovation is a primary source of economic

development: their theoretical models consistently identify technological change as a key engine

of economic growth, and their empirical studies regularly confirm that innovation is a leading

source of improving standards of living. Most innovations are made by individuals – artists,

scholars, scientists, entrepreneurs – or by small groups working together. Nobel prizes and many

other celebrated honors recognize the vast contribution of these individuals to our society and

economy. In view of the enormous importance of innovation, we might naturally assume that

economists would devote a great deal of attention to understanding the methods these

extraordinary individuals use to produce their discoveries: how artists create masterpieces, how

medical scientists develop vaccines and treatments for diseases, how scholars devise new

methods of inquiry and analysis, how engineers and entrepreneurs create new technologies and

products. Remarkably, however, this is not the case; economists have shown virtually no interest

in the technologies underlying the vast productivity of these exceptional individuals. It is past

time to recognize that economists’ refusal to study individuals is a disciplinary prejudice that will

prevent us from ever understanding how gifted innovators increase the productive capacity of

our economy, and even worse, that may consequently prevent us from increasing the creativity of

the most productive people in our society.

       Great artists themselves have occasionally touched on the question of how they

effectively accomplish what medieval alchemists failed to do, in turning such base materials as

canvas and paint into objects worth large quantities of gold. A famous instance occurred in 1878,
                                                  4
when in the course of a libel suit he had brought against a critic, the painter James McNeill

Whistler was challenged to justify the high price of his work. When asked by opposing counsel

whether he really charged purchasers of his paintings the large sum of 200 guineas for the labor

of just two days, Whistler replied, “No, I ask it for the knowledge of a lifetime.” 1 In 1884,

Vincent van Gogh suggested a very different source for artistic value, when he wrote to a fellow

painter of his belief that “art is something greater and higher than our own adroitness or

accomplishments or knowledge;…art is something which although produced by human hands, is

not created by these hands alone, but something which wells up from a deeper source in our

souls.” 2 In 1961, Piero Manzoni contended that artistic value was a product of “something

intimate, something truly personal from the artist,” so he made a series of small sealed cans, each

numbered and signed by the artist, titled Merda d’artista, with labels reading “Contents: 30 gr.

net; freshly preserved.” In an apparent nod to alchemy, Manzoni sold these cans at prices equal

to the current market value of 30 grams of gold. 3

       Whether artistic innovations – or those in other intellectual domains – stem from the

accumulation of human capital, divine intervention, or some other, more organic source, is an

important question. Recent studies have taken significant steps toward a systematic

understanding of human creativity. This work has focused on the arts. We can briefly summarize

the nature of the investigations before describing their results.

Artistic Importance

       A critical initial step in studying artistic creativity is to avoid the widespread confusion

over what determines the quality of art. Although many different attributes of art can be

considered, the overall importance of art is a function of innovation. Important artists are
                                                  5
innovators whose work changes the practices of their successors; important works of art are

those that embody innovations. Artists have made innovations in many areas, including subject

matter, composition, style, materials, and technique. But whatever the nature of an artist’s

innovation, its importance, and that of the artist, ultimately depends on the extent of its influence

on other artists. Recognition of this relationship allows us to measure the timing of an artist’s

creativity by determining when in his career he produced his best work.

Process

       The research I have done to date has several components. A central element is the

systematic measurement of an artist’s creativity over the course of the life cycle. For painters,

this began with regression estimation of age-price profiles for individual artists, that used auction

data to measure the value of an artist’s work throughout his career. To test the robustness of

these results, this market evidence on prices was then complemented by data that effectively

surveyed the opinions of art scholars on the importance of an artist’s work over the course of his

career. The two main sources for this were the illustrations of the work of each artist reproduced

in all available textbooks of art history, and the paintings selected for inclusion in major

retrospective exhibitions of the artist’s work.

       These three sources tend to agree closely in identifying each artist’s peak period. So for

example the highest average price of paintings by Paul Cézanne sold at auction during 1970-97,

holding constant support, size, and sale date, was for those he executed at age 67. Paintings from

that age – the last year of his life – were also illustrated more frequently than those from any

other year in 33 textbooks published in English since 1968, as well as in 31 textbooks published

in French since 1963. And the most recent retrospective exhibition of Cézanne’s work in 1996
                                                  6
included more paintings he produced at age 67 than in any other year. The estimated age-price

profile for Pablo Picasso peaked at age 26, the same age from which both sets of textbooks

included the largest number of illustrations of his work, and the same age from which the latest

full retrospective of his work, in 1980, presented the largest number of his paintings. 4

        I have now extended the measurement of individual artists’ creative life cycles to other

arts. For poets, I compiled age distributions of the poems reprinted in large numbers of

anthologies. For novelists, I measured the amount of space devoted to individual novels in

scholars’ studies of each writer’s oeuvre. For architects, sculptors, and photographers, I analyzed

the age distributions of works illustrated in textbooks, as for painters. For movie directors, I used

surveys of critical evaluations of individual films, including polls of large numbers of critics and

directors. 5

        Measurement of an artist’s life cycle of creativity immediately allows the identification of

his greatest innovation, or innovations. For each artist, it is important to study the work executed

at these times, in order to understand what the artist’s most important innovation was, and why

this was the case. Understanding the latter requires analysis of whom the innovation influenced,

and how.

        Identifying and understanding an artist’s major contribution facilitates categorization of

the artist. I have discovered that important artists can be divided into two types, on the basis of

differences in their goals, methods, and achievements. Experimental innovators seek to record

their perceptions. They work tentatively, by trial and error. The imprecision of their goals rarely

allows them to feel they have succeeded, so they often have trouble finishing individual works,

and generally spend their careers pursuing a single objective. They consider making art a process
                                                  7
of searching, in which they wish to make discoveries in the course of executing their works.

They build their skills gradually, and their innovations appear incrementally in a body of work.

In contrast, conceptual innovators use their art to express ideas or emotions. Their goals are

precise, so they plan their works, and execute them systematically. Their innovations are

conspicuous, transgressive, and often irreverent. These innovations appear suddenly, as a new

idea produces a result different not only from other artists’ work, but also from the artist’s own

previous work.

       Categorization is normally straightforward once the artist’s peak period, and the nature of

his innovation, are known. So for example late in his life Cézanne painted visually, from a

model, and directly, without preparatory drawings, and thus he was clearly an experimental

innovator. In contrast, Picasso did not work from models – he explained that he painted what he

knew, not what he saw – and he planned his paintings carefully, with preparatory studies and

meticulous underdrawing. Cubism, his great early innovation, did not imitate the appearance of

objects, but represented them symbolically. Picasso thus was clearly a conceptual innovator.

       It was not accidental that the experimental Cézanne made his greatest contribution late in

his life, or that the conceptual Picasso made his very early in his career. The long periods of trial

and error typically required for important experimental innovations generally cause them to

occur late in an artist’s life. Radical conceptual innovations depend on the ability to recognize

the gains from extreme departures from existing conventions, and this ability declines with

experience, as fixed habits of thought develop. The most important conceptual innovations

consequently occur early in an artist’s career.

       Once artists are categorized, these predictions about the timing of their life cycles can be
                                                  8
tested in light of the measurement of their creative life cycles. In addition to determining whether

conceptual artists tend to make their greatest contributions earlier in their careers than their

experimental counterparts, other implications of the analysis can be considered. So for example

the clarity of their goals means that conceptual artists are more likely to conceive and produce

dominant individual works, whereas experimental artists often produce bodies of work in which

no single piece emerges as the most important. The greatest individual masterpieces in our

history are consequently disproportionately the products of conceptual innovators. 6

Products

       The results of my research can be illustrated through reference to the methods and

innovations of important practitioners of each of the arts I have studied. In each case, these

individuals were included in larger samples of prominent practitioners of these arts, so analyses

of the careers of other important figures in each art can be found in the studies cited below.

       Paul Cézanne (1839-1906) was an experimental painter, who declared “I seek in

painting.” 7 He was perennially frustrated with his inability to achieve the vague goal he referred

to as “realization,” and less than a month before his death, he wrote to his son that “I am so slow

in expressing myself that it makes me very sad.” 8 Ironically, when he wrote these words he was

working on the paintings that embodied new means of representing the process of perception that

would directly influence the greatest discoveries of Picasso, Matisse, and virtually every other

important artist of the next generation. In contrast, Pablo Picasso (1881-1973) was a conceptual

innovator, who confidently declared “I don’t seek; I find.” 9 At the age of 26, he painted Les

Demoiselles d’Avignon, which declared a radical new symbolic representation of forms and

space and which initiated Cubism, the most revolutionary stylistic innovation since the
                                                  9
Renaissance. The Demoiselles has been widely recognized by art scholars as “the watershed

between the old pictorial world and the new,” and is illustrated in more textbooks of art history

than any other work of the modern era. 10

       Auguste Rodin (1840-1917) was an experimental sculptor, who believed that “art is only

a close study of nature.” 11 He was committed to the conviction that good art required patience:

“only slowly, little by little, by continual effort, can one make anything well.” 12 His single

sculpture that is most frequently reproduced in art history textbooks is his Monument to Balzac,

which he completed at the age of 58, and considered the “result of a lifetime of effort.” 13 Robert

Smithson (1938-1973) was a conceptual sculptor, who considered that “an object…is the product

of a thought.” 14 Early in his career Smithson invented a new genre of art called earthworks,

large structures that he and other artists would create in, and from, the landscape, often in remote

areas. At the age of 32, he hired a contractor to move more than 6,000 tons of mud and rock to

create a 1,500-foot-long promontory at the north end of Great Salt Lake. Spiral Jetty is now

illustrated in more textbooks of art history than any other work ever produced by an American

artist, and it secured Smithson’s fame in spite of his premature death only three years later, in the

crash of the small plane from which he was filming his plan for a new earthwork. 15

       Virginia Woolf (1882-1941) was an experimental novelist, who confessed in her diary

that she was never able to reach any definitive conclusion: “I have some restless searcher in me.”

She did not believe in fixed vantage points, for “if honestly examined life presents question after

question.” 16 Her work is valued for her graceful prose and the realism and subtlety of her

characters. Just a week before she finished To the Lighthouse, she noted in her diary that she did

not know how to conclude it, but was “casting about for an end;” the novel, written when she
                                                  10
was 44, is now generally considered her most important. 17 F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940) wrote

The Great Gatsby, which many scholars consider the greatest novel ever written by an American,

at the age of 29. 18 Gatsby was a conceptual masterpiece, that used lyrical prose and simplified

characters in the service of an allegorical plot. Fitzgerald’s fiction deteriorated precipitously after

Gatsby. Like many other conceptual writers late in their lives, he wondered where his gift had

gone, as in a letter to his daughter, he observed that “The talent that matures early is usually of

the poetic, which mine was in large part.” 19

       T.S. Eliot (1888-1965) wrote “The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock,” one of the most

important American poems of the twentieth century, at the age of 23, while he was a graduate

student in philosophy at Harvard, and he wrote The Waste Land, widely considered the greatest

American poem of the century, at 34. In contrast, Robert Frost (1874-1963) wrote his most

frequently anthologized poem, “Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening,” at the kitchen table

of his Vermont farm at 48. Eliot was a conceptual poet: the writer Malcolm Cowley observed

that he regarded his poems “as intellectual problems – having solved one problem, he devoted

himself to another.” 20 Frost, an experimental poet who was inspired by the real speech of

residents of rural New England, explained that his art was the product of listening: “I would

never use a word or combination of words that I hadn’t heard used in running speech.” 21

       Le Corbusier (1887-1965), wrote a book titled Creation Is a Patient Search, and late in

his life described himself as “A visual man, working with his eyes and his hands.” 22 His primary

concern for his buildings always involved their appearance, for he valued beauty above all. He

was an experimental innovator, whose greatest achievements came late in his life: he completed

the chapel of Notre Dame du Haut at Ronchamp at 63, and it is illustrated in more textbooks of
                                                  11
the history of art and architecture than any other building of the twentieth century. The chapel’s

bulging, curved roof, which has inspired generations of younger architects to experiment with

irregular forms, was suggested by the shape of a crab shell Le Corbusier found on the beach.

Renzo Piano (1937- ) achieved instant fame in 1971, at the age of 34, when he and his 38-year-

old partner Richard Rogers won a competition to design a new Parisian cultural center. Their

design embodied the idea of the building as a machine, made from standardized parts, that could

readily be adapted to a variety of uses, and the appearance of the building mimicked a factory.

Many observers were outraged by the building’s intrusion on an old Paris neighborhood, and

Piano himself has described the Pompidou Center, which remains the conceptual architect’s most

famous building, as “a huge joke, a kind of face pulled at the cultural establishment.” 23

        There is remarkably widespread agreement that Citizen Kane is the most important movie

ever made: so for example it has placed first in each of the five decennial polls the British Film

Institute has conducted of movie critics since 1962. The film was directed and coauthored by

Orson Welles (1915-1985), when he was just 26. It was Welles’ first film, and is a conceptual

masterpiece: thus the French director François Truffaut remarked that “when I see Kane again

for perhaps the thirtieth time, it is its twofold aspect as fairy tale and moral fable that strikes me

most forcefully.” 24 John Ford (1894-1973) received the first Life Achievement Award ever given

by the American Film Institute; the citation declared that “No individual has more fully explored

on film the American experience.” Interestingly, however, the citation did not mention any of

Ford’s movies by name, but referred to them collectively as “a creative tapestry representing

over 50 years of work.” 25 Ford believed that “Pictures, not words, should tell the story,” and he

was celebrated for his skillful use of images: thus Alfred Hitchcock stated that “A John Ford film
                                                 12
was a visual gratification.” 26 Ford’s experimental craftsmanship grew over time, and his film that

received the most votes in the 2002 British Film Institute poll of critics, The Searchers, was

made when he was 62.

        Irving Berlin (1888-1989) was an experimental songwriter whose goal was to write songs

so simply and clearly that they would be whistled and sung by millions of people. At the age of

54, he wrote “White Christmas,” which became the top-selling popular song in history. Berlin

believed that its success was a result of his development of the ability, after decades of

painstaking effort, to write “in the simplest way…as simple as writing a telegram.” 27 In 1965, at

the age of 24, Bob Dylan (1941- ) wrote “Like a Rolling Stone.” Dylan described the song as his

breakthrough into “a whole new category.” 28 “Like a Rolling Stone” rejected the traditional

clarity and universality of popular music, using a novel synthesis of folk music, blues, and

Symbolist poetry to create a personal, complex song that became a radical new model for rock

music. It led directly to the introspective and elusive imagery of the Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper’s

Lonely Hearts Club Band, and inspired generations of singer-songwriters. 29 When Dylan was

inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988, the singer Bruce Springsteen hailed him

for creating a conceptual revolution: “Bob freed your mind the way Elvis freed your body. He

showed us that just because the music was innately physical did not mean that it was anti-

intellectual.” 30

        Alfred Stieglitz (1864-1946) declared at the age of 28 that “My sole aim in making

pictures is to reproduce what I see,” and more than three decades later, at 60, he complained,

“Could I but photograph what I see!” 31 His goal was to use photography to make people aware

of the beauty around them, and he never wavered in his experimental belief in the importance of
                                                  13
experience, as late in his life he wrote that “My teachers have been life – work – experiment.” 32

He made The Steerage, his most celebrated photograph, at 43. Cindy Sherman (1954- ) went to

college intending to become a painter, but a course in photography changed her mind: “I realized

I could just use a camera and put my time into an idea instead.” 33 The year after she graduated

from college, Sherman began to make the series of 69 photographs, collectively called the

Untitled Film Stills, that made her the most influential artist of the late 20th century; each picture

portrayed Sherman, alone, wearing a different costume, in settings that appeared to be taken

from movies of the 1940s and ‘50s. The conceptual Sherman intended the Stills as a comment on

“the fakeness of role-playing,” and they inspired many young conceptual artists to produce

works that told stories. 34 Sherman completed the Stills at the age of 25.

       These examples have now been multiplied many times over by systematic studies of

innovative individuals. The regularity with which artists whose goal is to represent their

perception of an external world make their greatest contributions late in their lives, after long

periods of development, and that with which artists who wish to express their own ideas make

their greatest contributions early in their careers, before they have adopted existing conventions

and developed fixed habits of thought, have made it clear that these are consistent patterns.

Applications

       It may be valuable now to consider undertaking studies that apply the economic analysis

of creativity to solve significant problems. I have done one large-scale study of this kind, also in

the area of the arts. Specifically, in a new book I have offered a reinterpretation of the history of

art in the twentieth century. What I discovered is that experimental and conceptual innovators

had coexisted on relatively even terms for centuries, during which all their innovations were
                                                 14
constrained by the artists’ need to satisfy powerful patrons – individuals or institutions – who

effectively controlled the demand for advanced art. This situation changed in the late nineteenth

century, as a government monopoly of the market for fine art was replaced by a competitive

market. With this new market structure, artists gained unprecedented freedom. Dealers and

collectors soon recognized that the most innovative art would in time become the most valuable.

In a market setting that rewarded conspicuous innovation, conceptual artists who could innovate

rapidly and decisively gained a clear advantage over their experimental counterparts. The art of

the twentieth century became completely different from that of all earlier times, as artists

produced a rapid sequence of conceptual revolutions, that continue today. 35

         Many possible applications of the experimental-conceptual analysis of creativity lie

outside the arts. One obvious possibility is in the study of business. It may be more difficult to

measure the creative life cycles of entrepreneurs, because the innovations of individuals cannot

always be disentangled from those of others within firms. The journalist Malcolm Gladwell has

suggested one possible solution to this problem, by treating entire firms as experimental or

conceptual: in his example, “Apple is Picasso; Dell is Cézanne.” 36 In today’s frenetic world of

instant internet links, in which Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Sergey Brin, Larry Page, and a long line of

other young geniuses have gained fame and fortune at very early ages, it might be tempting to

think that great entrepreneurs are all necessarily conceptual innovators. Yet this is clearly not the

case. In 1974, Muhammad Yunus was happily teaching economic theory at provincial

Chittagong University in Bangladesh, when a devastating famine struck. He recalled that he

began to dread his own lectures: “What good were all my complex theories when people were

dying of starvation on the sidewalks and porches across from my lecture hall?” In desperation,
                                                15
Yunus put aside his theories and textbooks, and went to talk to suffering villagers about their

problems. In his book Banker to the Poor, he tells us that “The poor taught me an entirely new

economics.” In classic experimental language, Yunus recalled that when he first began making

small loans to the poor, violating the fundamental banking premise of collateral, “I did not know

if I was right. I had no idea what I was getting into. I was walking blind and learning as I went

along.” 37 In 1983, when he was 43 years old, Yunus founded the Grameen Bank on the

pragmatic experimental belief that experience is a better guide than theory. Today, Grameen is

the largest bank in Bangladesh, and in 2006 Yunus and the Grameen Bank shared the Nobel

Peace Prize for their success in reducing poverty.

       The economic analysis of creativity may have significant applications in a number of

other domains, including notably education. Its value in these other spheres remains to be

demonstrated. Yet perhaps the central point to emphasize in closing is that the study of creativity

by economists is a very new activity. We do not know whether, and how much, it will help us to

increase the contributions of innovative individuals. The only certainty is that if economists

choose to continue to ignore the subject of creativity, they will make no contribution to

understanding – and perhaps increasing – it.
                                               16
Footnotes

This paper was prepared for the Center for Creativity Economics, Universidad del CEMA,
Buenos Aires, to be inaugurated in August, 2010. I thank Carlos Rodriguez, president of
Universidad del CEMA, for the opportunity.

1.     James Albert McNeill Whistler, The Gentle Art of Making Enemies (New York: G.P.
       Putnam’s Sons, 1922), p. 5.

2.     Vincent van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, Vol. 3 (London: Thames
       and Hudson, 1958), pp.399-400.

3.     Germano Celant, Piero Manzoni: Catalogo generale, Vol. 2 (Milan: Skira, 2004), p. 655.
       In 2004, celebrating Tate Modern’s purchase of one of these cans, the museum’s director
       of acquisitions described it as “a classic work of art;” Bernard Bazile, The Owners
       (Villeurbanne: Institut d’art contemporain, 2004), p. 11.

4.     David Galenson. Old Masters and Young Geniuses (Princeton: Princeton University
       Press, 2006), pp21-35. For similar evidence on other modern painters, see David
       Galenson, Painting outside the Lines (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001),
       Chap. 3 and Appendixes A and B.

5.     See Galenson, Old Masters and Young Geniuses, Chap. 6; David Galenson, Artistic
       Capital (New York: Routledge, 2006), Chaps. 9-11; David Galenson and Joshua Kotin,
       “Filming Images or Filming Reality: The Life Cycles of Important Movie Directors from
       D.W. Griffith to Federico Fellini,” Historical Methods, Vol. 40, No. 3 (2007), pp.117-34;
       David Galenson, “The Greatest Architects of the Twentieth Century,” NBER Working
       Paper 14182 (2008).

6.     E.g. see Galenson, Artistic Capital, Chaps. 1-2.

7.     Richard Shiff, Cézanne and the End of Impressionism (Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, 1984), p. 222.

8.     Paul Cézanne, Letters (New York: Da Capo Press. 1995), pp. 329, 333.

9.     Françoise Gilot and Carlton Lake, Life with Picasso (New York: Doubleday, 1989), p.
       199.

10.    George H. Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880-1940 (Harmondsworth:
       Penguin, 1972), p.235; Galenson, Artistic Capital, Chaps. 1.

11.    Judith Cladel, Rodin (New York: Century Co., 1917), p. 107.
                                              17



12.   Albert Elsen, ed., Auguste Rodin (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1965), p. 151.

13.   Galenson, Old Masters and Young Geniuses, p. 113; Albert Elsen, Rodin (New York:
      Museum of Modern Art, 1963), p. 89.

14.   Jack Flam, ed., Robert Smithson (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), p.192.

15.   Galenson, Artistic Capital, Chap. 8.

16.   Virginia Woolf, A Writer’s Diary (San Diego: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1982), p.
      85; Virginia Woolf, Collected Essays, Vol. 2 (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World,
      1967) p. 109.

17.   Woolf, A Writer’s Diary, p. 98; Galenson, Artistic Capital, p. 195.

18.   Galenson, Artistic Capital, p. 214.

19.   Galenson, Artistic Capital, p. 215.

20.   Malcolm Cowley, Exile’s Return (New York: Viking Press, 1951), p. 111.

21.   David Perkins, A History of Modern Poetry: From the 1890s to the High Modernist Mode
      (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976), p. 235.

22.   Le Corbusier, Creation Is a Patient Search (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1960); Le
      Corbusier, The Final Testament of Père Corbu (New Haven: Yale University Press,
      1997), p.85.

23.   Gianpiero Donin, Renzo Piano (Rome: Casa del libro editrice, 1982), p. 27.

24.   François Truffaut, The Films in My Life (New York: Da Capo Press, 1994), p. 284.

25.   Galenson, Artistic Capital, p. 238.

26.   Galenson, Artistic Capital, p. 239.

27.   Jody Rosen, White Christmas (New York: Scribner, 2002), pp. 4-8.

28.   Greil Marcus, Like a Rolling Stone (London: Faber and Faber, 2006), pp. 70, 121-22.

29.   David Galenson, “From ‘White Christmas’ to Sgt. Pepper: The Conceptual Revolution in
                                             18


      Popular Music,” Historical Methods, Vol. 42, No. 1 (2009), pp. 17-34.

30.   Benjamin Hedin, ed., Studio A (New York: W.W. Norton, 2004), p. 203.

31.   Sarah Greenough and Juan Hamilton, Alfred Stieglitz (Washington, DC: National Gallery
      of Art, 1983) pp. 26-27.

32.   Alfred Stieglitz, Stieglitz on Photography (New York: Aperture, 2000), p. 226.

33.   Michael Kimmelman, Portraits (New York: Modern Library, 1999), p. 146.

34.   David Galenson, “The Greatest Photographers of the Twentieth Century”, NBER
      Working Paper 15278 (2009).

35.   David Galenson, Conceptual Revolutions in Twentieth-Century Art (Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press and NBER, 2009).

36.   Malcolm Gladwell, “Age Before Beauty,” http://web.archive.org/web/20070628195140/
      http://www.davidgalenson.com/malcolmgladwell-lecture.pdf.

37.   Muhammad Yunus, Banker to the Poor (New York: Public Affairs, 2003) pp. viii-ix, 57.
