                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         GENETIC INTERACTIONS WITH PRENATAL SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT:
             EFFECTS ON ACADEMIC AND BEHAVIORAL OUTCOMES

                                            Dalton Conley
                                            Emily Rauscher

                                         Working Paper 16026
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16026


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and
designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal
agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle
for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available
on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from
grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. This analysis was supported by the NSF Alan T. Waterman Award,
SES-0540543. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Dalton Conley and Emily Rauscher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral
Outcomes
Dalton Conley and Emily Rauscher
NBER Working Paper No. 16026
May 2010
JEL No. I1

                                               ABSTRACT

Caspi et al. (2002, 2003), Guo et al. (2008a), and Pescosolido et al. (2008) all claim to have demonstrated
allele-by-environment interactions, but in all cases environmental influences are potentially endogenous
to the unmeasured genetic characteristics of the subjects and their families. Thus, gene-gene interactions
cannot be ruled out as an alternative explanation. Second, these studies have not deployed adjustments
for multiple hypothesis testing—always an issue, but particularly so for GE studies with multiple alleles
and outcomes. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health (Add Health),
we address these limitations of previous studies by taking advantage of a natural experiment that randomizes
a particular environmental influence – fetal position, resulting in birth weight discordance within monozygotic
twin pairs (validated with dizygotic twins as well). Whether or not we use corrections for multiple
statistical tests, we find no support for the GE interactions (or for main effects of genes or birth weight)
found in past research and, in fact, the only significant allele-birth weight interaction we reveal works
in the opposite direction of Caspi et al.’s classic finding on 5-HTT and maltreatment.


Dalton Conley
New York University
6 Washington Square North #20
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
conley@nyu.edu

Emily Rauscher
295 Lafayette Street 4th Floor
NY NY 100012
ekr220@nyu.edu
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Background

        Studying genetic-environmental (GE) interactions has long been a goal of social

scientists fond of touting the dependence of genetic expression on social structure. However,

how do we get from the adage that “a gene for aggression lands you in prison if you’re from

the ghetto, but in the boardroom if you’re to the manor born” to a serious empirical research

agenda on the study of GE interactions? Recently, genetic markers on specific loci—such as

single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)—have seemed to offer hope for those interested in an

explicit research program aimed at specifying and measuring gene-environment interactions

for complex traits (what geneticists call Quantitative Traits). Polymorphisms are genetic

variants that occur within a species. These could include base-pair substitutions—among one

of the four nucleotides that make up our genetic code (G, guanine; C, cytosine; A, adenosine;

and T, thymine)—which may: 1) affect the amino acid produced out of that codon (a triplet of

nucleotides that determine which amino acid should come next when the messenger-RNA is

translated into a protein) if the polymorphism is in an open reading frame (ORF) of a gene (i.e.

the protein-related coding region) and is non-synonymous; 2) truncate the protein by causing

the transcription machinery to stop there (by producing a stop codon); or 3) do nothing (what

are called silent or synonymous mutations) since multiple three-letter codes may result in the

same amino acid being produced (though, perhaps at different efficiency levels, something

called codon-bias). Hence, these non-lethal polymorphisms, which result from mutations, may

present an opportunity to study how specific environments—social or biophysical—may result

in different outcomes depending on an individual’s genotype.

        The basic logic is the following: A certain proportion of a population sample is found

to have a variant of a particular allele. If this allele is shown to be randomly distributed across




                                                                                                     1
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


demographic subgroups (or, for example, within a particular subgroup such as an ethnic

group), and, likewise, it is found to be associated with a specific social outcome or tendency

(such as addictiveness, shyness, schizophrenia, to name a few) within that same population (or

subgroup as the case may be), then researchers may try to look for specific environmental

conditions which seem to magnify or mitigate its effect—such as family structures, parents’

behavior, or simply socioeconomic status.

        For example, Guo and Stearns (2002) claim that genetic influence on intellectual

development depends on parental employment and ethnicity. Shanahan and colleagues (2008)

find that the “risky” DRD2 genotype reduces the likelihood of post-secondary school

attendance for boys and that this risk is moderated by social capital. Yet they also find that

boys with the risky DRD2 genotype are less likely to have high social capital environments.

This is a fundamental flaw; it could be that the allele(s) are interacting not with differential

social environments, but rather with other, non-randomly distributed genes (even if the

principal gene in question is indeed randomly distributed).1 To provide other examples of this

fallacy, Guo et al. (2008a) and Pescosolido et al. (2008) both claim to have revealed

conditional genetic effects depending on family support or friendship networks. Guo et al.

1
  Recent genome-wide association studies (e.g., Beauchamp et al. 2009) are particularly subject
to this criticism of genetic population stratification. Beauchamp et al. use a method developed
by Price et al. (2006) to attempt to control for subpopulation differences. Using principle
components analysis, they identify the 10 strongest axes of variation in the sample. They then
control for these underlying subpopulations in GWAS models with the hope of preventing
spurious results. However, while principle components analysis accounts for as much
variability as possible, it is impossible to know whether it successfully identifies all important
subpopulations. Beauchamp et al. drop outliers and there may be more than 10 important
subpopulations, just to give one example of the potential problems. Within-family studies
avoid concerns about population stratification. If allele variation is studied within families (i.e.
across siblings) then it does indeed offer a potential way to measure specific genetic influences
with some certainty. One would then compare the expression of that allele—as compared to
the sibling without the polymorphism, for example—in families of various demographic or
economic backgrounds.


                                                                                                     2
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


indicate that regular family meals eliminate the delinquent tendencies associated with the

“risky” DRD2 genotype. Similarly, family support reduces the genetically-influenced risk of

alcohol dependence (Pescosolido et al. 2008). However, neither use within-sibling set

differences to control unmeasured environmental differences that may covary with genes; and

neither attempts to address the unmeasured genetic variability across subjects. Indeed, the

environmental mediators in both cases include family behaviors, which could easily reflect

genetic rather than exogenous environmental differences. That is, family support and

closeness could be related to the very genes in question. Even if they are not, other genetic

differences could explain the apparent gene-environment interaction.

        A paper by Caspi et al. (2002) that has become a classic in this area of research claims

to have uncovered a GE-interaction by comparing male children who have a particular

functional polymorphism in the MAOA gene (monoamine oxidase A)—an enzyme which

breaks down various neurotransmitters once they are chaperoned out of the synaptic cleft—

with those who do not among a longitudinal sample of 1,037 white New Zealanders followed

from ages 3 to 26. Those individuals who showed a variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) in

the promoter region of the gene (the area that precedes the actual coding portion but which is

important to transcriptional activation and regulation) putatively transcribe (and by extension

translate) MAOA at a lower rate than those without this polymorphism on their X-

chromosome. In turn, MAOA activity as indicated by this genetic difference was interacted

with degree of maltreatment the respondents experienced between the ages of 3 and 11 to

predict an index of anti-social behavior that included four measures ranging from criminal

convictions to anti-social personality disorder criteria of the DSM-IV. They argue that while

there do exist other MAO genes that may compensate for deficiencies in MAOA (in particular




                                                                                                     3
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


MAOB), among children these are not yet fully expressed, thus making MAOA particularly

important with respect to moderating the effect of maltreatment during early childhood.

        Eight percent of the sample experienced severe maltreatment, 28 percent experienced

“probable” maltreatment and 64 percent experienced no maltreatment. In a multiple regression

context, the main effect of maltreatment level on the antisocial behavior index was significant,

whereas the main effect of MAOA activity level was not, but an interaction effect between the

two measures was statistically significant at the α=.01 level. They argue that this is a true

genetic-environmental interaction effect since the MAOA genotypes were not significantly

differently distributed across maltreatment levels—suggesting that this genotype did not itself

influence exposure to maltreatment (i.e. the environment is not standing in for the genotype).

        In a follow-up study (2003), they use the same cohort to examine the interaction of

stressful life events with alleles of the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTT) linked promoter

region (5-HTTLPR). Specifically, individuals who have a short 5’ (i.e. upstream) promoter

may show more propensity than those with a long promoter toward depression. However,

previous studies had come to conflicting results; namely many replications had failed to

produce results claimed in earlier linkage studies. Some researchers despaired that psychiatric

and other behavioral phenotypes were controlled by so many quantitative trait genes that

modeling genetic effects in a robust, direct way would not be possible and/or would account

for little of the variation (see, e.g., Hamer 2002). Caspi et al. (2003) instead argue that, rather

than complicated gene-gene interactions, the muddle of results could result from GE

interactions. This muddle motivated their search for an interaction effect of stressful life

events and 5-HTTLPR allele.




                                                                                                      4
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


        This is an autosomal gene—meaning that individuals of both sexes have two copies—

so they compared individuals with the homozygous long genotypes and heterozygotes (long /

short) to those who were homozygous for the short alleles. They found that in the subsample

who had experienced no stressful life events between ages 21 and 26, there was no difference

between the three genotypes in the propensity to depression. However, as the number of self-

reported stressful life events increased, the genotypes diverged with respect to their likelihood

of clinical depression at age 26. They interpret this as a GE interaction.2

        However, as was the case with Guo (2002 & 2008a) or Pescosolido (2008), it could still

be possible that Caspi et al. (2002; 2003) were actually uncovering gene-gene interactions in

both studies, because they did not have an exogenous source of environmental variation. In the

latter case, those with the “at risk,” short alleles were, in fact, more likely to report stressful

events than those who had long alleles. We may conclude, then, that measured genotype did

influence the measured environmental measure. The researchers try to get around this by

reversing the time order: Measuring stressful life events between ages 21 and 26 and

measuring depression at age 21 (i.e. prior). When they do this, they do not find the significant

interaction they did in the “correctly” ordered model. However, it still may be the case that

depression was induced by a gene-gene interaction since an underlying unmeasured gene could

cause the phenotype of “negative life events” to emerge in one’s early 20s: Imagine a gene that



2
  Animal-based studies also find evidence of environmental effects conditional on genotype at
these locations. For example, Murphy et al. (2001) studied mice with a disrupted 5-HTT gene
and found that those with risky alleles were more fearful and had higher stress hormone levels
in response to stress, but no differences by genotype without environmental stress. Research
on rhesus macaques found different biological reactions depending on 5-HTT genotype for
those raised in stressful environments, but no differences among those raised normally
(Bennett et al. 2002). Thus, animal-based experiments suggest gene-environment interactions
may explain substantial variance in health and behavioral outcomes, but similar human
experiments are not ethical.


                                                                                                      5
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


causes excessive thrill-seeking and risk-taking, which, in turn, manifests as negative events

during one’s early adulthood. As for the MAOA interaction, we face the same issue: While

measured maltreatment did not vary by MAOA status, it could very well have varied by other

genes (present in the parents and potentially passed on to the children). Thus, it would not be

the maltreatment that interacted with MAOA status but rather the underlying, unmeasured

genotype, which, in combination with given MAOA alleles, causes both parents and offspring

to act anti-socially.

        In fact, supporting the notional importance of gene-gene interactions (and offering a

competing model to GE interactions) is recent genetics research that has shown that among the

genes studied in humans (or other [model] organisms such as the fruit fly, drosophila

melanogaster, or the nematode worm, Caenorhabditis elegans), the vast majority of known

genes are linked in a single network component when measured by either protein-protein

interactions, regulatory relationships, or phenotypic co-variation (Jeong et al. 2001; Stelzl et al.

2005). This suggests that, indeed, one cannot conceptualize the perturbation of one gene as

unrelated to the impact of other genes. Conversely, the embeddedness of this network suggests

that genomic systems are highly redundant and robust and that other genes may be up- (or

down-) regulated to compensate when a given gene is non-functional (or hypertrophic).3

        Gene-environment research is not alone in its failure to account for unmeasured genetic

differences. Low birth weight is consistently found to have developmental consequences and has

3
  The real rub is that, since we can plausibly postulate second-, third-, fourth- and, ultimately,
Nth-order interactions across alleles, there simply would not be enough degrees of freedom in
the approximately seven billion human beings currently occupying the planet to properly test a
fully specified model (21,000! = 9.58 E 81648 > 7,000,000,000). The discovery of about
21,000 genes—a figure much lower than originally hypothesized—is good news in that it is a
tractable number of alleles for geneticists to study. However, the irony lies in the fact that, if
this lowly number of genes explains the development of human beings in all their forms, then
gene-gene interactions are probably quite important


                                                                                                     6
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


been associated with a wide variety of outcomes in later life, including cognitive ability,

behavioral problems, and health (Lowe et al. 2009; Hayes and Sharif 2009; Schlotz and Phillips

2009; Cooper et al. 2009). However, much of the apparent effect of birth weight may reflect

inherited differences. While some research has estimated the effect of birth weight using identical

twins (Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004; Conley et al. 2003), most studies have relied on sibling

(Conley and Bennett 2000; 2001) or even between-family comparisons (Hack et al. 2002; Rich-

Edwards 1997; Sorensen et al. 1997), which cannot rule out genetic explanations for differences

in outcomes; such an approach may create spurious effects of low birth weight if the same genes

driving birth weight are also driving educational or developmental outcomes. For instance,

among singleton siblings or fraternal twins, genetic advantage could influence fetal nutrition,

making any apparent effects of birth weight spurious. Further, birth weight could affect only

those with certain alleles – putting them at risk for poor health outcomes for example. Therefore,

even studies using identical twins may be lumping vastly heterogenous treatment effects of birth

weight into one average treatment effect.

        To address these concerns in both the GE interaction and birth weight literatures, in the

present study, we deploy a novel approach: We use both MZ and DZ twin differences in birth

weight to predict educational, mental health and behavioral outcomes using nationally

representative data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health (Add Health).

We deploy MZ twins in order to hold constant genetic differences that may influence both

birth weight and the outcome of interest. We then see if the treatment effect of low birth

weight varies across twin sets that are divergent on measured alleles. Since this strategy leaves

open the possibility that loci across which we are stratifying are correlated with other

unmeasured environmental or genetic differences due to population stratification (or linkage




                                                                                                     7
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


disequilibrium), we also present estimates that compare the effects of that allele (and its

interaction with birth weight, as well as a main effect for birth weight), on those same

outcomes using intra-sibling comparisons among dizygotic twins. In this way, with the

exception of other genes that may be linked to the gene in question through linkage

disequilibrium during recombination, all other genes are orthogonal to the measured genetic

difference. (However, in the DZ models, we cannot say that birth weight differences are not

endogenous to unmeasured genetic characteristics that vary between the twins.) Thus, we

present findings that are robust to both these estimation strategies and which pass a stricter

statistical threshold that accounts for multiple hypothesis testing (another failing of most earlier

GE work).

        To preview our results: We purport to establish—for the first time in humans outside

the laboratory—that environmental stress can interact with alleles that otherwise appear to

have no direct effect and cause behavioral phenotypes to emerge. Environmental conditions,

even as early as in the womb, can moderate the effect of alleles on social outcomes but in ways

that contradict the previous literature. Namely, neither birth weight nor the alleles we measure

appear to have any direct effects on the outcomes we study. However, birth weight interacts in

both DZ and MZ twin models such that decreased birth weight (previously considered a risk

factor) results in lower risk of depression—but only for those who have the “risky” serotonin

transporter promoter region allele. These results—standing in contrast to a whole host of

previous findings—should fuel debate and future research in social genetics and provide a

methodological framework for moving that debate forward.



Methodological Approach




                                                                                                     8
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


        Birth weight is orthogonal to genes for identical twins; that is, genes are shared completely

so they cannot affect nutritional advantage relative to one’s identical twin in the womb. MZ twin

pair fixed effects exploit random variation in birth weight to identify a gene-environment

interaction (with the notable exception of unique, de novo mutations post zygotic cleavage). Low

birth weight and particular alleles have previously been associated with behavioral and health

outcomes – including depression, delinquency, and educational outcomes. Previous research

predicts a greater return to birth weight for those with a genetic risk for depression,

delinquency, and poor educational performance. Out of concern for population stratification, we

also show results for dizygotic twins. That is, risky genotypes may not be randomly distributed

by demographic subgroups, in which case we could spuriously attribute an environment-

environment interaction in MZ twin models to a GE interaction if G is acting as a proxy for E.

Fixed effects model the differences in outcomes within twin pairs.



Y ij a  bBirthweight ij cRiskyAllele ij  dBirthweight ij * RiskyAlleleij  eSexij  fTWINSET j  ij


where Y ij is the outcome for a given twin i in pair j, b is the effect of birth weight within twin

pair j that has the so-called normal allele, c is the main effect of differences in the risky gene,

and b + d is the effect of birth weight (within twin pairs) for those with the risky allele, e

represents differences due to sex (for dizygotic twin pairs only), and  ij is the sibling-specific

(i.e. idiosyncratic) error, assumed to be unrelated to genes, birth weight, and control factors.

Monozygotic twins share the same genes and sex, so c and e drop out. Individuals are

compared to their twin who is the same age, obviating the issue of age differences.




                                                                                                      9
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


         The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Harris 2009) provides birth

weight and sequenced genotype data for three genes putatively related to behavioral and health

outcomes conditional on environment (5HTT, DRD2, and MAOA). (Actually, they sequence

loci at seven genes, but we focus on the three that have been studied in previous GE interaction

research mentioned earlier.) These genes are involved in neurotransmitter (e.g., dopamine and

serotonin) transport, receiving and recycling, vital for cognition and behavior. Previous

research, including animal-based genetic manipulation, has identified these three loci as

influential on a variety of outcomes. For example, Cases et al. (1995) and Shih and Thompson

(1999) studied knockout mice (those with the MAOA gene removed) and found they had

increased dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine levels and increased aggression among

males.

         Thus far, Add Health has released three waves of panel data for sibling pairs. In 2001-

2 (wave 3, the most recent wave that includes genetic data), respondents were ages 18-26

(mode = 22). Siblings of individuals identified as twins in the stratified sample were added,

yielding 64% of sibling pairs from the probability sample and 36% from convenience

sampling. Buccal swabs were collected in wave 3 from 2612 of the 3139 eligible siblings from

wave 1 (a compliance rate of 83%; Harris et al. 2006) for DNA sequencing at the Institute for

Behavioral Genetics. Monozygosity was genetically confirmed, requiring complete matches

on 11 “highly polymorphic, unlinked short tandem repeat (STR) markers: D1S1679, D2S1384,

D3S1766, D4S1627, D6S1277, D7S1808, D8S1119, D9S301, D13S796, D15S652 and

D20S481 and the sex determining locus amelogenin” (Harris et al. 2006:992). Our sample

includes over 200 twin pairs not missing birth weight, genetic data, or outcome data for either

twin (sample size for each model depends on the number of pairs with complete outcome data).




                                                                                                     10
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


        Research has linked polymorphisms in the human genes DRD2, 5HTT, and MAOA

with behavior and health outcomes. At the D2 dopamine receptor gene locus (DRD2), the A1

allele is related to fewer receptor binding sites (Pohjalainen et al. 1998). Compared to the A2

allele, possessing the A1 allele has been associated with anxiety, depression, novelty seeking,

impulsiveness, lack of inhibition, and substance use (Lawford et al. 2006; Noble et al. 1998;

Wiers et al. 1994; Blum et al. 1991). Consistent with previous research, individuals possessing

an A1 allele are considered to have the risky genotype.4 For all three genes, those with no

copies of the risky allele are specified in models below, but results are similar with alternative

specifications.

        Variation at the serotonin transporter gene locus (5-HTT) has been associated with

propensity toward depression. Previous research has suggested that individuals with a short

allele in the promoter region of 5-HTT have stronger depressive reactions to stressful life

experiences (Caspi et al. 2003).

        The MAOA gene codes for monoamine oxidase A, which chaperones and breaks down

neurotransmitters (e.g., serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine) and for which variation has been

linked to disposition toward aggression in both animals and humans (Guo et al. 2008b; Rowe

2001; Cases et al. 1995; Shih and Thompson 1999; Brunner et al. 1993). Caspi et al. (2002)

and Guo et al. (2008a) found that those with fewer repeats (i.e., lower MAOA activity) in the

4
  Guo et al. (2008a) suggest a significant interaction between DRD2 and social factors (e.g.,
family meals and growing up with two biological parents) on delinquent behavior. However,
they present an interaction for heterozygotes – with exactly one A1 allele – not for either
homozygous type, which makes it difficult to interpret their results. It is unclear whether
heterozygosity or having a short allele is driving the results. We distinguish those with no
copies of the A1 allele. Results for main and interaction effects of DRD2 variation on
delinquency are presented below. Guo and colleagues also found an association between the
longer 10R allele of DAT, a dopamine transporter gene, and delinquent behavior, but no
environmental interaction. DAT is not presented here because a GE interaction was not found
(though in separate analysis we do not find a significant interaction at this locus either).

                                                                                                     11
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


promoter region of the gene are more susceptible to family environmental influences.

Individuals with two copies of the long 4R allele are specified below.

        Birth weight is reported by parents, measured in ounces, and logged. Depression is

measured using the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Scale (CES-D). It consists

of 20 questions included in the Add Health survey which ask respondents to rate the frequency

of a depressive symptom from 0 (never/rarely) to 3 (most/all of the time). The sum of

responses for all 20 items indicates the frequency of depressive symptoms. Results are also

investigated using an indicator for “any symptoms” and logged scores (after adding one to

avoid excluding those with no symptoms). Following Fletcher and Lehrer (2009) and Roberts

et al. (1991), age and gender-specific threshold measures of depression are also investigated.

Results are largely the same in these specifications and are not presented, but are briefly

discussed below.

        Delinquency is measured using 12 questions from the Add Health wave 3 survey that

ask about deviant behavior in the past 12 months. For example, questions include how often

you used someone else’s credit/bank card without their permission, deliberately wrote a bad

check, stole something, or used a weapon. Sensitivity analyses use an indicator for the

presence of any delinquent behaviors and logged scores (after adding one)—results are similar

to a linear specification. Educational achievement is measured using cumulative high school

GPA gathered from high school transcripts. An indicator of college attendance (as well as a

continuous measure for highest grade completed) is also tested, for comparability with

Shanahan et al. (2008). In general, results do not differ from those for GPA and thus

discussion concentrates on analysis of the continuous measure of achievement (i.e. GPA). A

supplemental table presents results for college attendance.




                                                                                                     12
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


        The gene-environment literature has generally reported results without taking multiple

hypothesis testing into account. Significance is therefore overstated. Results shown here

account for multiple hypotheses, using the relatively conservative Bonferroni correction (α/n)

to increase the significance level required. Three genes and three outcomes are investigated

below, which could be interpreted as three or nine distinct tests depending on what one

considers independent hypotheses. For example, the three outcomes – depression,

delinquency, and high school GPA – are likely related. An effect of birth weight on any of

them would likely manifest in the others as well. Therefore, tables report general 95%

significance levels, with shading to indicate significance after adjustment for the 3 hypotheses

of genetic markers. Discussion of results in the text report significance levels with a correction

for both 3 and 9 hypotheses, but this is an overly cautious adjustment to the extent that

outcomes are related.



Results

        Table 1 shows main effects for each outcome. In Panel 1, models predicting each

outcome include only the gene which previous research predicts should have effects. Panel 2

includes all three genes. Despite previous evidence that the short 5HTT allele increases

depression symptoms, DZ twin fixed effect regressions controlling for a variety of potential

confounders show no significant effect of this genotype on depression. Main effects shown in

Table 1 are insignificant, whether including all three genes or only 5HTT. Results are similar

using the natural log of depression symptoms.

        Prior research has also suggested an effect of MAOA on delinquency and claimed that

DRD2 affects school continuation. Using Add Health genetic data, for example, Guo et al.




                                                                                                     13
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


(2008b) find a significant relationship between the short 2R MAOA allele and serious and

violent delinquency. Among our analyses of twins, however, main effects of variation at these

genetic loci are nearly all insignificant (controlling for gender and birth weight). An exception

is identical twin random effects models; having no copies of the risky DRD2 allele is

significantly related to highest grade completed and having some college education, but not to

high school GPA.5 These effects, however, emerge only in identical twin random effects

models, which estimate the effect of the gene between (as opposed to within) twin pairs, since

genotype is always the same for identical twins. Therefore, these significant main effects

could reflect population stratification – with genotype potentially non-randomly assigned to

different twin pairs. Similarly, as shown in Panel 2 of Table 1, identical twins with two copies

of the 4R MAOA allele show significantly lower depression (raw and logged scores), but this

relationship disappears when including those with missing birth weight and only holds in

identical twin random effects models—i.e. across families.

        While rare significant relationships emerge (e.g., lower high school GPA for all and

fraternal twins with the “good” MAOA alleles, but only when including those missing birth

weight), the overarching pattern is that main genetic effects are insignificant regardless of the

specifications tested. In other words, main effects are insignificant in these models (or at least

inconsistent across twin types) when comparing those with two copies of the risky allele to all

others or when using alternate specifications of the outcome variable.

        Similarly, main effects of birth weight are insignificant in all of the identical and

fraternal twin models shown (when an interaction with genotype is not included). Exceptions

(in models not shown) include a significant positive effect of birth weight on the gender-

5
 Results predicting some college are presented in supplemental table S1 for comparison with
Shanahan et al. (2008).

                                                                                                     14
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


specific depression cutoff measure among identical twins and, in models including indicators

for 5HTT alone or all three genes investigated here together, a significant association with

lower likelihood of having any depressive symptoms among fraternal twins. The

overwhelming absence of birth weight effects contradicts Conley and Bennett (2000), who use

singleton comparisons, which fail to address underlying genetic differences. The absence of

main genetic effects suggests previous results may be biased by population stratification.

        Research by Caspi (2003) and Wilhelm et al. (2006) predicts that those with the short

5HTT alleles should be more sensitive to and benefit more from environmental advantages.

However, this research failed to control for a variety of genetic and environmental

confounders. Identical twin comparisons address this potential spuriousness and reveal that

additional fetal nourishment actually increases depression among those homozygous for the

risky allele. Weighing an additional pound (above the MZ mean of 90 oz or 5.6 lbs) increases

depression symptoms by over 4 points (over 11 standard deviations) for those with two copies

of the short allele, but has no effect for others. Specifying the gene differently and comparing

those without any short alleles to others shows that birth weight nudges individuals in different

behavioral directions depending on genotype. Birth weight increases depressive symptoms for

those without any long alleles (2.6 points or 7.5 standard deviations), but decreases symptoms

for those with 2 long alleles (by 4.5 points or 13 standard deviations). Figure 1 illustrates this

gene-environment interaction.

        Results for depression are shown in Table 2. Effects of birth weight depend on 5HTT

genotype when including all or identical twins, but not fraternal twins alone. Model 3, limited

to identical twins, suggests that an additional pound at birth, compared to one’s twin, reduces

depressive symptoms by almost 4 ½ points for those with two long alleles. That same pound




                                                                                                     15
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


increases depressive symptoms by 2.6 points for those with one or two short alleles. The

interaction effects shown remain significant even with a Bonferroni correction for 3 or 9

hypotheses. (The main effect of birth weight in model 3 remains only marginally significant

[p=.054] with a conservative correction for 9 hypotheses.) Running these regressions

separately by genotype suggests that there is no effect among those with two long alleles, while

birth weight increases depression among others. Results (not shown) are null using an

indicator for any depressive symptoms, but are similar using a logged measure of depression or

including twins with missing birth weight (although these specifications are sometimes

marginally significant and less robust to Bonferroni corrections). Thus, contrary to findings in

previous research, environmental advantages appear to harm rather than help those with the

risky genotype. Meanwhile, birth weight effects do not depend on MAOA and DRD2

genotype. A marginal interaction between the long MAOA allele and birth weight is found

among all twins (Model 4 in Table 2). But this disappears among identical twins and is in the

opposite direction as would be expected from the prior literature; that is, it is among those with

the “good” allele that birth weight seems to matter.

        Caspi and his colleagues (2002) found a significant interaction between MAOA and

maltreatment on delinquency. However, correcting for potential genetic and environmental

confounders with twin fixed effects, and specifying MAOA in various ways, there is little

evidence that MAOA affects delinquent behavior. Further, within identical twin pairs,

environmental advantage does not moderate genetic effects (see Table 3). Caspi found a

stronger relationship between risky MAOA genotype and delinquency for those exposed to

childhood distress (specifically maltreatment). We found no support for this; the random

environmental advantage of fetal nutrition did not affect the relationship between MAOA and




                                                                                                     16
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


delinquency. The results shown in Table 3 are similar when using raw or logged measures of

delinquency and including pairs missing birth weight information for one twin. The only

exception is a significant estimate for MAOA and its interaction with birth weight when

predicting the indicator for any delinquent behavior or logged scores, but only when specifying

those with at least one 4R allele (rather than two) and only among all and fraternal twins.

(Using logged scores, this interaction only holds among all twins when excluding pairs missing

birth weight.) Effects disappear within identical twins and using other specifications of the

alleles.

           Finally, using Add Health data, Shanahan et al. (2008) find that the A1 allele at the

DRD2 gene is related to a lower likelihood of post-secondary school for boys. They indicate

that this risk is moderated by social capital, yet they also find that boys with the risky DRD2

genotype are less likely to have high social capital environments. In this case, the risky allele

could be interacting with non-randomly distributed genes rather than with social capital (even

if the principal gene in question is in fact randomly distributed). Indeed, results from twin

comparisons shown in Table 4 suggest previous research was biased by omitted genetic

differences. Using the whole sample of twins, models including DRD2 and birth weight

interactions suggest that, contrary to Shanahan et al.’s findings, those with no copies of the

risky A1 allele have significantly lower high school GPAs and experience a boost from fetal

nutrition (i.e. are more sensitive to environmental insults). This interaction is marginally

significant among fraternal twins and disappears within identical twins (Model 3). When twin

pairs missing complete birth weight data are included, the interaction effect is only marginally

significant using the whole sample of twins and insignificant in all others. Genetic differences

between fraternal twins appear to account for apparent environmental interaction effects with




                                                                                                     17
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


DRD2. (Supplemental Table S1 shows results for college attendance. No significant

interaction effects with DRD2 emerge for years of education or college attendance.)

        We find a similar pattern for MAOA when predicting highest grade completed—tables

not shown. Fraternal twins with two copies of the long 4R MAOA allele experience

significantly higher educational attainment, but experience a slight educational penalty for

additional birth weight. However, as with results for DRD2, these effects are only significant

among fraternal twins. They disappear among identical twins and are only marginally

significant for all twins. Effects disappear when pairs missing complete birth weight

information are included. Population stratification could account for these apparent GE

interaction effects.



Discussion and Conclusions

        Caspi (2003) presented evidence that sensitivity to environmental insults increases with

each short 5HTT allele – i.e., those with one short and one long allele fall between those with 2

copies of either. There is some evidence for this. Compared to those with two copies of the

long allele (the “good” allele), heterozygotes show significantly higher depression with

increased birth weight – an additional 3.7 points (over 10 standard deviation units) with each

pound. (This remains only marginally significant [p=.066] with a Bonferroni correction of 3).

Those with two copies of the short allele show the strongest interaction with this specification,

increasing 5.7 points on the depression scale (over 16 standard deviation units) with an

additional pound at birth. This effect remains significant for those with two copies of the short

allele even with the Bonferroni correction of 9 (p=.027).




                                                                                                     18
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


        Even with the Bonferroni correction, results confirm that effects of 5HTT depend on

environmental input, as others have found. However, contrary to previous research, those at

most genetic risk for depression (two short alleles) are actually hurt by the environmental boost

of fetal nutrition. Individuals with “good” genes show reduced depression with increased birth

weight. Unfortunately, this seems to be the old story of cumulative advantage.

        The pattern of null findings for gene and gene-environment interaction effects within

twin pairs suggest that previous significant findings were likely biased due to population

stratification or omitted environmental factors. Genetic differences are distributed non-

randomly across the population. The absence of effects within identical twin pairs suggests

that previous findings may reflect a failure to account for non-random relationships between

environmental and genetic differences.

        A potential concern in this research is that the genes in question could influence birth

weight or birth weight differences within twin pairs. If the risky MAOA gene, for example, is

associated with smaller birth weight differences between DZ twins, the reduced birth weight

variation could yield insignificant interactions. However, regressions checking for such an

association suggest it is not a concern (see Table 5). Among MZ twin pairs, no genes are

associated with twin pair birth weight difference or average. Looking at 5HTT alone does not

change results; 5HTT is not significantly related to MZ twin difference in birth weight.

Among DZ twins, pairs in which one twin has a risky DRD2 allele have slightly more similar

birth weights. This effect is not robust to a Bonferroni correction for 3 hypotheses, is

insignificant among identical twins, and is not found when specifying those with two risky

DRD2 alleles.

        At the individual level, these genes are still unrelated to birth weight. Within fraternal




                                                                                                     19
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


twin pairs, none of these genes significantly affect birth weight. Identical twins of course share

any risky genes, but estimates using random rather than fixed effects show no relationship

between genes and birth weight. (Individuals with two copies of the short 5HTT allele have

slightly higher birth weight, but this relationship is only marginally significant – even without

Bonferroni correction – and is insignificant when specifying those with two copies of the long

allele instead). Including those with missing birth weight does not change the results.

        A limitation of this study is the potentially selective data on birth weight.

Approximately 20% of the sample is missing parent-reported birth weight. An additional 10%

is missing birth weight data for their twin. Thus, about a third of all identical twins are

excluded. Both identical and fraternal twins missing birth weight information for their twin

sibling were born significantly lighter on average than other twins. This suggests parents who

did not provide birth weight data may have had lighter babies and excluded twins may weigh

less than those included in the study.

        Low weight babies experienced the strongest environmental insult and their outcomes

may be most sensitive to genotype. Under-representation of low weight babies may therefore

cause attenuation bias in estimates of gene-environment interaction effects. The differences

are slight, however, amounting to just over an ounce for both MZ and DZ twins, which

suggests minimal bias. An alternative story further reduces our concern about missing birth

weight. Parents may better remember the birth weight of the lighter rather than the healthier

twin. In this scenario, those missing birth weight would be nearer the twin average.

        A further concern is the potential relationship between missing birth weight data and

outcomes or genetic measures. Table 6 provides comparisons of these two groups: twins with

and without complete birth weight data. MZ twins with complete birth weight info have




                                                                                                     20
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


significantly higher delinquency rates than those without – amounting to about ½ an additional

delinquent act such as stealing or damaging property. This difference remains significant with

binary (indicating any symptoms) and logged measures of delinquency (after adding one to

raw scores to include those with scores of zero). Twins with and without birth weight data

show no differences in the specific alleles investigated here.

        These birth weight and delinquency differences, though slight, suggest missing birth

weight data could be non-random. However, only one (delinquency among MZ twins) remains

significant at the 95% level with the multiple hypothesis adjustment. In addition, potential bias

due to non-random missing birth weight is investigated for all models using the missing

indicator method. Results are similar. Finally, half of those cases missing birth weight have

valid information for pounds at birth, but are missing ounces. When these individuals are

assigned 7 ounces (the midpoint, plus their birth weight in pounds), results are similar to those

presented here.

        To summarize, we find no evidence for the GE interaction effects putatively

demonstrated by previous scholars using the same dataset (Add Health) or another (the

Dunedin sample of Caspi et al.). We argue that this and other previous work has spuriously

assumed GE associations are actually GE effects when the environmental measures have been

endogenous to unmeasured genotype. In fact, when we use an exogenous source of

environmental variation—within twin-set differences in birth weight—the only significant

result we obtain works in exactly the opposite direction of that proposed by Caspi et al.

Beyond the specific results presented here, we purport to have developed a careful method for

assessing GE interaction effects: by deploying both MZ and DZ comparisons, which each

complement the other’s inferential weakness. (And for direct effect of genetic locus variation,




                                                                                                     21
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


DZ twin comparisons alone suffice.) We encourage other researchers to deploy the

methodology presented here.

        Finally, our analysis calls into question the research literature on birth weight. Not only

do we find little to no main effects of birth weight on important behavioral and academic

outcomes that would seem to be directly in a causal pathway to previous findings regarding

birth weight and educational attainment, we find that when interacted with certain alleles, birth

weight works in the opposite direction as previously supposed. This, too, calls for further

investigation by future researchers.




                                                                                                     22
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


References

Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2004. “Returns to Birthweight.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 86(2): 586–601

Beauchamp, Jonathan, David Cesarini, J. Niels Rosenquist, James H. Fowler, and Nicholas A.
Christakis. 2009. “A Genome Wide Association Study of Educational Attainment.” A paper
presented at the IZA (Institute for the Study of Labor) Workshop: Genes, Brains, and the Labor
Market in Bonn, Switzerland. www.neuroeconomics.nyu.edu/papers/Cesarini1.pdf.

Bennett, A. J., K.P. Lesch, A. Heils, J.C. Long, J.G. Lorenz, S.E. Shoaf, M. Champoux, S.J.
Suomi, M.V. Linnoila, and J.D. Higley. 2002. “Early Experience and Serotonin Transporter
Gene Variation Interact to Influence Primate CNS Function.” Molecular Psychiatry 7: 118-
122.

Blum, K., E.P. Noble, P.J. Sheridan, O. Finley, A. Montgomery, T. Ritchie, et al. 1991.
“Association of the A1 Allele of the D2 Dopamine Receptor Gene with Severe Alcoholism.”
Alcohol 8: 409-416.

Brunner, H.G., M. Nelen, X.O. Breakefield, H.H. Ropers, B.A. van Oost. 1993. “Abnormal
Behavior Associated with a Point Mutation in the Structural Gene for Monoamine Oxidase A.”
Science 262, 5133: 578-580.

Cases, Olivier, Isabelle Seif, Joseph Grimsby, Patricia Gaspar, Kevin Chen, Sandrine Pournin,
Ulrike Muller, Michel Aguet, Charles Babinet, Jean Chen Shih, Edward De Maeyer. 1995.
“Aggressive Behavior and Altered Amounts of Brain Serotonin and Norepinephrine in Mice
Lacking MAOA.” Science 268: 1763-1766.

Caspi, Avshalom et al. 2002. “Role of Genotype in the Cycle of Violence in Maltreated
Children.” Science 297: 851-854.

Caspi, Avshalom et al. 2003. “Influence of Life Stress on Depression: Moderation by a
Polymorphism in the 5-HTT Gene.” Science 297: 851-854.

Conley, Dalton and Neil G. Bennett. 2000. “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Life
Chances.” American Sociological Review 65: 458–467.

Conley, Dalton and Neil G. Bennett. 2001. “Birthweight and Income: Interactions Across
Generations.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 42(4): 450-465.

Conley, Dalton, Kate W. Strully, and Neil G. Bennett. 2003. The Starting Gate: Birth Weight
and Life Chances. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Cooper, C., Harvey N, Cole Z, Hanson M, Dennison E. 2009. “Developmental origins of
osteoporosis: the role of maternal nutrition.” Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology
646:31-9.



                                                                                                     23
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes




Dobbs, David. 2009, December. “The Science of Success.” The Atlantic. Retrieved 1/10/2010
from http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/200912/dobbs-orchid-gene.

Druet, C. and K.K. Ong. 2008. “Early childhood predictors of adult body composition.” Best
Practice and Research Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 22, 3:489-502.

Ellis, Bruce J. and W. Thomas Boyce. 2008. “Biological Sensitivity to Context.” Current
Directions in Psychological Science 17, 3: 183-187.

Fletcher, Jason M. and Steven F. Lehrer. 2009. “Using Genetic Lotteries within Families to
Examine the Causal Impact of Poor Health on Academic Achievement.” NBER Working
Paper 15148. http://www.nber.org/papers/w15148.

Guo, Guang, Michael E. Roettger and Tianji Cai. 2008a. “The Interaction of Genetic
Propensities into Social-Control Models of Delinquency and Violence among Male Youths.”
American Sociological Review 73: 543-568.

Guo, Guang, Xiao-Ming Ou, Michael Roettger, and Jean C. Shih. 2008b. “The VNTR 2
Repeat in MAOA and Delinquent Behavior in Adolescence and Young Adulthood:
Associations and MAOA Promoter Activity.” European Journal of Human Genetics 16: 626–
634.

Guo, Guang and Elizabeth Stearns. 2002. “The Social Influences on the Realization of Genetic
Potential for Intellectual Development.” Social Forces 80(3): 881-910.

Hack, M., D. Flannery, M. Schluchter, L. Cartar, E. Borawski, and N. Klein. 2002. “Outcomes
in Young Adulthood for Very Low Birth Weight Infants.” The New England Journal of
Medicine 346(2): 149-157.

Hamer, D. 2002. “Rethinking Behavior Genetics.” Science 298(5591): 71-72.
Harris, Kathleen Mullan, Carolyn Tucker Halpern, Andrew Smolen, and Brett C. Haberstick.
2006. “The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) Twin Data.” Twin
Research and Human Genetics 9, 6: 988-997.

Harris, Kathleen Mullan. 2009. The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add
Health), Waves I & II, 1994–1996; Wave III, 2001–2002 [machine-readable data file and
documentation]. Chapel Hill, NC: Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill.

Hayes, B. and F. Sharif. 2009. “Behavioural and emotional outcome of very low birth weight
infants--literature review.” Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine 22, 10:849-56.

Jeong, H., S. P. Mason, A.-L. Barabási and Z. N. Oltvai. 2001. Lethality and centrality in
protein networks. Nature 411: 41-42.




                                                                                                     24
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Lawford, B.R., R. Young, E.P. Noble, B. Kann, T. Ritchie. 2006. “The D-2 Dopamine
Receptor (DRD2) Gene Is Associated with Co-Morbid Depression, Anxiety and Social
Dysfunction in Untreated Veterans with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.” European Psychiatry
21: 180-185.

Lowe J, Erickson SJ, Maclean P, Duvall SW. 2009. “Early working memory and maternal
communication in toddlers born very low birth weight.” Acta Paediatrica 98, 4:660-3.

Meas, T., S. Deghmoun, P. Armoogum, C. Alberti, C. Levy-Marchal. 2008. “Consequences of
being born small for gestational age on body composition: an 8-year follow-up study.” Journal
of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 93, 10: 3804-9.

Murphy, Dennis L., Qian Li, Sharon Engel, Christine Wichems, Anne Andrews, Klaus-Peter
Lesch, and George Uhl. 2001. “Genetic Perspectives on the Serotonin Transporter.” Brain
Research Bulletin 56(5): 487-494.

Noble, E.P., T.Z. Ozkaragoz, T.L. Ritchie, X. Zhang, T.R. Belin, and R.S. Sparkes. 1998. “D2
and D4 Dopamine Receptor Polymorphisms and Personality.” American Journal of Medical
Genetics: Neuropsychiatric Genetics 81: 254-267.

Pescosolido, Bernice A., Brea L. Perry, J. Scott Long, Jack K. Martin, John I. Nurnberger, Jr.,
and Victor Hesselbrock. 2008. “Under the Influence of Genetics: How Transdisciplinarity
Leads Us to Rethink Social Pathways to Illness.” American Journal of Sociology 114 Suppl.:
S171–S201

Price, Alkes L., Nick J. Patterson, Robert M. Plenge, Michael E. Weinblatt, Nancy A. Shadick,
and David Reich. 2006. “Principal Components Analysis Corrects for Stratification in
Genome-Wide Association Studies.” Nature Genetics 38, 8: 904-909.

Pohjalainen, T., Rinne, J. O., Någren, K., Lehikoinen, P., Anttila, K., Syvälahti, E. and Hietala,
J. 1998. “The A1 Allele of the Human D2 Dopamine Receptor Gene Predicts Low D2 Receptor
Availability in Healthy Volunteers.” Molecular Psychiatry 3, 256–260.

Rich-Edwards, J. 1997. “Birth Weight and Risk of Cardiovascular Disease in a Cohort of
Women Followed Up Since 1976.” British Medical Journal 35:396-400.

Roberts, R.E., Lewinsohn, P.M., and J.R. Seeley. 1991. ”Screening for Adolescent Depression:
A Comparison of Depression Scales.” Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry 30(1): 58-66

Rowe, D.C. 2001. Biology and Crime. Los Angeles: Roxbury.

Schlotz, W. and DI. Phillips. 2009. “Fetal origins of mental health: evidence and mechanisms.”
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 23, 7:905-16.




                                                                                                     25
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Shanahan, Michael J., Stephen Vaisey, Lance D. Erickson, and Andrew Smolen. 2008.
“Environmental Contingencies and Genetic Propensities: Social Capital, Educational
Continuation, and Dopamine Receptor Gene DRD2.” American Journal of Sociology, 114
Supplement: S260-S286.

Shih, J. C. and R. F. Thompson. 1999. “Monoamine Oxidase in Neuropsychiatry and
Behavior.” American Journal of Human Genetics 65:593–98.

Sorensen, H., S. Sabroe, J. Olsen, K. Rothman, M. Gillman, and P. Fischer. 1997. “Birth
Weight and Cognitive Function in Young Adult Life: Historical Cohort Study.” British
Medical Journal 315:401-403.

Stelzl, Ulrich, Uwe Worm, Maciej Lalowski, Christian Haenig, Felix H. Brembeck, Heike
Goehler, Martin Stroedicke, Martina Zenkner, Anke Schoenherr, Susanne Koeppen, Jan Timm,
Sascha Mintzlaff, Claudia Abraham, Nicole Bock, Silvia Kietzmann, Astrid Goedde, Engin
Toksöz, Anja Droege, Sylvia Krobitsch, Bernhard Korn, Walter Birchmeier, Hans Lehrach and
Erich E. Wanker. 2005. “A Human Protein-Protein Interaction Network: A Resource for
Annotating the Proteome.” Cell. 122: 957-968.

Wiers, R.W., J.A. Sergeant, and W.B. Gunning. 1994. “Psychological Mechanisms of
Enhanced Risk of Addiction in Children of Alcoholics: A Dual Pathway?” Acta Paediatrica
Supplement 404: 9-13.

Wilhelm, Kay, Philip B. Mitchell, Heather Niven, Adam Finch, Lucinda Wedgwood, Anna
Scimone, Ian P. Blair, Gordon Parker and Peter R. Schofield. 2006. “Life events, first
depression onset and the serotonin transporter gene.” The British Journal of Psychiatry 188:
210-215.




                                                                                                     26
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Figure 1

                               Effect of an Additional Pound at Birth
                            on Depression Symptoms by 5HTT Genotype
                                             ll vs. others

   6
                                                  **
   4


   2


   0
                                                                                                     ls or ss
                                                                                                     ll
  -2


  -4


  -6


  -8




                                                                                                           27
                Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Table 1: Main Effects of Genes and Birth Weight
Panel 1 – Including Hypothesized Gene
                      (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)     (11)     (12)
 VARIABLES                      Depression                            Delinquency                                 HS GPA
                     Twins     DZ       MZ      MZ-RE     Twins       DZ      MZ        MZ-RE     Twins        DZ       MZ      MZ-RE
 5HTT ll             -0.31    -0.32      0       0.08
                     (1.10)   (1.14)    (0)     (0.88)
 MAOA both 4R                                              -0.40    -0.39        0      -0.32
                                                          (0.39)    (0.44)      (0)     (0.26)
 DRD2 no A1                                                                                         -0.05      -0.05      0      0.17
                                                                                                   (0.13)     (0.15)     (0)    (0.15)
 Log oz               1.86      0.86    3.78     -0.16     -0.49     -0.86     0.24      0.58       -0.02      0.13     -0.30    -0.19
                     (2.73)    (3.49) (4.45)     (2.30)   (0.94)    (1.30)    (1.29)    (0.69)     (0.30)     (0.45)   (0.33)   (0.28)
 Male                -0.93     -0.91      0      -0.30    0.84**    0.85**       0      0.43+     -0.45**    -0.46**      0     -0.34*
                     (0.80)    (0.83)    (0)     (0.82)   (0.29)    (0.32)      (0)     (0.26)     (0.09)     (0.11)     (0)    (0.15)
 Constant             -2.17     2.28   -11.27     6.54     2.65      4.31      -0.46    -2.04      3.07*       2.31    4.16**   3.77**
                    (12.32)   (15.76) (20.04)   (10.33)   (4.24)    (5.86)    (5.81)    (3.09)     (1.37)     (2.03)   (1.49)   (1.24)
 Observations          486      280      206      206       456       270       186      186         392        232      160      160
 R-squared           0.618     0.593    0.654              0.635     0.611    0.692                0.847      0.815     0.912
 No. of pairs          243      140      103      103       228       135       93        93         196        116      80       80

Panel 2 – Including All Three Genes
                      (1)        (2)     (3)     (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)      (11)    (12)
 VARIABLES                       Depression                            Delinquency                                HS GPA
                     Twins      DZ       MZ   MZ-RE       Twins       DZ        MZ      MZ-RE      Twins       DZ        MZ     MZ-RE
 5HTT ll             -0.46     -0.47      0     0.54       -0.65    -0.66        0       0.25        0.21      0.22        0     -0.26
                     (1.17)    (1.20)    (0)   (0.95)     (0.40)    (0.44)      (0)     (0.30)     (0.14)     (0.16)      (0)    (0.17)
 MAOA both 4R         0.36      0.39      0   -1.760*      -0.27     -0.25       0      -0.39      -0.27+     -0.27        0      0.07
                     (1.21)    (1.25)    (0)   (0.85)     (0.41)    (0.46)      (0)     (0.27)     (0.14)     (0.17)      (0)    (0.15)
 DRD2 no A1           0.75      0.76      0     -0.26      0.014     0.02        0       -0.04      -0.04     -0.04        0      0.25
                     (1.12)    (1.16)    (0)   (0.88)     (0.37)    (0.42)      (0)     (0.28)     (0.13)     (0.15)      (0)    (0.16)
 Log oz               1.69      0.93    3.16   -0.79       -0.57     -0.98     0.25      0.53       -0.00      0.10     -0.19     -0.18
                     (2.81)    (3.57) (4.63)   (2.40)     (0.96)    (1.31)    (1.34)    (0.73)     (0.30)     (0.45)   (0.32)    (0.27)
 Male                -1.19     -1.18      0    -0.36      0.80**    0.81*        0       0.37     -0.40**    -0.41**       0    -0.39**
                     (0.87)    (0.89)    (0)   (0.85)     (0.29)    (0.33)      (0)     (0.27)     (0.09)     (0.11)      (0)    (0.15)
 Constant             -1.78     1.46    -8.35  10.46       3.18      5.02      -0.49    -1.83       3.02*      2.48    3.68*    3.77**
                    (12.67)   (16.10) (20.84) (10.83)     (4.32)    (5.90)    (6.01)    (3.29)     (1.36)     (2.03)   (1.43)    (1.22)
 Observations          460      270      190     190        446       268       178       178        376       222       154       154
 R-squared           0.615     0.592    0.646              0.636    0.617      0.682                0.856     0.823    0.922
 No. of pairs          230      135       95     95         223       134        89       89         188       111        77      77
                                                     Standard errors in parentheses
                                                     ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1

                NOTE – If twin pairs missing one birth weight value are included, with a dummy indicator for
                missing birth weight, genetic effects are still insignificant. Main genetic effects on logged
                depression and delinquency scores are also null. Variation in birth weight and genes alone do
                not significantly predict these outcomes.




                                                                                                                        28
        Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Table 2: Interaction Effects – Depression
                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)     (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)        (9)
 VARIABLES                                                          Depression
                             Twins        DZ         MZ       Twins     DZ           MZ       Twins          DZ         MZ

 Log oz_5HTT-ll             -12.32** -8.40+ -27.33**
                              (4.27)  (5.03) (8.59)
 5HTT-ll                    55.38** 37.62       0
                             (19.31) (22.74)   (0)
 Log oz_MAOA both 4R                                          -9.65*     -8.90     -12.07
                                                               (4.58)    (5.45)    (8.96)
 MAOA both 4R                                                 43.80*     40.43        0
                                                              (20.81)   (24.77)      (0)
 Log oz_DRD2 no A1                                                                             -5.36      -7.45       2.48
                                                                                              (4.49)     (5.26)      (9.19)
 DRD2 no A1                                                                                   25.00       34.45         0
                                                                                             (20.32)    (23.77)        (0)
 Log oz                      6.90*         4.13   15.95**      6.44+      5.45       8.82      4.78       5.23        2.61
                             (3.21)      (3.98)    (5.73)      (3.48)    (4.35)     (6.14)    (3.66)     (4.60)      (6.25)
 Male                        -0.95        -0.92       0        -1.01    -1.009         0      -0.91       -0.89         0
                             (0.79)      (0.83)      (0)       (0.85)   (0.884)       (0)     (0.81)     (0.83)        (0)
 Constant                   -24.94+      -12.49    -28.03     -22.99    -18.54     -7.072    -15.90      -18.08     -11.81
                            (14.47)     (17.98)   (19.91)     (15.71)   (19.60)    (20.13)   (16.51)    (20.75)     (20.81)
 Observations                 486          280       206        470       272        198        482        282        200
 R-squared                   0.631        0.601     0.685      0.623     0.595      0.662     0.616       0.597      0.645
                                         Standard errors in parentheses
                                          ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
            Shading indicates significance with Bonferroni correction for 3 hypotheses: p<.05; p<.10




                                                                                                                   29
       Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Table 3: Interaction Effects – Delinquency
                              (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)           (7)       (8)     (9)
VARIABLES                                                       Delinquency Score
                            Twins       DZ         MZ       Twins      DZ      MZ           Twins       DZ      MZ

Log oz_MAOA both 4R           -1.47    -1.61      -1.01
                             (1.57)    (2.02)    (2.60)
MAOA both 4R                  6.28      6.93        0
                             (7.14)    (9.17)      (0)
Log oz_5HTT-ll                                              -2.05      -1.82     -3.27
                                                            (1.50)     (1.89)    (2.64)
5HTT-ll                                                      8.75       7.70        0
                                                            (6.78)     (8.55)      (0)
Log oz_DRD2 no A1                                                                            0.26       0.17    0.89
                                                                                            (1.81)    (1.99)   (4.10)
DRD2 no A1                                                                                  -1.14      -0.71      0
                                                                                            (8.20)    (8.98)     (0)
Log oz                       0.20       -0.10     0.72       0.27      -0.48      2.13      -0.91      -1.22   -0.46
                            (1.20)     (1.61)    (1.78)     (1.13)     (1.50)    (1.78)     (1.48)    (1.74)   (2.82)
Male                        0.86**     0.87**       0       0.78**     0.80*        0       0.80*     0.81**      0
                            (0.29)     (0.33)      (0)      (0.28)     (0.31)      (0)      (0.32)    (0.31)     (0)
Constant                     -0.48       0.90     -0.40      -0.76      2.64      -4.25      4.39       5.77    0.72
                            (5.40)     (7.26)    (5.84)     (5.11)     (6.77)    (6.13)     (6.68)    (7.82)   (9.28)
Observations                  456        270       186        472       278        194       468        280     188
R-squared                    0.637      0.613    0.693       0.631     0.610     0.682      0.628     0.604    0.654
                                            Standard errors in parentheses
                                            ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                                                                                               30
       Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


Table 4: Interaction Effects – Cumulative High School GPA
                              (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)           (8)        (9)
VARIABLES                                                    GPA
                             Twins       DZ        MZ        Twins       DZ        MZ       Twins           DZ         MZ

Log oz_DRD2 no A1             1.11*    1.41+       0.17
                             (0.51)    (0.71)     (0.67)
DRD2 no A1                   -5.07*    -6.41*        0
                             (2.33)    (3.23)       (0)
Log oz_MAOA both 4R                                           0.26       0.30      0.15
                                                             (0.50)     (0.71)    (0.62)
MAOA both 4R                                                 -1.40      -1.58        0
                                                             (2.29)     (3.21)      (0)
Log oz_5HTT-ll                                                                                -0.29      -0.61       0.74
                                                                                             (0.50)     (0.69)     (0.65)
5HTT-ll                                                                                        1.49       2.91         0
                                                                                             (2.25)     (3.11)        (0)
Log oz                        -0.64     -0.72      -0.38     -0.15      -0.08      -0.25      0.11       0.38       -0.63
                             (0.42)     (0.62)    (0.45)     (0.38)     (0.55)    (0.43)     (0.37)     (0.52)     (0.44)
Male                        -0.45**    -0.46**       0      -0.42**    -0.42**       0      -0.45**    -0.45**         0
                             (0.09)     (0.11)      (0)      (0.09)     (0.12)      (0)      (0.09)     (0.11)        (0)
Constant                     5.85**     6.16*     4.14**      3.72       3.32     3.65*        2.38       1.07     4.62**
                             (1.87)     (2.80)    (1.50)     (1.72)     (2.51)    (1.39)     (1.65)     (2.37)     (1.51)
Observations                   392       232        160       386        224        162        396        230        166
R-squared                     0.851     0.821      0.912     0.856      0.823     0.922      0.848      0.816      0.913
                                        Standard errors in parentheses
                                         ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
           Shading indicates significance with Bonferroni correction for 3 hypotheses: p<.05; p<.10




                                                                                                                  31
Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


        Table 5: Predicting Birth Weight
                                     (1)                  (2)             (3)             (4)
        VARIABLES                 Log oz diff          Log oz diff       Log oz          Log oz
        Twin pair                    MZ                   DZ            MZ – RE           DZ

        DRD2 both no A1                  -0.019           -0.004
                                        (0.021)          (0.023)
        DRD2 one no A1                      0            -0.057*
                                           (0)           (0.027)
        5HTT both ll                     0.026            -0.015
                                        (0.022)          (0.024)
        5HTT one ll                         0             -0.016
                                           (0)           (0.025)
        MAOA both 4R                     -0.005            0.002
                                        (0.020)          (0.022)
        MAOA one 4R                         0              0.007
                                           (0)           (0.025)
        Male                             0.013            -0.018          0.050          0.019
                                        (0.020)          (0.019)         (0.031)        (0.022)
        Individual
           DRD2 - no A1                                                   -0.018          0.013
                                                                         (0.033)        (0.028)
            MAOA - 4R                                                     0.010          0.032
                                                                         (0.032)        (0.030)
            5HTT - ll                                                     -0.051         -0.021
                                                                         (0.036)        (0.029)
        Constant                       0.093**         0.145**           4.500**        4.496**
                                        (0.019)        (0.026)           (0.031)        (0.026)
        Observations                      95             136               190             272
        R-squared                        0.025          0.047                            0.798
        Number of pairs                   95             136                95             136
                                     Standard errors in parentheses
                                     ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                                                                                     32
     Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


     Table 6: Twins with and without Complete Birth Weight Data
                          MZ w/ twin BW             MZ w/o twin BW               DZ w/ twin BW               DZ w/o twin BW
                        Mean    Std     N          Mean     Std   N           Mean      Std    N          Mean      Std    N
                               Error                      Error                        Error                       Error
Log oz                 4.5*    0.01   208         4.37*   0.05   15          4.52* 0.01       285         4.42* 0.04      28
Cumulative GPA         2.82*   0.05   181         2.62*   0.08   89           2.61+ 0.06      252          2.43+ 0.08     104
Highest Grade Comp     13.41   0.13   208         13.08   0.18   100         13.31+ 0.12      285         12.96+ .16      129
Depression             5.71    0.35   208         5.77    0.46   98           5.54   0.30     284          5.80   0.49    127
Log depression         1.63    0.05   208         1.68    0.07   98          1.58    0.05     284         1.61    0.07    127
Any depression         0.93    0.02   208         0.95    0.02   100         0.89    0.02     285         0.93    0.02    129
Delinquency            0.78*   0.15   202         0.29*   0.09   100         0.69    0.11     283         0.77    0.16    129
Log delinquency        0.32*   0.04   202         0.14*   0.04   100         0.29    0.03     283         0.32    0.05    129
Any delinquency        0.30*   0.03   208         0.15*   0.04   100         0.25    0.03     285         0.27    0.04    129
DRD2 – no A1           0.53    0.04   203         0.58    0.05   100         0.61    0.03     285          0.54   0.04    127
MAOA – both 4R         0.49    0.04   200         0.39    0.05   97          0.49    0.3      280         0.42    0.04    127
5HTT – ll              0.31    0.03   206         0.33    0.05   98          0.33    0.03     284         0.32    0.04    128
     Indicates significant mean difference (two-tailed ttest, unequal variance) * p<0.05, + p<0.10
     Bonferroni correction of 3 p<0.05, p<0.10

     Log and Any deliquency measures are significant at p<.05 after correcting for 9 hypotheses.




                                                                                                              33
       Genetic Interactions with Prenatal Social Environment: Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes


       Table S1: Main and Interaction Effects – College Attendance
       Panel 1: Main Effects
                                   (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)                (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)
         VARIABLES              College Attendance – Hypothesized Gene                College Attendance – All 3 Genes
                                 Twins       DZ       MZ       MZ-RE               Twins       DZ        MZ       MZ-RE
         DRD2 no A1               0.07       0.07       0       0.20*               0.06       0.06        0       0.23*
                                 (0.08)     (0.08)     (0)      (0.09)             (0.08)     (0.08)      (0)      (0.09)
         5HTT ll                                                                   -0.04      -0.04        0        0.03
                                                                                   (0.08)     (0.08)      (0)      (0.10)
         MAOA both 4R                                                               0.12       0.12        0        0.03
                                                                                   (0.08)     (0.09)      (0)      (0.09)
         Log oz                    0.16        0.18       0.12         -0.07        0.11       0.11      0.12       -0.08
                                  (0.19)      (0.25)     (0.31)       (0.22)       (0.20)     (0.25)    (0.33)     (0.22)
         Male                    -0.30**     -0.30**        0          -0.12      -0.30** -0.30**          0      -0.16+
                                  (0.06)      (0.06)       (0)        (0.09)       (0.06)     (0.06)      (0)      (0.09)
         Constant                  -0.00       -0.06      0.01          0.83        0.16       0.21      0.01        0.84
                                  (0.87)      (1.10)     (1.42)       (0.98)       (0.88)     (1.12)    (1.46)     (1.00)
         Observations               484         284       200           200         462        272       190         190
         R-squared                0.806       0.788      0.828                     0.802      0.789     0.818
         No. of pairs               242         142       100          100          231        136        95          95

       Panel 2: Interaction Effects
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)         (9)
VARIABLES                                                         GPA
                             Twins         DZ          MZ         Twins         DZ         MZ       Twins       DZ           MZ

Log oz_DRD2 no A1             -0.14     -0.11      -0.28
                             (0.31)     (0.37)     (0.63)
DRD2 noA1                     0.71       0.56         0
                             (1.42)     (1.69)       (0)
Log oz_MAOA both 4R                                                -0.36        -0.59      0.40
                                                                  (0.32)       (0.38)     (0.63)
MAOA both 4R                                                       1.72         2.79         0
                                                                  (1.46)       (1.71)       (0)
Log oz_5HTT-ll                                                                                       -0.14     -0.10        -0.26
                                                                                                    (0.30)     (0.36)       (0.62)
5HTT-ll                                                                                              0.60       0.45           0
                                                                                                    (1.37)     (1.62)         (0)
Log oz                        0.24        0.24      0.25            0.29         0.40      -0.07     0.22       0.22         0.23
                             (0.26)     (0.33)     (0.43)          (0.24)       (0.30)    (0.43)    (0.23)     (0.29)       (0.41)
Male                        -0.30**    -0.30**        0           -0.29**      -0.29**       0     -0.30**    -0.30**          0
                             (0.06)     (0.06)       (0)           (0.06)       (0.07)      (0)     (0.06)     (0.06)         (0)
Constant                      -0.35      -0.35      0.09            -0.62        -1.10     -0.02    -0.22      -0.23        -0.13
                             (1.16)     (1.47)     (1.43)          (1.10)       (1.36)    (1.42)    (1.03)     (1.29)       (1.44)
Observations                   484        284       200              472          274       198       488       282          206
R-squared                    0.806      0.788      0.829           0.807        0.794     0.826     0.806      0.784        0.832

       Panel 1: Random effects Models 4 and 8 suggest identical twins with no copies of the “risky”
       A1 allele are significantly more likely to attend college. Results are similar when including
       pairs with missing birth weight. However, this between-family estimate could reflect
       population stratification.
       Panel 2: Interaction effects between genotype and birth weight are all insignificant.



                                                                                                                        34
