                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOW DOES THE MARKET VALUE
                   UNFUNDED PENSION LIABILITIES?



                            Jeremy Bulow

                           Randall Morck

                          Lawrence Summers



                       Working Paper No. 1602




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research project
in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #1602
                                                         April 1985




                           How Does the Market Value
                         Unfunded Pension Liabilities?



                                    ABSTRACT



          We lead off by discussing a number of theoretical reasons for

expecting various relationships between a firm's unfunded pension liability and

its market value. We then discuss our doubts about the methodology of earlier

papers which studied the empirical relation between funding and market value

using standard cross sectional techniques. A modified cross sectional approach

which alleviates some of these doubts, and a variable effect event Study meth-

odology which alleviates most of them are both employed to investigate the issues

raised in the first part of the paper. Our conclusion confirms those of earlier

studies that unfunded pension liabilities are accurately reflected in lower

share prices.




Jeremy Bulow                   Randall Morck                Lawrence Summers
Graduate School of Business    National Bureau of           Department of Economics
Stanford University            Economic Research            Littauer Center 229
Stanford, CA 914305            1050 Massachusetts Ave.      Harvard University
                               Cambridge, MA 02138          Cambridge, MA 02138
           The question of how the stock market values pension assets and liabili-

ties is of central importance to corporate decision nakrs,         financial   econDsts
 and economists concerned with level of national savings. If investors treat

pension debt differently from other forms of debt, in valuing firms, prudent

value maximizing      managers should recognize these differences and adjust their
pension funding policies acordingly. A convincing demonstration that market

valuations failed to take account of pension assets or liabilities would either

challenge prevailing theories of market efficiency and rational valuation, or

force a re—examination of conventional views about effective ownership of pen-

sion claims. 'inally, if potential beneficiaries of pensions recognized the

value of the pensions and adjusted their savings accordingly, hut no comparable

adjustment occurred because holders of pension liabilities did not recognize

their liabilities, or were confident of their ability to shift then to some

other source such as the PBGC, then pensions would reduce national savings.

These effects might he quite significant,. Contributions to private pensions

represented 58 percent of personal savings in 1977.

           A number   of   empirical studies including Oldfield (1971), Feldst,ein and

Seligman (1981), Feldstein and Mrck (1983),        Gersovitz (1980) and Westerfieli and
Marshall   (1983) have attempted to study the markets valuation of pension liahi—

lities using cross—sectional valuation models. Other analysts have taken the

position that the overwiielming empirical evidence in support      of   the hypothesis

of market efficiency, makes studying the market valuation of pension assets and

liabilities irrelevant. This position seems unwarranted. A great deal of

controversy as reflected in Modigliani—Cohn (1971), Summers (1981) and French,
                                       —2—




Ruhack and Schwert (l993 focuses on the effects of inflation on firms! nominal
assets and liabilities. 51urthermore, if the supposition of rational valuation

is   accepted, studies of the market valuation effect of changes in pension liabi-
lities offer an ideal methodology for examining the true ownership of pension claims.
            In adding to the already fairly extensive empirical literature on the
valuation    of pension assets and liabilities, this paper makes two significant

innovations.    First, we report results using a "variable effect" event study
methodology, for studying the valuation of pension claims. This methodology is
far superior to the traditional cross—sectional valuation model approach for
examining    the determinants of market valuations. Indeed, we suggest that iden-

tification is highly problematic using standard approaches. Second, following

recent work by Bulow (1982), Lazear (1983), and others we recognize that pen-

sions may only he one aspect of complicated contracts through which firms offer

workers   deferred compensation. If deferred compensation is an important aspect
of the labor market, one would expect it to leave traces in the market valutions
of otherwise equivalent firms with demographically different labor forces. We
examine this issue using both the standard cross—section and the "variable
effect" event study methodology. In addition to these innovations, the availa-

bility of a larger and more recent data set made it possible for us to repli-

cate the estimates presented in earlier studies and examine their robustness.

            The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 1 examines the theoreti-

cal relationships between pension assets and liabilities and the market

valuation of firms. A number of possible reasons why unfunded pension liabili-

ties may not reduce equity valuations dollar for dollar are considered. Section
                                       —3—




II   presents evidence on the relationship between pension obligations and rket

valuations using standard cross—sectional techniques. Other forms of deferred

compensation are also considered. Our doubts about    cross—sectional   methodolo-

gies are also discussed. Section III presents estimates of the eff'ect of pen-

sion obligations on market valuation using the variable effect event stu;

methodolo. We argue that this methodolo provides a superior basis for
testing market valuation issues than does the standard approach. While the
available evidence is weak, it does tend to corroborate standard theories
regarding the economic effects of pension obligations.   Finally, Section I'J   pre-
sents our conclusions and   suggests directions for future research.
                                         —'4 —




1. V&L[JING A FIRM'S NET PENSION WEALTH
          A nunber of empirical studies have attempted to examine the extent to

which market valuations of firm equity accurately reflect firms pension posi-

tions. These studies have typically not discussed in any detail how rational

investors should combine a firm's regular balance sheet and its pension position

in valuing it. It turns out, however, that because of complexities engendered

by the legal    nature of   the pension contract, the nature of the longterm implicit

contracts    between workers and firms, and the tax code; the valuation of pension
assets   and liabilities is quite a subtle issue. This section begins by
sketching    a naive benchmark model for evaluating firms' pension positions and

then considers five qualifications to it. These qualifications provide the

basis for much of the empirical discussion in the next two sections.

            Perhaps the simplest model of a defined benefit plan is the

"consolidated balance sheet" approach. In this approach, pension liabilities

are defined on a "quit" basis—— what workers would receive if they individually

quit the firm today, or their vested benefits——and those obligations are treated

like a general corporate liability. Pension assets are similarly treated as a

general corporate asset, so any difference between pension assets and liabili-

ties is part of net shareholder wealth. On this view unfunded pension liabili-

ties should reduce firms' market value dollar—for—dollar.


ERISA's Effect on the Pension Obligation

            The first qualification to this simple model is that it does not take

into account the special legal nature of the pension liability. Prior to ERISA
                                        —5—



enployees' pension benefits were nonrecourse claims against corporate pension

assets. Because of the workers' nonrecourse claim we noild think of the firm's

net pension wealth as being an option on the fund's assets, F, with an exercise

price equal to V, vested benefits. If we think of the firm and its employees a

constantly negotiating over the levels of F and V so that either side alwas had

the ability to force immediate exercise of the option, then the firm's net pen-

sion wealth would he mx (o,_v), and workers' net pension wealth would be

min(F,V)

            With the passage of ERISA firms are liable for varying sums denending

on the level of guaranteed benefits 0 (which in terminations in the first few

years of PBGC existence averaged •f'5 of vested benefits), accrued benefits A

(which because they include nonvested benefits slightly exceed vested benefits),

the amount of money in the pension fund F, and the market value of the firm's

equity F.

            Following Ruby (l9B2) we can make a table of the firm's total pension

obligations and unfunded liability as a function of these four variables:



                                      Table 1.1
Level of Funding                  Pension Liability          Net Firm Liability

(i) F -i-.3E <    0                   F + .3E                        .3E
(2) G <     F +   .30 c 0 + .3E         0                            0—F
(3) G<F<A                                F                            o
R)   A < F                              A                       F—A (overfunded)

           Note that in case (1), a severely underfunded plan, the firm's pension

liability is less than the present value of worker's benefits. The difference

is nade up by the P300 through its "insurance" program, and is often referred to
                                    —6—




as the pension put.

         An empirical implication of the valuation mdcl implied in Table I is

the that firms with overfunded pensions (where F > A) are the residual claimants

in their plans and should benefit from increases in F (through plan asset

growth) and decreases in A (caused by interest rate increases that decrease the

present value of accrued benefits). Again in the case where 0 C F + .3E C 0 + .3F

the 'irm is the residual claimant. However, in cases (i) and (3), for vastly

underfunded plans and for those with 0 C A C F the firm is not the residual

claimant and should be unaffected by changes in pension asset and liability

values, Of course, if we realistically assume that pension policy cannot be

instantaneously revised then the firm nay he a partial gainer or loser fron

changes in pension asset and liability valuation. For example, following Sharpe

(1977) one might view the firm as having a call option on the assets of the Sund

F at an exercise price A, so changes in F and A change the value of that option

but not dollar for dollar with A—F. On average, though, we would expect firms

with overfanded pension plans to have valuations that are more sensitive to pen-

sion asset and liability values than firms with less well funded ulans. We test

this hypothesis in the next two sections.


Implicit Contracting

         A second qualification to the benchmark analysis of pension obligations

is that one may be reluctant to take literally all the aspects of the employment

contract. For example, firns often raise the benefits of already retired

workers and workers nay find their pension benefits much higher if they leave a
                                     —7—



finn just after qualifying for early retirement rather than just before. A

literal view of individuals' pension wealth would say that increasing benefits

to retired workers is a gift of the firm and that a worker accumulates a large

amount of wealth the day he becomes eligible for early retirement. Neither

assumption seems very satisfying.

         Bulow and Scholen (1983) make the argument that in fact. compensation is

negotiated cross—sectionally between a firm and its employees, either explicitly

through a union or implicitly. Workers bargain for part of the nuasi—rents

earned by firms and have some leeway as to how to split those rents among them—

selves. Their model allows for the possibility that sometimes a worker will he

paid much more than marginal product, such as when retirement benefits are

raised or early retirement eligibility is attained. Their measure of worker

compensation in a period is the salary, pension and other benefits legally

accrued during the period (the workers' extra compensation if they all left at

the end of the period rather than at its beginning) plus any increment in the

present value of the quasi—rents that the workers expect to be able to negotiate

with the firm. In particular, it is widely believed that workers benefit from

their firm's reinvestment in their industry. Bulow and Scholes argue the reason

is that even if such investment did not change the marginal product of the last

worker employed in the firm, average product would be greater and the workers

would be in a position as a group to negotiate greater compensation. Similarly,

increases in pension assets may affect the workers' bargaining ability with

their employers. A company with extra cash in its pension fund may find its

workers are able to bargain for a better deal, implying that part of any gain on
                                       —8—




the pension portfolio will find its way to the workers.
         The Bulow—Scholes model has the empirical implication that workers

share in the gain or loss on the pension portfolio and, therefore, pension gains

and losses should only partially be reflected in stock prices. It most clearly

differs from the first qualification in its prediction of the treatment of

changes in net pension assets for vastly overfunded plans ( >> A) where the

first qualification would predict that all incremental gains would go to

stockholders.


Pensions and Other Aspects of Compensation Arrangements

         Third, it is extremely difficult to isolate pensions from the rest of

the compensation contract. For example, a firm nay have more generous severance

arrangements for workers who leave before the early retirement date. If so, the

extra pay for staying until early retirement is much less than implied by the

pension plan because the gain in pension benefits is mitigated by a loss in

severance pay. Other benefits such as health benefits and (in universities

especially) college tuition may also he spread unevenly accross an employee's

career. Thus looking at pension wealth in isolation may he an error if pension

wealth is correlated with other nonhalance sheet compensation.

         ost importantly, pension contributions are less than 10 percent of

salary for most firms and have been decreasing for the past two years. Clearly

small percentage changes in salary can cancel much larger percentage changes in

pensions.
            The implication of all this is that we know little about how the pen—
                                      —




sion obligation correlates with Other elements of the ccnpensation package. If

there is a correlation between firms with large gross pension liabilities and

firms with older workers, say, and older workers get overpaid regardless of the

nature 0f the firm's pension plan, then a relation between large tension liabi-

lities and low firm valuation my he due to the correlation of those liabilities

with the age composition of the firm's labor force. In Section 2 we make preli-

minary tests of whether steep wage/age profiles and older labor forces are

correlated with firms' stock market value.

Tax   Effects
           The fourth issue which causes significant conceptual difficulty in

valuing a firm's net claim on its pension fund is taxes. For simplicity we will

confine our analysis here primarily to the case of an overfunded plan, making the

assumption that the firm can use any excess assets to reduce future pension

costs and thus bear the entire risk of changes in pension asset and liability

values. Therefore, we will he placing an upper bound on the value of an

increment in pension assets to a firm.

           We limit our discussions to three tax issues that have not received

wide attention among pension researchers. The first is an explicit calculation

of the value of being overfunded. The second is the implications of that

calculation for changes in pension asset and liability valuation. The third is

simply that overfunding a pension fund can serve many of the sane purposes as a

stock repurchase, with better tax implications. We use as an arbitrary

benchmark a plan which is always funded at the level of accrued benefits.

(Defined contribution plans are generally like this.) We compare such a plan
                                                —19—



with one where the plan is funded at some level c(s) at time s where F(s) may

differ from the level of accrued benefits. Then it is easy to show that the tax

advantage to having a defined benefit plan is equal to the present value of

interest earned on pension assets in excess of pension liabilities, times the

tax rate on pension contributions.

            To illustrate this point we introduce the following notation: Let r =

pre—tax market interest rate


11 =   marginal tax rate of the firm
12 =   implicit   tax rate the firm pays on investment income; that is its after—tax

       discount rate is r(l—t2)


F(s) = amount of money in pension fund at time s

B(s) =   benefits   paid at time s.

            We compare the tax benefits of beginning a plan at time t, making an

initial contribution F(t), and subsequently operating with funding at level F(s)

versus making an initial contribution of A(t) and subsequently renaming fully

funded at level A(s).

            With funding maintained at level t'(s) the present value of after—tax

future pension contributions needed to supply a benefit stream B(s is



(1.1) (l—T1)F(t) +     (1_Il) (F(s) + B(s)—rF(s)) e
                                j                               ds
                            t
            The present value of contributions to a plan that is always fully

funded is

                                                                  —r(l—t0)(s—t)
(1.2) (l—i1)A(t) +     (1_Il)   5   (A(s)   +   B(s)—rA(s))   e                   ds
                                            —11—



             The tax saving from funding at level F is simply (3) minus (2) or

(1.3) Tax Saving =
                        rT2(1_11)Tt      F(s)—A(s) eT25_t)ds

             It should be clear that the way to maximize (1.3) is to set F(s) as

high as possible at each moment. In such a simple model, then, firms will

always be up against their IRS funding limitation.

             What is the   implication for firm valuation of a shock   to the value of

F(s)     or A(s)? First, consider a rise in F(s). With increased excess funding

the firm would get larger tax benefits. It would amortize its "experience gain"

on asset performance as slowly as possible. If amortization occurs over T years

annual pension contributions will drop by rAF/(l_e_rT) where AF is the gain in

the value of fund assets. The present value to the firm of' its savings is



(1.14)      AF(1—11) (l—e
                         —r(1—
                                  2)
                                  'Ic'

                       (l_e_Al)
              (l_12)

This formula is most understandable by considering some extreme cases. irst,

asume 12 = 0:     there is no tax paid on investment income earned outside the pen-

sion fund. Then there is no advantage to funding per se and an increase in F of

one dollar will raise firm value by 1—1,, the amount of money the firm would get

if it were able to immediately withdraw the extra dollar from the plan. Second,

consider the oft—considered case where 12 =
                                            11
                                               =     'r:   the implicit tax rate on

corporate non—pension investment income is the same as the corporate marginal

rate of T (generally considered 146 percent). This view is consistent with that

of Miller's (1977) model of corporate finance. Furthermore, assume that T =
                                          —12—



the increment in pension assets does not have to be amortized and the firm may

be overfunded by an extra dollar forever. Then the increment in firm value is

AF. Of this gain of AF, then, F(l—'t) is created because the value of assets in

the pension fund (which holds pre—tax assets) has risen by AF. Also, because

those F dollars will earn returns of rAP' each year forever instead of r(l—t)AF

as non—pension assets would earn, there is an annual saving in pension costs of

rid? because of the tax—sheltered nature of the pension returns. The after—tax

value of this saving is riAF(l—T). If we discount this saving at the after—tax

rate of r(l—T), we find that the present value of the tax saving from being able

to remain overfunded forever is


                             ridF(l—T)
(1.5)                                    rAP'.
                                r(l—T
              If in fact we assume 15 years amortization of excess funding, that

             = .146, and that pre—tax interest rates are 10 percent, then (1.14) implies
'I =    '2
that a firm's value should rise by approximately 12 cents for each dollar its

pension assets rise in value. There is an asymmetry on the loss side in that

while excess assets will be defunded as slowly as possible asset shortfalls will

be made up as quickly as allowed. Of course, if a funding deficiency could he

made up instantly then the cost to a firm of a decline in the value of its

pension assets would he 5)4 cents. Because of the asymmetry firms have a

mitigated      incentive to establish "dedicated" bond portfolios which preclude
gains or losses on a fraction of their pension obligations.
          Changes in the value of pension liabilities are a bit more
complicated.       The reason is that funding limitations are based on the book value
of liabilities rather than market value. If interest rates rise, causing the

value   of liabilities to fall, in the short run the firm will he sore overfunde

than before. This overfunding will only be recognized for funding limitation

purposes through the channel of the firm's pension assets earning a return

greater than the plan's actuarial rate. As these greater returns are earned

each year they must then be amortized as experience gains. Thus changes in

liability values will end up being effectively amortized more slowly than

changes in asset values and a slightly higher coefficient would he expected is

the sensitivity of firm value to changes in pension liabilities than to changes

in pension assets.

           Finally, we note the large amount of corporate stock and other assets

held in private pension plans. Numerous firms hold pension assets in excess of'

the market value of firm equity. Because pension contributions are

tax—deductible, except for the fact that transfer of assets to a pension fund

may involve a transfer of corporate wealth from stockholders to employees

pension overfunding seems to dominate corporate share repurchases on two

grounds. First is the deductibility of contributions, and second the fund can

use money to hold a wider variety of assets than just the firm's own stock. As

such, we might expect excess pension fund contributions to provide a signalling

role much like that of dividends and repurchases. Rowever, we leave this last

point for future research.


Investor Rationality

           A fifth reason that changes in firms' pension assets and liabilities
                                      —1 '4—




may   not be reflected dollar—for—dollar in stock prices is that the market maY he
inefficient   in valuing pension liabilities. While this reason may seem

implausible, concern over the effect of large pension contributions on reported

earnings may he one of the reasons that managements often contribute ioh lesc

to their pension funds than they are permitted by TES regulations.

           Other studies such as Prench, Ruhack, and Schwert (1993) have

indicated that it is difficult to find the effect of the change in the market

value of conventional debt on stock prices. Pension debt, which does not appear

on corporate balance sheets and has only recently appeared in any form in the

footnotes, may thus he discounted by the market because of its comolexity.

           In this section we have discussed a number of reasons why a naive

model of changes in a firm's net pension wealth being reflected

dollar—for—dollar in stock market valuation may fail. In particular, we have

discussed the details of ERISA, implicit contracting issues, the correlation

between pension and nonpension compensation, tax effects, and investor

rationality in valuing pension claims. In the subsequent sections cf the paper

we attempt to estimate what in fact is the relation between a firm's pension

assets and liabilities and the market value of its equity.
                                           —15—




2.      CROSS—SECTIONAL VALUATION MODELS

            The   ectent to which share prices reflect unfunded pension ohligctions
is a key issue in considering the effect of private pensions on national

savings. It has been argued (Feldstein l98) that if unfunded pension

liabilities are not fully reflected in stock prices, equity owners will save

less    and consume more than they would in a world where perceptions were correct.

National savings might thus he reduced by the introduction of private pensions.

            For this reason and because of intrinsic interest as an aspect of

financial behavior a series of pioneering papers including Oldfield (l91),

Feldstein and Seligman (1981), Gersovitz (1980), and Feldstein and Mrck (1953)

have endeavored to explore this issue. These efforts have focused on listing

variables likely to he determinants of a firms market value. If an effect of

unfunded   pension liabilities on market value can he detected after these ot}er
likely    factors are controlled for, the studies conclude that unfunded pension

obligations influence share prices.

           Feldstein and Mrck (1983), for example, nodel a firm's market value

(v)   per dollar of net assets (A) as depending on the firms future earrings

potential, its riskiness, its leverage, and (perhaps) its pension obligations.


(2.1)        = F (ture earnings potential, risk, leverage, unfunded pension
                  liability)

As proxies for future earnings potential, they use the firm's current earnings

(E), its historical growth rate in earnings (GEOW) and its research and develop-

ment spending (RD). They enloy the firm's beta as a measure of risk, and the

market value of its debt as a fraction of net assets as a leverage indicator.
                                                 1
                                               —lo—




The firm's unfunded vested pension liability (UVPL) per dollar of net assets is

used to measure its pension obligations. Thus Feldstein and Mrck ended up

estimating


(2.2)        =
                 BQ
                      +
                          l#   +       +        + BETA   +   OEBT   +       +c


They found a coefficient of about minus one on unfunded vested pension liabili-

ties, and concluded that an added dollar of net pension obligations depresses

the firm's market value by about one dollar. Their study was plagued by fairly

difficult data problems ——         primarily   by the use of only very coarse inflation

adustnents and by the very small size of their sample.

         Preliminary to this study, we replicated the Feldstein/Mtrck

regressions using a much larger body of more recent data. Although their result

could he reproduced, it was quite unstable. Seemingly innocuous changes in the

sanple made it come or go. The estimated coefficients on the proxies for future

earnings potential ——          especially   on GROW —— were also disturbingly unstable.

         In this section, we shall point out severe problems inherent in the

cross—sectional valuation methodolo' used by these previous authors. We then

suggest alternative more satisfactory cross—sectional estimating equations.

Estimation of these equations yields results consistent with Feldstein and

Mtrck's conclusion that pension liabilities are largely reflected in a firms

market valuation.


Problems with the Cross—Sectional Valuation

             The lack of robustness of the Felstein—Mrck equations when replicated
                                        —11—




for a larger sample using, more recent data calls into question the vaildit' of
the   cross—sectional valuation methodology used by then and other authors. Th±r

inference is supported by the conflicting evidence found in previous

cross—sectional valuation studies. eldstein and Selignan (12R1', for example,

obtain results similar to those of Feldstein and Mtrck; while Cldfiel.d (lY7)

found no such relation.

           It should not he surprising that such cross—sectional studies lead to

conflicting inferences about the valuation of pension liabilities. It is not at

all clear in what sense these equations can he said to identify structural para-

meters  of any interest. Standard financial theory postulates that the value of
a firm Ky) nay he expressed either as the sun of assets (A.) and liabilities (L.
                                                         1
or as the present value of future cash flows (CF) discounted at some rate s.

These two alternatives may be written as:

                 n             in

(2.3)     V =    ) A.1    —

                i=l           j=l
                                    C



                         CF
(2.)      v=
                t=l (l-'-p)


Note that neither of these equations includes an error tern. The standard

procedure in estimating a cross—sectional valuation equation seems to he to

deflate both sides of (2.3) by an estimate of the replacement value of the

firm's capital stock, insert proxies for whatever assets and liabilities are

easily measured in the equation, and then try to adhere to the spirit of

equation (2.it) in adding to the equation measures of earnings and earnings
growth to cover for assets and liabilities which are hard to measure. easoning

of this sort appears to guiie the specification of Feldstein—rck and the

earlier work of Tobin and Brainard (1911) upon which they rely.

            It is difficult   to knov   hoi to interpret the error term in rich a

mongrel   equation. Presumably it reflects unmeasured assets or liabilities. Put
since the opportunity cost of purchasing these assets (incurring these
liabilities) is not being able to purchase measured assets (not incurring
measured liabilities), it is hard to believe that the error is orthogonal to the
included balance sheet variables. Furthermore, since earnings depend on the
assets and liabilities held by a firm it is difficult to see how they could he
orthogonal to the error term in the cross—section. As a consequence it seems
very difficult to interpret the coefficients of equations such as those reported
by the authors who have previously examined the market valuation of pension
obligations. Since almost every right—hand side variable in standard valuation
equations    is endogenous, adequate instruments do    not seem to be available for
estimating   the parameters of the standard hedonic equation consistently. Given

these prohlens, instability in the estimated coefficients is not surprising.

Even if the parameters of standard hedonic market valuation equations could be

estimated consistently serious problems of interpretation would remain. The

standard procedure for using these equations to answer questions about pension

obligations involves focusing on the coefficient on the pension variables in the

equation. For example, a coefficient of —l on the UVPL variable was to he

interpreted as meaning that if a firm gets an extra dollar in its pension fund,

its value will rise by one dollar.
                                        —19—



             This conclusion is unwarranted.   If the firm contributes a dollar to

its pension fund, current earnings are reduced by one dollar. Taken literally

the Feldstein—Mrck equation implies that this decrement would reduce market

value by alnost two dollars. The presence of the grofth variable makes the

situation even more complex. It is clear, however, that simply looking at the

pension variable will not he satisfactory. A similar problem of inference holds

with respect to the R&D and debt variables in hedonic valuation equations.

            We conclude that the standard hedonic equation approach is not a

useful instrument for studying the nErket valuation of pension liabilities. In

the remainder of this section, we modify the standard cross—sectional approach

by using only balance sheet variables to explain firm valuations. The next

section   uses an alternative variable effect event study nethodoloj to study the
questions at hand.

Modified    Cross—Sectional Equations

            In the remainder of this section we estimate equations relating to

market valuation of firms only to items that can he thought of as elements in

their balance sheet. This avoids the problems of interpretation discussed in

the previous section although the possibility of inconsistent parameter

estimates remains. In particular the equation we estimate is of the form:

        V
(2.5)   A     =S0+1tJVPL
                     A
                         +S2DEBT
                            A
                                 ÷3RD +BETA+y.D.
                                              ' 1




where

  = market value of firm
                                         —20—



A = replacement cost of firm

RD =   research and development spending
BETA =    beta
DEBT = market value of firm's debt

UVPL. =   unfunded vested pension liabilities

D. = two digit SIC industry code dummies


             Our data for 1930 and 1931 is constructed exactly as described by

Feldstein and Mrck's (19814) numbers with a few exceptions which are explained

below. The reader is referred to the earlier paper for a detailed account of

the data. Following Myers (1983) comments, an unlevered rather than a standard

BETA   is used here. We also make use of inflation adjusted figures that have
recently become available. In this study we use inflation adjusted asset
figures from the Financial Accounting Standards Board's statement 33 (FASB 33).
Our replacement cost number A is the inflation—adjusted value of property plan
and equipment plus the inflation—adjusted value of inventories. Our pension
numbers were taken from the Financial Accounting Standards Board's statenent 36

(FASB 36).       Pension liabilities are adjusted to reflect a common discount rate
of seven percent.
             Dummies for two digit industries are included in the equation to

capture the notion that different types of physical capital are valued

differently in the marketplace. The estimation results for 1979, 1980 and 1981

are shown in Table 2.1. Like the Feldstein Mrck conclusion the results for all

three years suggest that firms' market values do reflect their pension
                                           —21—



obligations. In each case the parameter estimates i1y that firms' market

values are reduced more than dollar—for—dollar with unfunded pension liabilities

though the hypothesis that       =   —1           rejected.
                                          can never he

            One possible objection to these questions is the "weak firm" problen
raised by Myers (1983) in his comments on the Feldstein—Mrck paper and
confirmed   by Bodie, Light, Mrck and Taggart (19814) as an important effect.

Firms with low value assets will tend to have low market values and because of

financial pressure will tend to underfund their pension funds. As a result a

spurious negative association between firm value and unfunded pension

liahilities may be observed. This is addressed in Table 2.2 by using two

different techniques.

           First, in the equations in the left half of the table a variable PATIPIi

is included reflecting the firm's Standard & Poor's bond rating is added to the

specification. The RATING variable takes values ranging from 1 for firns rated

D by S&P to 10 for firms ranked A.AA. It should be at least a partial control

for   weal: firm effects.
            Second,   in the second half of the table UVPL is treated as an endoqe—

nous variable and is instrumented using the firm's total pension liabilities.

The justification is that the total size of the firm's liabilities is indepen-

dent of its funding policy, and so should he a satisfactory instrument. It

obviously should also be correlated with the firm's level of unfunded liabili-

ties and so should provide reasonably efficient estimates.

            The results unambigu.osly and robustly point to a negative relationshio

between a firm's unfunded vested pension liabilities and its market value.
                                          —22—




Using either of our two procedures for controlling for weak firm effects, the
absolute   value of the UVPL coefficient actually increases. While the standard

errors are large, we are able to find no evidence that weak firm problems

account    for these results, suggesting that the market penalizes firms with
unfunded pension liahiities.
            The discussion in the previous section suggested that the marginal
effect of reduced pension liabilities nay he different for underfunded than for
overfunded    plans. The analysis of section 1 implies that generally stockholders

will gain more from a reduction in an already overfunded plan, because unfunded

liabilities will be put in part to the PBGC and in part to employees. We

address this issue by adding a variable PUT to the specification of equation

(2.5). The variable PUT is defined as Max (0, JNPL). Results are shows in

Table 2.3.

             Unfortunately,   the data do not appear to be powerful enough to rej cot
any interesting hypothesis concerning this issue. In the nore reliable 1990 and
1981 equations, there is very weak evidence that the availability of the pension

put influences the marginal valuation of liabilities for troubled firms.

            A final major issue suggested by the discussion in Section 1 is the

role of other deferred compensation arrangements which may he correlated with

our included pension variables. Firms may have implicit contracts with their

workers which require them to pay older workers in excess of their marginal

products. If so the capitalized value of these obligations represents a

liability of the firm. This liability is of interest in its own right. In

addition, it is likely to he correlated with pension liabilities.
                                     —23—



          Unfortunately, there is no apparent way to construct an estimate of

firm's deferred compensation liability. As a crude apDroximation, we added

three variables to equation 2.3; AGE, SLOPE, and AGExSLOPE where AGE is an

estimate of the average age of a firm's workforce, SLOPE is an estimate of the

slope of its age—wage profile and AGExSLOPE should enter the equation negati-

vely. Firms with steep age—wage profiles and old work forces should have the

largest deferred compensation liability. The other variables cannot he sirrned

on an a triori basis.

          Our estimates of AGE and SLOPE were obtained from a merge of the

January and March l98 Current Population Survey tapes. This collention of

data included the ages, wages, tenures and three digit employer industry codes

for over forty thousand individuals. Parameters of an age distribution and an

age vs. log(wage) profile were estimated for each three digit industry code.

These codes were matched to the SIC codes on the comnustat tape. In general a

three digit CPS industry code corresponded to a 3 digit or in a few cases a

four digit SIC code. Each firm in our sample was thus assigned a wane—age

profile corresponding to its SIC industry code.

          The results of estimating equation (2.5) with the additional

variables AGE, SLOPE and AGExSLOPE are displayed in Table 2.1.. They are

disappointing. The 1980 estimates are consistent with the hypothesis advanced

above. The age—slope interaction variable is both satistically and suhstan—

tively significant. However, its sign is reversed with equal statistical

significance in the 1981 equation. As a consequence, we cannot reach amy

judgement about the role of deferred compensation in affecting firm
                                     —24 —




valuations.   However, our results suggest tha taking account of several

deferred compensation liabilities does not alter the estimates of the

influence of unfunded pension liahilities.
                                             —25—




3.      INTEREST RATE CHANGED AND THE VALUATION OF PENSION LIABILITIES


            This   section uses an alternative methodoloi' to circumvent some of the

problems    in the standard cross—sectional approach discussed in the preceding
section.    The essential insight underlying our tests may he illustrated as

follows. Consider two otherwise equivalent firms one of which has more pension

liabilities than the other. Now suppose the nominal long—term interest rate

rises unexpectedly. The firm with rre pension liabilities shoul do relatively

better than the firm with less liabilities because of the greater capital gain

it   experiences as the higher interest rate unexpectedly erodes      the value of

long—term    obligations. By examining the response of firms with different
pension obligations to interest rate changes, it should be possible to determine
the extent to which the market values changes in the status of a firm's pension
fund.
             Because the approach taken here looks at the effect of an exogenous
event,    a change in the interest rate on the valuation of different firms, it

does not depend on any assumption about how firms decide how much to fund their

pension plan. Thus the variable effect event study method used here is not

subject to the weak firm problem described in the previous section.

             More formally our approach is as follows. We postulate that the

return on firm i, in month t, can be expressed as:


(3.1)      p. = a
            it      1
                        +
                            it pt   +   u
                                        it
where       is the normal required expected return on firm i, and it reflects its

sensitivity to interest rate news, here proxied by the change in the long—term

interest rate, and             is a random error tern. 1Ye initially specify that
                                                 —26—




    depends on the firm's characteristics at time t according to:

                            T
                                rf   it + 2
(3.2)      it =       +                           + Z.tY        + Li
                          iiLv

where TJVPL represents unfunded vested pension liabilities. LTD reoreseots boo—

term debt, Z refers        to   control variables discussed in more         detail below,   and 7

is the equity value of the firm. Combining equations (3.1) and (3.2) yields the

cross—section time series equation which provides the basis for an empirical

work:


                  =   +
                                      UVPL       LTD
                                              + 127        + Z.t11     + u., +
            pit            tIC + Il                   it
Fauation (3.3) can        be estimated given cross—section time series data usinc
ordinary    least squares, to yield unbiased estimates of the parameters. However,

the error term does not satisfy the requirements for consistency of the standard

errors. In the results reported below we allow for the inclusion of firm aod'or

period effects in (3.3). This should make it possible to compute approximately

accurate standard errors.

           Our procedure is entirely consistent in spirit with the vect stuy

methodolor that is widely used in financial economics. The anproach imvolvs

looking    at the response of securities prices to unexpected develonments or
"news" in an effort to gauge the effects of the variables heinc studied on firms
market value. Our "variable effect—event study methodolopr" represents an
improvement over the techniques normally used in finance in two ways.
            First, the events we look at are developments that are exogenous from
                                      —2—




the   viewpoint of the firm. A standard event study approach to the problem of

studying how the market values firms pension liabilities would involve looking

at how firms' market value responded to news about their pension funding deci-

sion. The difficulty is that firm's decisions are themselves responses to news,

or to privately held information. It is not really possible to sort out      the
effects of policy changes from the independent effects of their causes. Our

indirect procedure of looking at the differential efects of interest rate

changes on firms entirely avoids these problems. Second, our econoetric proce-

dure is superior to the grouping techniques normally used in event studies. One

could, as many financial economists would, group as firms by   pension   funding

status, and then look at how different portfolios responded to news about

interest rate developments. Such a procedure simply discards information about

within—group differences in pension funding status and therefore is inefficient.

           Before turning to a description of our data, it is useful to discuss

the expected signs of the coefficient in (3.3) and possible biases arising fron

omitted variables. We expect l and 12 to be positive reflecting the capital

gains firms earn on their nominal liabilities as interest rates reduce the value

of outstanding liabilities. The principal problem in estimating (3.3) is that

some long—term nominal assets or liabilities which might be correlated with the

included variables are excluded. These might include the value of depreciation

in tax shields or of prospective lease obligations. If these variables have a

systematic impact on firms' pension funding decisions, our results will he

biased. However, we know of no previous arguments suggesting a role for these

variables in pension funding decisions. They might, however, be related to the
                                         —2 9—




amount of long term debt a firm decides to carry.

          In estimating equation (3.3) we use data for the 36—month period

from January, 1979 to December 1991. We assume that pension assets and liabili-

ties are constant within each year1. Data on pension assets and liabilities are

drawn from a tape provided by the EASE. Liabilities are adjusted to current

interest rates using the rule of thumb described in Feldstein and Mtrok (1983).

Essentially, this procedure involves railtiplying reported liabilities by the

ratio of the actuarially assuned interest rate to the actual market interest

rate. This is done on a monthly basis. The market value of long—term debt is

calculated from information available on the Conpustat tape. It is assumed that

all debt reported as long—term by Conpustat has a 10—year maturity and a 10 per-

cent coupon rate. This debt is then valued using the monthly EM interest rate.

onthly stock returns are drawn from the CROP tapes. To insure robustness

extreme values of the right—hand side variables were eliminated from the sample.

All necessary data were available for about 200 firms in 1979, about 7O firms

in 1980 and about itoc   firms   in 1991 giving us a total of 12,715 observations in

a 36—month sample period.

          The results of estimating (3.3) omitting any Z variables are reported

in Table 3.1 for various specifications of the error term. In some cases         is

treated as a constant, in others it is allowed to vary across firms, and in

others to vary from nnth to month.




   1An alternative which we intend to explore would involve interpolating net
assets and liabilities within years.
                                       —29—



           The results are broadly consistent with the hypothesis that the narket

values pension obligations rationally. In each case the unfunded liability

variable is both substantively and statistically significant. The estimates in

column (1) for exanple imply that for a firm with unfunded liabilities equal to

10 percent of equity value, a one percent increase in the interest rate would

raise market value by about .3   percent.     While this is only about half the value

that   would be predicted by a naive mdel in which firms "owned" all unfunded
liabilities and none of the other complicating factors discussed in the first
section arose, it seems very reasonable especially in light of tax
considerations.
            In all the equations the debt variable has the wrong sign and it is

highly statistically significant in equations (1) and (2). This finding con—

firns the results of French Buhack and Schwert (1903) who were unable to find

any evidence in support of the nominal credit hypothesis.       It also supports the

Modigliani—Cohn inflation illusion hypothesis. These surprising results may

alternatively be a consequence of our short sample period or of our failure to

accurately measure all the firms' nominal assets and liabilities. In any event,

they stand as a major puzzle. We recognize that it is inplausihle to assert as

our results seen to suggest that market participants recognize the effects of

increases in interest rates on pension debt but not on regular balance sheet

debt. But we do not at this point have any resolution to offer.

            Our results are somewhat less unsatisfactory for equation (3) where

month dummies are included in the specification. The unfunded pension liahili—

ties variable remains statistically significant in (3) ,     although   its substantive
                                                       —30—



significance is mach less than that suggested by equations (1) and (2.                            The

debt variable, thought it continues to have the wrong sign, becomes insignifi-

cant in equation (3).


Further Tests

            A major problem with                the   cross—sectional valuation tests presented in

the previous section was the "weak firm" problem. Firms with capital that can-
not earn a high rate of return tend to find themselves in financial trouble and
try to underfund their pension plans. A negative relationship between firm
value    and unfunded pension liabilities is observed hut may well he spurious.

Both low firm value and underfunding of the pension liability are consequences

of the firm's ownership of the unprofitable assets. There is no reason to

expect a similar problem here. Weak firms should not be differentially affected

by changes in the nominal interest rate. However, as a further check we added a

variable IRRATING to equation (2) in Table 3.1, where RATING is a categorical

variable which ranges from 1 for firms whose debt is rated P to 10 for firms

whose debt is rated AM. The estimated equation was:



(3,14)       p        = a       + AR   [(25,7    (TJVPL) —   22.6 LTD —   3.11 RATING +   20.3]
                 it         1
                                       (111.0)               (6.2)        ('.6)      (111.2)

While the RATING interaction variable enters significantly, it does not have an
important influence on the pension variable's coefficient, which rises sliahtly.

The introduction of RATING has little effect on the anomalous debt coefficient.

             A concern in previous pension research has been whether the market

responds to pension liahilities as measured at market or actuarial interest
                                                 —31—




rates.     The equations reported so far in this section assume that liabilities

are valued at market interest rates. To test this assumption we add an addi-

tional variable to equation (2) in Table 3.1 equal to A9(PLA - PLM) where

PLM   is   the pension liability         valued at market—interest rates and PIP is the pen-
sion liability valued at actuarial interest rates. If the market responds to
actuarial interest rates rather than market rates, one would expect that this
variable would have a positive sign. The estimated equation was:



(3.5)        p.it =   a.1   + AR!23.6 (uvpL) + 29.9(PLA_pLM) — 12.5 —12.5]
                                (12.3)           (12.7)           (2.1) (2.1)


This equation provides very weak evidence that actuarial interest rates

influence market valuations. It appears that firms who overstate their pension

liabilities by re gain more when interest rates rise. These results ar in

accord with the results obtained in the preceding section using a dif'ferent

methodological approach. They do also support the claim of' Feldstein and orok

(1983) that market participants appear to use below market interest rates in

valuing pension liabilities.

            The results in the previous section provided evidence that the nension

put and the possibility of bankruptcy influenced the market's valuation of pen-

sion liabilities. This issue can be examined by investigating whether interest

rate changes have smaller effects for firms with large relative pension liabili-

ties. This issue can be examined by investigating whether interest rate changes

have smaller effects for firms with large relative pension liabilities. We exa-

mine this issue by adding a variable AR PUT to our basic equation where PUT =
                                             —32—




Ax(o, UVPL).      Our hypothesis is that the coefficient on this variable will be

negative but smaller in absolute value than the coefficient on (UVPL). This

reflects the attenuated impact of interest rate changes on badly underfunded

firms discussed in Section 1. The estimation result was:



(3.6) p.      =       + R[33.T (PL-PA)   -   165 PUT -    6.9 - 12.01
        it        1
                          (10.7)             (99)        (3.5) (2.1)

Although the coefficient on the put variable is statistically insignificant

because it cannot be esti ted with any accuracy, its magnitude is consistent

with our hypothesis. This evidence thus dovetails with the evidence in the pre-

ceding section on potential importance of the level of unfunded benefits.

             A final issue to he considered is the relationship between a firm's

pension arrangements and other parts of its compensation scheme. In the pre-

vious section we presented some crude tests of the idea that firms with steep

age earnings profiles and aging work forces were valued by the market as if they

had a formal debt liability to their work force. While the results were

inconclusive, taking acount of this liability did not have a large iract on the

estimated effect of pension obligations on firms' market valuations.

             It would he desirable to exanine these questions using the methodology

of this section. However, a serious problem presents itself. Any long—term

implicit contract between workers and firms is likely to be formulated in real

terms. The changes in interest rates which provide the basis for our tests

largely reflect changing inflationary expectations. Separating out real

interest rate changes in monthly data is probably not feasible. Hence we cannot
                                          0   —




in   this section shed raich light on the existence of nonpension—deferred compen-

sation. On the possibility that interest rate changes over our lYI9l sannle

period night reflect real interest rate variations, or that nonpensinn long—term

contracts    might   be nominally denominated, we re—estimated equation (3.3) with

various wage growth and age structure variables included. In no case did they

enter    significantly or affect the magnitude of the pension coefficients.
Therefore,    no results are displayed here. We reluctantly conclude that this

section's method cannot be used to exanine the important deferred compensation

issue.
                                     —?   —




)4 OONCLUSIO"S


          The results in this paper confirms earlier analyses suggesting tha

the stock market valuation of firms reasonably accurately reflects their per.sion

funding situations. This conclusion is reached using alternative methodological

approaches and data from several different years and so is reasonably robust.

In particular we demonstrate that it is not simply a consequence of weak firm

effects. Our results also suggest that the availability of the termination an-i

the pension put influences the market valuation of pension liabilities.

Finally, we provide some evidence suggesting that market valuations of firms

reflect implicit contractual liabilities to pay older workers amounts in excess

of their marginal products. These contractual liabilities appear to be denomi-

nated in real rather than nominal terms.

          Our results provide no support for the notion that investors ignore

pension liabilities in valuing firms. As a consequence, they suggest that cor-

porate managers will benefit if they fund their plans as fully as possible.

Furthermore, they suggest that the private pension may not have a large effect

on aggregate saving since both the asset and liability side of pension balance

sheets influence private savings decisions.

          Perhpas the most promising area suggested for future research is the

market's valuation of implicit contractual liabilities to older workers. It

would he desirable to extend the tests reportd here in order to get an estimate

of the value of this liability. If it were to be significant, strong evidence

would he provided for incentive contracting models of the labor market.
                                         —35—



                                      REFERENC ES



Bulow, J. 1982. What are Corporate Pension Liabilities? Quarterly Journal of'
    Economics 97 (August): 1435—52.

Bulow, J. and M. Scholes. 1983. 'Jho Owns the Assets in a Defined—Benefit
    Pension Plan? In Financial Pspects of the U.S. Pension System. Zvi Bodie and
    John B. Shoven eds. University of Chicago Press.

Bodie, Z., J. Light, H. Mrck and P. Taggart. 1984. Funding and Asset
    Allocation in Corporate Pension Plans: AnFrnpirical Investigation. In this
    volume.

Feldstein, p.S.    and R.
                       M4rck. 1983. Pension Funding Decisions, Interest Pate
    Assumptions, and Share Prices. In Financial Aspects of the U.S. Dension Pyster.
    Zvi Bodie and John B. Shoven eds. University of Chicago Press.

Feldstein, M.S. and S. Seligman. 1981. Pension Funding, Share Prices and
    National Savings. Journal of Finance 36: 801—214.

French, K.R., H. S. Ruhack and S. W. Schwert. 1983. Effects of Nominal
    Contracting on Stock Returns. Journal of' Political Economy 91:1 70—96.

Gersovitz, M. 1980. Economic Consequences of Unfunded Vested Pension Benefits.
    NBER Working Paper No. 1480.

Lazear, E. P. 1979. Why is There Mandatory Retirement? Journal of Political
    Economy 87 (December): 1261—614.

Miller, Id.    Debt and Taxes. Journal of 'inance 32 (May): 261—75.

Modigliani, F. and H. A. Cohn. 1979. Inflation, National Valuation an the
    Market. Finarcial Analysts Journal 35: 214_141.

Meyers, S.C. 1983. Comment on Feldstein and '4rck. In Financial AsDects of
    the U.S. Pension System. Zvi Bodie and John B. Shoven eds. University of
    Chicago Press. 207—9.

Oldfeld, G.S. 1977. Financial Aspects of' the Private Pension System. Journal
    of Money, Credit and Banking 9: 148—93.

Sharpe,   W.   1976. Corporate Pension   Funding Policy. Journal of Financial
    Economics 3   (June): 183—93.
Tobin, J. and W. Brainard. 1977. Asset Markets and the Cost of' Capital. In
    Economic Progress, Private Values and Public Policy: Essays in Honor of William
    Feliner. H. Nelson and B. Balassa eds. Amsterdam: North Holland.
                                    —36—




Westerfield, R. and W. Marshall. 19R3. Pension Plan Funding Decisions and
    Corporate Shareholder Value: A New Model and Some Empirical Results.
    Unpublished paper: University of Pennsylvania.
                                     TABLE 2.1

           Balance Sheet, Approach to easuring the  Inact of Unfunded
                  Vested Pension Liabilities on Firn Valuation



           Dependent Variable: Market VAlue Over Replacement cost V/A

Year                                        1919     1980       191

Unfunded vested liabilities UVPL/A         _l.112   —1.5       —1.16
                                           (1.17)   (0.70)     0.5fl)

Leverage                      DEBT/A        1.06    —0.16      —0.32
                                           (0.31)   (0.33)     (0.21)

Research                      RD/A          6.9L    10.75       1.5
                                           (2.18)   (1.51k)    (1.12)

3eta                          BETA          0.18     0.08       0.06
                                           (0.15)   (0.13)     (o.o)

Constant                       C            0.19     0.56
                                           (0.21)   (0.30)     (0.15)

Sample                         N                      266        256

                                                     0.39        .53
                                      TABLR 2.2


             Balance Sheet Approach to Measuring the Impact of Unfunded
       Vested Pension Liahilitj on Firm Valuation and the Weak Firm Problea



            Dependent Variable: Market Value Over Replacement Cost V/A


Year                                       1980      1981     1990        l9l
Unfonded Vested Liabilities TJVDL/A       —1.92     —1)45    —3.15
                                           (0.93)   (0.69)   (1.63)      (1.15)

Rating                         RATING      0.05      o.oL
                                          (0.06)

Leverage                       DEBT/A     —0.06     —O.2L    0.052        0.30
                                                    (0.30)   (939)       (o.2L)

Research                       RD/A       o.65      7)43     12.27
                                                    (1.37)   (1.76)      (1.22)

Beta                           BETA        0.03      0.08    —0.10       0.05
                                          (0.20)    (o.os)   (0.15)      (o.ofl

Constant                        C          o.i6                          0.65
                                          (0.90)    (0.33)   (0.32)      (0.17)

Sample                          N          153      17        256        2
                                           0)45                          0.52
                                         —39—



                                       TABLS 2.3


             Balance Sheet Approach to Measuring the Impact of Unfunded
           Vested Pension Liabilities on Firm Valuation and the PBGC Put


            Dependent Variable: Market Value Over Replacenent Cost V/A

Year                                            1919      l9O        l91
Unfunded Vested Liabilities     UVPL/A          0.75     —2.63      —l.9
                                                         (i.o)

PBGC Put   Indicator            PUT          —2.65        1.3        0.61
                                             (.21)       (2.16)     (i.hL)

Leverage                        DEBT/A           1.03    —0.16      —0.32
                                                (0.31)   (0.33)     (0.21)

Research                        RD/A            7.02     10.65       7)9
                                                (2.20)   (1.55)     (i.1)

Beta                            BETA                      0.01       0.06
                                                (o.I6)   (0.13)     (n.o)

Constant                         C               0.23     0.55       0.66
                                                (0.23)   (0.30)     (0.16)

Sample                           N                 70      266        256

R2                                                        0.39       0.53
                                     TABLE 2.b

             Balance Sheet ADproach to the Impact of Pensions and Labor
                         Force Structure on Firm Valuation


            Dependent Variable: Market Value Dyer Replacement Cost V/A


Year                                                     1980             1981

Mean age                            AGE                  0.05          —0.03
                                                        (o.o)             (0.03)

Slope    of age wage profile        SL0E               lUh.14h
                                                       (6r.o9)        (62.52)
Age and slope interaction term      AGExSLDPE                             1.66
                                                                          (1.62)
Unfunded vested liabilities         TJVPL/A             —1.99
                                                        (0.90)
Leverage                            DEBT/A              —0.39          —0.2w
                                                        (o.3)             (0.22)

Research                            RD/A                11.06             7.90
                                                        (1.87)            (1.25)

Beta                                BETA                 0.08              0.07
                                                        (0.15)            (o.oL)

Constant                              C                 —1.38             1.82
                                                        (1.9)             (1.30)

Sample                                N                   233              234

                                                         0J40             0.55
                                           TABLE 3.1

The effect of     interest) rate changes on monthly       stock returns reflected tYrcnrr'i
pension assets and liabilities as well as fror. loss tern debt.




Equation                             (1)                (2)


Unfunded vested                  30.6                  29.2            29.1
pension liabilities             (lO.L)             (lO.U)             (0.1fl)
x 11B



Long tern debt                  —8.05              —T.9T
x                              (3.2)              (3.3)              (2.n5)



AE                              —13.0                  13.2            86.1
                                (2.10)             (2.09)             (6.Bb)



Constant                        0.012
                                (0.000707)


Firm Effects                    no                 yes                no



'onth   Effects                 no                 no                 yes


Sample                           12,563            12,563             12,563


                                 l.93              l.97°              29.9°1
