                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN HUMAN CAPITAL:
                 EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR INDIA

                                           Robert T. Jensen

                                        Working Paper 16021
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16021


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




I would like to thank Dora Costa, Pascaline Dupas, Nolan Miller, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Mai Nguyen,
Jeff Nugent, Emily Oster, John Strauss and seminar participants at Berkeley, Columbia, the University
of Chicago and Yale for valuable comments and discussions. Financial support from the Center for
Aging and Health Research at the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Women and Public
Policy Program, the Dean's Research Fund at and the William F. Milton Fund at Harvard University
is gratefully acknowledged. I would also like to thank Shubhashis Gangopadhyay and the India Development
Foundation for hosting me during the initial stages of this project. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Robert T. Jensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Economic Opportunities and Gender Differences in Human Capital: Experimental Evidence
for India
Robert T. Jensen
NBER Working Paper No. 16021
May 2010
JEL No. I0,J16,O12

                                              ABSTRACT

Gender differences in health and education are a concern for a number of developing countries. While
standard theory predicts human capital should respond to market returns, social norms (e.g., disapproval
of women working outside the home) may weaken or even sever this link for girls. Though many studies
have examined the link between women's wages or labor force participation and investment in girls,
two significant problems are the possibility of omitted variables bias and reverse causality, and difficulty
in identifying which of several mechanisms (returns, bargaining power, income, etc.) link the two.
To overcome these problems, we provided three years of recruiting services to help young women
in randomly selected Indian villages get jobs in the business process outsourcing industry. Girls in
treatment villages were more likely to be in school and had greater measured BMI. We argue that
the design of the experiment (providing opportunities almost exclusively for young, unmarried women
rather than current mothers) allows us to rule out that mechanisms other than increases in the returns
explain our results.


Robert T. Jensen
UCLA School of Public Affairs
3250 School of Public Affairs Building
Box 951656
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
and NBER
robertjensen@ucla.edu
                                         I. INTRODUCTION


        There has long been considerable concern over the striking gender disparities in human
capital outcomes in a number of developing countries, particularly in Asia. For example, in
India, the female adult literacy rate is only 48%, compared to 73% for men. And mortality rates
in infancy and childhood are 40-50% greater for girls than boys, primarily due to inadequate
provision of nutrition and medical care (Chen, Huq and D'Souza 1981, Sen and Sengupta 1983,
Das Gupta 1987 and Behrman et al. 1988).1 The excess mortality of girls contributes to the
problem of highly masculine sex ratios and "missing women" that has received considerable
attention (Visaria 1969, Miller 1981, Sen 1990).
        A number of studies have focused on the returns to human capital or the potential
economic contributions of women, particularly in agriculture, as an explanation for these gender
disparities (Boserup 1970, Bardhan 1974, Miller 1981, Rosenzweig and Schultz 1982, Foster and
Rosenzweig 2009). In varying forms, this argument suggests that human capital investments in
girls are lower where the returns are lower. However, in many developing countries, the link
between human capital returns and outcomes is more ambiguous than would arise from a simple
application of the standard human capital framework, due to cultural practices and norms. For
example, Dyson and Moore (1983) and Foster and Rosenzweig (2009) note that the practice of
patrilocal exogamy (i.e., marriage between individuals from different villages, with women
leaving their birth household to live with their husband's family) means that the returns to
investing in girls' human capital do not accrue to parents, leaving them with less incentive to do
so.2 In addition, in many societies there are strong social prohibitions against women working
outside of the home (Boserup 1970, Dube and Palriwala 1990, Field, Jayachandran and Pande
2010, Goldin 1990, 1995 and Mammen and Paxson 2000). In this setting, the social costs to a
household of having a woman work may outweigh the potential income gains. Thus, even if
parents invested in girls purely for altruistic reasons (rather than for personal gains), girls'
schooling would still be insensitive to the market returns if women do not work. This is not to
say that parents will not invest in their daughters at all (such as for non-market returns); it is


1
  See Strauss and Thomas (1995), Behrman (1997) and Haddad et al. (1997) for reviews.
2
  Though they may still invest in girls for other reasons, such as: altruism; the expectation of transfers
from daughters even though they leave the household; or if the marriage market compensates parents for
higher human capital daughters (Behrman et al. 1999, Foster and Rosenzweig 2009).

                                                                                                        1
simply that if women do not work, investments in girls should not be affected by changes in the
market returns.3 In both examples (patrilocal exogamy and social prohibitions against women
working), cultural norms or practices can weaken and possibly even sever the link between
market returns and investments in girls.
       Despite the potential theoretical ambiguity, a large literature has documented that greater
female labor force participation or wages are indeed correlated with improved human capital and
survival outcomes for girls (Kishor 1993, 1995, Murthi, Guio and Drèze 1995, Agnihotri,
Palmer-Jones and Parikh 2002, Rosenzweig and Shultz 1982 and Qian 2008). However, two
important factors make it difficult to conclude that it is the increased future earnings potential
that leads parents to invest more in their daughters. First, most of these studies use cross-
sectional data, and concerns about omitted variables bias (areas where women work differ in
many ways from areas where women do not work) or reverse causality (higher human capital
women are more productive and therefore earn higher wages or are more likely to be in the labor
force) make it difficult to draw a causal interpretation from the results, as noted by Sen (1990)
and Foster and Rosenzweig (2009).4 Three studies that attempt to address these concerns are
Rosenzweig and Schultz (1982), who use variation in rainfall as a determinant of women's
earnings opportunities, Qian (2008), who exploits a policy reform in China that differentially
affected the value of traditionally male and female crops, and Foster and Rosenzweig (2009)
who use land prices and yields as measures of expected future technical change and productivity.
       Second, most studies cannot specifically identify the mechanism(s) linking current
employment rates or wages among adult women to investment in contemporaneously young
girls. Beyond expected returns to human capital (i.e., current economic conditions for women
reflect returns daughters will face in the future), there are many other potential channels. First,
greater earnings opportunities for adult women may increase a mother's bargaining power within
the household (Thomas 1990, Schultz 1990; see Strauss and Thomas 1995 and Duflo 2005 for
surveys). If women prefer to discriminate less against their daughters than their husbands do, that
increased bargaining power could result in greater investments in girls. Second, increases in

3
  Behrman et al. (1999) and Foster and Rosenzweig (2009) argue that even if women don't work, their
education may respond to market returns due to greater demand (and lower dowries) for more educated
wives, who produce higher human capital sons. However, if we increase the potential returns for women
only (as in the present case) and women do not work, the marriage market should not respond in this way.
4
  Foster and Rosenzweig (2009) also point out that under patrilocal exogamy, it is the labor market
conditions in the villages girls will marry into, not those they are born into, that should matter.

                                                                                                      2
women's employment opportunities, all else equal, increase household income. If investment in
girls is a normal or luxury good, then increases in income may benefit girls (Schultz 2001).
Third, employment of adult women outside the household may increase the value of daughters,
as they substitute for the mother in household production activities such as child care or cooking.
This may increase the incentive for parents to invest in their daughters, both just to ensure they
survive and can help in the household (Murthi, Guio and Drèze 1995), and because it may make
them more productive at those tasks.5 Fourth, by raising the opportunity cost of time, women's
earnings opportunities may lower fertility, and girls in smaller families may gain more than boys
when they compete with fewer siblings for limited family resources.6
        These mechanisms all yield very different implications for understanding both the root
causes of gender bias as well as the policy instruments that will most effectively address the
problem.7 Yet, most studies cannot identify the underlying mechanism. Qian (2008) provides
some arguments that bargaining power of women might explain, at least in part, why increases in
the value of women's crops leads to less male-skewed sex ratios in China, but she also notes that
it isn't possible to explicitly or directly test this hypothesis against alternatives.
        In this paper, we use a randomized intervention in India to ask whether increases in
employment opportunities for women lead to greater human capital investments in girls. The
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) industry in India has grown rapidly over the past decade,
creating a significant number of new, high-paying opportunities, particularly for women.
However, because it was such a new sector, awareness of these jobs and knowledge of how to

5
  Of course, the additional time demands of household production could instead lower girls' schooling.
6
  Fifth, if a woman's husband, older children or in-laws take over child care when she enters the labor
market, and some of these individuals have lower preferences for discrimination against girls, then
women working may lead to gains for girls (women may have stronger reasons to favor sons because they
are often forced out of their home or lose their land to their husband's family when he dies unless she has
a son (Agarwal 1994, Chen 2000)). Finally, where women have more employment opportunities, they in
effect have an insurance mechanism to cope with the unemployment, disability or death of their husbands,
as well as a source of income to save for old age and possibly even a pension. If one reason sons are
favored in the provision of human capital is that they serve a similar insurance or old age support role for
their parents, greater economic opportunities for women weakens the need to do so.
7
  For example, if bargaining power explains the correlation between women's employment and investment
in girls, then policies aimed at strengthening women's bargaining power, such as reform or enforcement
of divorce laws or strengthening women's property rights, might be favored over efforts to promote
women's employment. If it is instead an income effect, then the best policies are those that promote
income growth, rather than specifically promoting women's opportunities. Similarly, efforts to directly
address fertility or access to old age, unemployment or disability insurance would be favored if those
mechanisms are the relevant ones.

                                                                                                          3
access them was very limited, especially outside of the urban core and among less educated
households. Our intervention provided three years of BPO recruiting services to women in
randomly selected rural villages. By connecting women to experienced recruiters, the
intervention was designed to increase awareness of and access to these new opportunities.8
        Our goal is to test whether the increased employment opportunities for women lead to
greater human capital investments in girls. The study offers two key advantages. First, the
intervention provided random assignment of potential employment opportunities (or, awareness
of and access to these opportunities). This allows us to overcome potentially serious problems of
omitted variables bias and reverse causality, and results in a weaker identifying assumption and a
stronger case for causality than in the cross-sectional and natural experiment studies listed above.
        Second, the intervention allows us to isolate returns as the mechanism linking
employment opportunities and human capital investments in our case, eliminating the alternative
mechanisms identified above. All of the non-returns mechanisms listed above in effect focus on
the impact of employment of current mothers on investments in their daughters, such as a mother
having more say over household decisions when she earns a greater share of household income,
or changes in the value of the daughter to the household when her mother works. However, our
intervention created opportunities primarily for younger, unmarried women, since most
employers in this sector strongly favor this group (Ng and Mitter 2005) and because most of the
jobs require a secondary school degree, English language skills and familiarity with computers,
all of which are uncommon among older women. Further, in our project area very few married
women, especially those with young children, work outside the household (much less commute
long distances or migrate, which would be required for these urban-based jobs), so these
opportunities would not apply to them, but instead apply in the future to their daughters. Thus,
our experiment enhanced the future returns for currently young girls, leaving the employment
opportunities for older women (current mothers) unchanged. This design in effect shuts off all
links driven by changes in the employment of current mothers.
        Using panel data spanning a three year period, we find that the BPO recruiting and
placement services increased employment among young women, with no effect for older women
or men of any age (as per the design of the experiment). Girls aged 5-15 in villages that received


8
  In this respect, the paper is similar to Jensen (2010), who finds that providing information on the returns
to schooling increases educational attainment among boys in the Dominican Republic.

                                                                                                           4
the recruiting services were 3 to 5 percentage points more likely to be in school and experienced
an increase in Body Mass Index, reflecting greater nutrition and/or medical care. However, there
was no net gain in height. For boys, there was no change in any of these measures.
       Three other studies have documented changes similar to those found here. Munshi and
Rosenzweig (2006) find that enrollment in English language schools increased for girls (but not
boys) in response to increases in the returns to English language education in Bombay, driven
principally by the expansion of the financial sector and other white collar industries. More
closely related, Oster and Millet (2010) use school-level panel data to show that towns in
southern India that saw the introduction of a call center experienced large increases in school
enrolment for both boys and girls. Finally, Shastry (2010) finds that the information technology
sector grew more rapidly in areas of India where English is more widely spoken, and that in turn
those areas experienced increased school enrolment. The results we find are broadly consistent
with these other studies. As noted, the key advantages of the present study are the weaker
identifying assumption due to randomization, and an intervention that allows us to isolate returns
as the mechanism linking the new opportunities for women to investments in girls.
       The results have important policy implications. With respect to the significant concern
over gender differences in health and education and skewed sex ratios in many low income
countries, many authors have suggested that cultural barriers prevent investment in girls, and that
change will not be possible without social or cultural change. Correspondingly, most policy
efforts have emphasized awareness raising, and information and media strategies to promote the
status of girls, i.e., efforts to act on any social or cultural component of bias (Croll 2000). Our
results suggest that the labor market plays an important role and that efforts to expand economic
opportunities for women can have significant impacts. Our results also provide insight into the
underlying causes of poor education and health for both boys and girls more generally in
developing countries. Much of the literature has focused on poverty and credit constraints, or
"supply side" factors such as distance or access to schools or health clinics, costs, staff training,
etc. While these factors are certainly important, since our experiment changed nothing except
awareness of the returns to human capital, our results show that there are important "demand-
side" constraints as well. This suggests that low demand, driven by low returns, may contribute
to low human capital attainment in poor countries.



                                                                                                   5
       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the experimental
design and Section III discusses the data and empirical strategy. Section IV shows the results and
Section V concludes.


                                   II. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
II. A. The BPO Sector in India
       The Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) industry is a broad umbrella covering a range
of activities and "back office" services. The most highly publicized of these jobs are call centers
(e.g., customer service, taking reservations), but the industry is much larger, and also includes
data entry and management, claims processing, secretarial services, transcription and online
technical support, as well as more skilled activities such as accounting or software development.
While the industry has been around in some form for decades, recent technological changes in
telecommunications and networking infrastructure (for example, the development and global
deployment of fiber optic cable networks) have made it both possible and relatively inexpensive
to provide these services remotely to clients around the world.9 This in turn lead to dramatic
growth in the BPO export sector in many low-wage countries, particularly those like India where
English is spoken. BPO growth in India was also facilitated by regulatory changes allowing
greater foreign investment in the telecommunications sector. Overall, India's BPO sector
experienced 30-40% average annual growth rates from 2000 to 2008 (NASSCOM 2009).
       Within the BPO sector, particularly call centers, there appears to be a preference for
female workers. A study of 2,500 call centers in 17 countries found that on average, 69% of
frontline call center workers are women (Holman, Batt and Holtgrewe 2007). Though the rate
was closer to 45% in India, this is still high in comparison to the sex ratio of employment in most
other industries. The study reported several reasons employers preferred women, including a
more pleasant voice and demeanor when interacting with customers, and the belief that women
were more trustworthy than men.10
       Thus, technological and regulatory changes in the BPO sector in India created a sharp
and fairly sudden increase in the demand for female workers, particularly those with secondary

9
   Much of the BPO sector is export-driven. For example, in India, almost three-quarters of call centers
serve international markets (Holman, Batt and Holtgrewe 2007).
10
   It is also possible that because women have fewer alternative employment opportunities than men, they
can be paid less or treated worse, without risk they will leave the job.

                                                                                                      6
school degrees or higher and English language skills. In order to meet this demand, there was a
surge in recruiting activities, including through newly-formed, specialized private contractors
and subcontractors who would seek out and screen potential employees. And because the BPO
sector is strongly geographically concentrated in India, with 95% of employment focused around
seven major cities, recruiting was fairly geographically concentrated as well, leading to large,
localized increases in economic opportunities for women.
       In general, BPO jobs are fairly well-paid in relative terms. Starting salaries with no
experience often ranged from 5,000−10,000 Rupees (Rs.) per month in 2003 (about $U.S.
110−220, 1 Rs.≈0.022 $U.S.), which was about 2-10 times the average starting pay for women
outside of the BPO sector. Salaries also often increase rapidly with experience, whereas many
other jobs have relatively flat compensation profiles.


II. B. The Intervention
       Though the BPO sector created a large number of employment opportunities for women,
there remained significant gaps in awareness about those jobs and how to access them, precisely
because the industry was so new. This was even more pronounced outside the urban centers
where these jobs were located (in fact, in our 2003 baseline survey of rural households described
below, no one was employed in this sector, including any members or children of members
having temporarily or permanently left the household). Our experiment was designed to both
increase awareness of these jobs and to make it easier for qualified women to get them.
       We hired eight BPO recruiters (5 women and 3 men), all with at least two years
experience overall and at least 6 months specifically recruiting women (either working directly
for recruiting firms or as freelancers). We drew the recruiters from Delhi, one of the most
important cities for the BPO sector. Using maps, the recruiters were asked to identify the specific
areas within and outside of Delhi they had visited for recruiting, and then to define the
approximate areas outside of Delhi beyond which they believed BPO recruiters would be
unlikely to visit due solely to their relative distance from the city and/or their population size.
This allowed us to establish a list of where awareness of and access to BPO employment
opportunities was likely to be lower, not because there were no qualified women, but simply
because the cost per potential recruit was high enough that recruiters chose to visit other areas
instead. From this list we drew 80 treatment and 80 control villages at random (most located

                                                                                                 7
approximately 50-150km from Delhi) from the states of Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh. This study region includes much of the area where gender disparities are concentrated
in India today. Haryana and Punjab in particular have the most masculine sex ratios in India, and
appear to be the only two states where sex ratios continue to worsen rather than improve
(Dasgupta, Chung and Shuzhou 2009). And our sample includes some of the districts with the
most extreme incidence of gender bias. For example, if we rank India's 593 districts by the sex
ratio of children aged 0-6 in the 2001 census, our sample includes the 3rd (Kurukshetra, with a
ratio of 770 girls per 100 boys), 10th (Srangur, 784) and 22nd (Karnal, 808) worst districts.
        For the treatment villages, between December 2003 and February 2004, a randomly
assigned recruiter would visit and make a small introduction at schools and to local leaders,
announcing that they would be visiting the village at a designated date a few weeks later to
provide information on employment opportunities in the BPO sector. They also contacted and
worked with local leaders, government officials and NGOs to advertise the sessions.
         Within a few weeks, the recruiters would visit the village and set up an information and
recruiting session. The sessions were open to women only.11 All women could attend, but it was
made clear that the job opportunities were primarily for women with a secondary school degree,
and preferably some English language ability and experience with computers. This in effect ruled
out a vast majority of women over the age of 25; for example, in our data only 8 percent of
women aged 26-50 have completed secondary school.
        The sessions were held in a range of facilities including schools and NGO or government
offices, and typically lasted from 4 to 6 hours. The sessions drew a great deal of local interest
and attendance was generally high. The recruiters did not have a fixed script, but were required
to follow a specific organization. In particular, after introducing themselves, the recruiters
provided: an overview of the BPO sector and the specific types of jobs and level of
compensation available; information on the names of specific firms currently or frequently
looking for workers; strategies for how to apply for jobs (how to create and submit resumes, plus
lists of websites and phone numbers); interview skills lessons and tips; mock interviews;

11
   In a second set of 80 treatment villages, we provided recruiting services for both men and women. This
treatment was designed to test both whether a "gender neutral" increase in economic opportunities would
still benefit girls, as well as a theory of parental investment in children in the face of imperfect
commitment. The latter requires a greater theoretical and empirical treatment of the parental decision
making process, and is left to a companion paper (Jensen and Miller 2010). Here we simply note that the
human capital gains for girls in this second set of treatment villages is very similar to what is found here.

                                                                                                           8
assessment of English language skills; and a question and answer session. The recruiters were
required to emphasize that the jobs were competitive, so they were not in any way guaranteeing
employment.
        One and two years after the initial treatment (i.e., December 2004 to February 2005 and
December 2005 to January 2006), we provided "booster shots," with the recruiters again visiting
the same treatment villages and providing the same session. After each of the three sessions, the
recruiters left their personal contact information so that any woman could follow up for
additional information or assistance, at no cost. The recruiters were contracted to provide
ongoing support for anyone from the designated villages. Thus, the intervention consisted
(exclusively) of three in-depth sessions and three years of continuous placement support.
        We wish to note that our goal is not to test whether recruiting services as a policy
instrument can help address gender disparities in human capital. While it is certainly worthwhile
to make sure that information on economic opportunities is widely available, our intervention
does not actually create any new jobs for women. The women in our study may simply get jobs
at the expense of other women, with no net effect on women's employment overall. 12 The goal of
the experiment is to supply exogenous variation in employment opportunities to test whether the
change in potential returns influences household investment in girls.
        One important aspect of the intervention worth highlighting is that the employment
opportunities were white collar. While the distinction is commonly overlooked in the literature,
for women the distinction may be particularly important. Boserup (1970), Costa (2000), Goldin
(1990, 1995, 2006) and Mammen and Paxson (2000) argue that there may be less of a social
stigma associated with women working in white collar jobs. These jobs are considered safer and
"cleaner" than manual labor such as factory work.13 This may have particular relevance for India,

12
   Though if growth of the sector and competition with other BPO firms internationally was constrained
by a shortage of skilled labor, or if providing information to a broader pool of potential applicants
improves the quality of the worker-job match or increases overall productivity in the sector, net
employment could potentially increase.
13
   Though there are some respects in which BPO jobs are considered less appropriate for women,
particularly in rural areas. For example, women may have to commute for these jobs, and parents or
husbands might perceive risks in women traveling alone. For more remote areas, taking one of these jobs
might require migrating to a city and possibly living on their own, which parents may not want. Finally,
some BPO jobs, particularly those in call centers servicing daytime hours in the United States, require
working and commuting and night, which might be perceived as even less safe for women. Thus, some
households would not want any female members to hold one of these jobs, and we expect they would
therefore not be affected by the treatment (either in terms of employment or human capital).

                                                                                                      9
since an important aspect of the caste system is the designation that certain jobs, which are
supposed to be set aside for "untouchables" outside the caste system, are considered "impure" or
"polluting." Another relevant distinction is that women have a comparative advantage in this
type of employment, since it does not require physical strength. We would therefore not
necessarily generalize our findings to increases in the returns in agriculture (as in Foster and
Rosenzweig 2009) or the blue-collar sector such as manufacturing (as in Atkin 2009). However,
we feel the experiment is relevant for understanding the consequences of changes in women's
employment for several reasons. First, the Indian economy, along with that of most other
countries, is shifting towards the service sector, where white collar employment predominates.
Services are the most rapidly growing sector in India, currently accounting for over 60% of GDP
(up from 26-28% in the 1980s), with the IT sector alone comprising 8% of GDP (up from 1%
just a decade ago). Second, throughout the world, much of the modern history of women's
increasing paid labor force participation (particularly for married women) is driven by the white
collar, service or clerical sectors (Boserup 1970, Goldin 1990, 1995, 2006, Costa 2000, Mammen
and Paxson 2000). It was only in these sectors that jobs were considered to be acceptable or
respectable for women. In fact, our experiment relating to information technology may be
particularly apt in light of the historical evidence; for example, Goldin (2006) notes that the rise
in female labor force participation in the United States in the early 20th century was due to
growth in office and clerical jobs arising in part from innovations in information technology.



                           III. DATA AND EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
A. Survey Information
       We conducted a baseline household survey during September and October of 2003 for
each of the 160 treatment and control villages. The survey was conducted by students at the
Management Development Institute, a business school outside of Delhi. In each of the villages,
we worked with a local official to draw up a list of households, and randomly selected 20
households per village. The sampling was conducted independently of the intervention, and thus
the sample contains some individuals that attended the recruiting sessions and some that did not.
       The survey consisted of a household questionnaire and an adult questionnaire. The
household questionnaire included questions on demographic and socioeconomic characteristics
(age, sex, and education of all members, expenditures, etc.). We also asked for demographic and

                                                                                                 10
socioeconomic characteristics of all household members or children of members who have either
temporarily or permanently left the household. The adult questionnaire was asked of all
individuals aged 18 and older. This questionnaire included information on norms and
expectations (work, marriage, dowry, old age support, etc.), the most relevant of which are
described below.
       Enumerators also weighed and measured the height of all household members aged 5 and
older.14 If someone was not home at the time of the survey, enumerators scheduled up to three
return visits to take these measurements, and would also visit other locations if the person lived
away from home. As a result, we were able to get weight and height measurements for 98% of
youths aged 5-15 (who will be the focus of our analysis) in round 1 and 99% in round 2. These
data are particularly valuable because they are objective and thus more likely to accurately
reflect changes in nutrition and health care provided to children.
       A second round, follow-up survey with the same households was conducted in September
and October of 2006. With a few exceptions noted below, the survey instrument for the second
round was the same as the first, and enumerators again weighed and measured all household
members aged 5 and older. We also tracked, and where possible measured, all individuals who
left home between the rounds (such as for work or marriage).
       Thus, overall, the project time-line was as follows. The baseline survey was conducted in
August and September of 2003. The first recruiting sessions were carried out from December
2003 to February 2004. The follow-up, booster-shot recruiting sessions were carried out from
December 2004 to February 2005 and December 2005 to February 2006. The second round
survey was conducted in September and October of 2006. Recruiting assistance was available
continuously from the time of the first session through the second round survey (and one year
beyond that as well), spanning nearly 3 years.
       Before turning to the data, we discuss attrition. Our analysis will focus on children aged
5-15 (in round 2), since most of these children will still live at home and therefore be measured.
It is therefore important to examine attrition (or non-measurement in general) for this group, and


14
   Enumerators used consumer-grade bathroom scales and marked boards or measuring tape, and were
trained to approximate as closely as possible the protocols in the 1988 National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) III manual. While the absence of a fixed setting and trained
professionals likely introduced imprecision, the errors should be uncorrelated with the treatment and
therefore should not bias our regression results.

                                                                                                  11
whether it is correlated with the treatment. One specific concern is the possibility that the
intervention affected whether children left home due to work, school, marriage or death (all of
which we gathered data on).15 As noted, we gathered information about children of household
members who had left home, and where possible tracked and weighed and measured them.16 In
our sample, the overall fraction of 5-15 year olds living away from home at baseline is less than
1 percent. Additionally, slightly less than 1 percent of children living at home could not be
measured (for reasons including infirmity or temporary absence from the home). Total attrition
for children aged 2-12 at baseline (and thus 5-15 at round 2) was 4.6 percent, about 3 percent of
which was attrition of entire households (i.e., no one from the round 1 household was present at
the same residence in round 2).17 Total attrition among girls 5-12 in the treatment villages was
4.7 percent, compared to 4.5 percent for the control villages. Though the difference in attrition
for the treatment and control groups is small, it is possible there were large but offsetting effects
of the treatment on attrition, and it is difficult to determine the possible bias this may introduce.
Below, we assess the sensitivity of our results to assumptions on the outcomes of attriters.


B. Descriptive Statistics
        Table I reports summary statistics for the full sample and separately by treatment status,
as well as tests of treatment-control balance in baseline characteristics. The variables overall
appear balanced between the control and the treatment groups. Formal tests suggest that
randomization was successful: the p-value for the F–test that baseline characteristics jointly
predict treatment is 0.71 and variable-by-variable individual tests cannot reject that the means are
the same for treatment and control groups for almost all variables (column 4).
        The table provides evidence of gender differences in education. The average adult
woman's years of schooling is 1.8, compared to 3.8 for men. Similarly, only 74% of girls aged 7-


15
   The expected bias is difficult to predict. If the intervention lead to delayed marriage for girls with the
greatest pre-treatment human capital (since they would benefit the most from staying in school longer to
get a BPO job), the sample of non-attriting treatment girls will have greater human capital on average
than the non-attriting control girls even if the treatment had no effect (though marriage is very uncommon
for girls under age 15). Alternatively, the higher human capital children might be sent away to better
schools because of the new economic opportunities, leaving the non-attriting treatment children with
lower human capital on average than the non-attriting control children, again just due to selection.
16
   We were able to locate and weigh and measure 62% of children 5-15 who left home between rounds.
17
   For attriting households, we chose replacement households at random from the original population lists.
Below we will use only the data from the panel, but the results are robust to including the replacements.

                                                                                                          12
15 are currently enrolled in school, compared to 87% of boys (all enrollment data were verified
by contacting schools that students said they attended).
        Since weight and height vary considerably over the 5-15 age range, we computed z-
scores for height-for-age (HFA) and Body Mass Index(BMI)-for-age (BFA) using the age- and
sex-specific standards for school-aged children and adolescents developed by the World Health
Organization (de Onis et al. 2007). These measures are considered the appropriate indicators of
growth and development for children aged 5-19 and reflect the provision of nutrition and health
care.18 The table shows that children in the sample are undernourished, with very low weight
(BMI) and height relative to international norms. On average, children aged 5-15 are 1.2 to 1.3
standard deviations below their age- and sex-specific reference median BMI, and 2 standard
deviations below the reference median height. The BMI and height data taken on their own do
not however indicate any differential between boys and girls. This somewhat surprising result is
also found in other data sets; for example, in the 3 rounds of the National Family Health Survey,
there is almost no difference in anthropometric measures for boys and girls under the age of 5
(IIPS 1995, IIPS and ORC Macro 2000, IIPS and Macro International 2007),19 despite the fact
that mortality rates for girls are significantly higher in this age range and a large literature
documents differential treatment of boys and girls. There are several reasons why anthropometric
measures may not detect gender differences, and it is beyond the scope of the present paper to
resolve this issue.20 However, for our analysis, we will examine changes in BFA and HFA,
which should reflect changes in the provision of nutrition and/or medical care.
        The table also provides evidence about norms affecting investment in girls. In particular,
adults aged 18 and older were asked whether they thought it was acceptable for women to work
for pay away from home at various stages in their lives: before they are married; after they are
married but before they have children; after they have children, but before those children have
gone to school; after all their children are in school; and after their children have left the
household. Overall, most people do not support women working for pay away from home. Only


18
   The WHO also computes weight-for-age standards, but only up to age 10 because it is not considered
an informative measure for older children (de Onis et al. 2007), so we do not use it here.
19
   For example, in the 2005/6 survey measuring children 5 and under, the mean height-for-age, weight-
for-height and weight-for-age z-scores are identical for boys and girls (-1.9, -1.0 and -1.8, respectively).
20
   For example, while lower nutrition should lead to girls being lighter and shorter for a given age, this
may be offset by lower nutrition also causing death for the least healthy children. Deaton (2007) discusses
the potential offsetting impacts of these "scarring" vs. "selection" effects.

                                                                                                         13
17 percent of adults believe it is appropriate for a woman to work for pay before marriage. This
declines to 7 percent after she is married but before she has children. Not shown in the table, this
declines even further to 4 percent when her children are not yet in school and 5 percent after all
children are in school, then increases to 14 percent after all children have left the household.
       Adults were also asked whether they think it is appropriate for adults to accept financial
support from their sons and daughters in old age. The differences are striking. While almost all
adults (97 percent) say it is appropriate to accept support from sons, only 4 percent say it is
appropriate to accept support from daughters.
       Thus, under prevailing norms/expectations, the incentive to educate girls may be quite
low, especially compared to boys. While parents may still invest in their daughters for non-
financial reasons, these investments may not respond to increases in market returns. Of course,
these are just subjective, self-reports, which may deviate from true beliefs or practice in either
direction. We view these data as simply suggestive, and consistent with the large anthropological
and ethnographic literature.


C. Empirical Strategy
       For each human capital measure, we present three specifications. First, we regress round
2 outcomes for children (aged 5-15 for weight-for-age and BMI-for-age, and 7-15 for schooling,
since most children do not enroll until age 6 or 7) on an indicator for residing in a treatment
village, separately for boys and girls: Yi =β0 +β1 Treatmenti +εi , where Treatment is a dummy
equal to one if the child, i, lives in a village that was exposed to the recruiting intervention. We
limit the sample to children under 15 to minimize selective attrition, given the increasing
likelihood of leaving the household for work or marriage after this age. Limiting the sample in
this way also means that we are examining changes in human capital (e.g., BMI) not for those
individuals who got placed in one of the BPO jobs, but younger children for whom the recruiting
sessions represent future economic opportunities, which their parents might respond to now.
       The second specification adds controls that are baseline predictors of human capital,
Yi =β0 +β1 Treatmenti + 𝛾𝑖 𝑍𝑖 + εi (parent's education, log of family expenditure per capita,
family size and child age). Our third specification uses the change in outcomes between rounds 1
and 2, rather than round 2 levels, ∆Yi =β0 +β1 Treatmenti +εi , for children aged 5-12 in round 1
(and thus 8-15 in round 2). While the three specifications should yield similar estimates of the

                                                                                                   14
effect of the treatment, they will in general not be identical. For example, the samples they cover
will be slightly different, since the changes specification cannot include children 5-7 in round 2
(because they will have been 2-4 in round 1, and thus not weighed or measured) or any children
not measured in round 1 for reasons such as absence from the household. Further, although
randomization should result in treatment and control groups being similar across all variables, in
any particular sample there can be small baseline differences, and the regressions with controls
or using changes will capture some of these differences.
        For all specifications, we estimate linear regressions regardless of whether the outcomes
are continuous or discrete, but limited dependent variable models yield nearly identical results.
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the village level.
        Since we are considering the impact of the treatment on a number of outcomes, in
addition to presenting the results for each individual outcome, we present two other statistics.
The first is the mean effect of the treatment across outcomes, computed using the methodology
described in Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007). This approach standardizes all variables to mean
zero and unit standard deviation and redefines them where necessary so that a higher value
constitutes an improvement. The average effect is computed as the unweighted average of the
coefficient on the treatment variable for each of the standardized outcomes. We also provide F-
tests of the null hypothesis that the effect of the treatment is jointly zero for all outcomes.


                                             IV. RESULTS
A. Employment
        The recruiters reported placing a significant number of women in jobs in the treatment
villages (about 900 over the three year period). Of course, some of these women might have
gotten jobs in this sector or other sectors even without the recruiters, which we can net out
through comparison to the control group. To assess the impact of the treatment on women's
employment with our survey data, we regress an indicator for whether an individual works for
pay in a non-family enterprise21 in the second survey round on an indicator for living in a

21
   We prefer this measure over BPO-only employment for several reasons. First, though we gathered
detailed job data (via open-ended responses on occupation, industry and employer), defining the exact
boundaries of the sector is difficult (just matching which women in our sample got a job from one of our
recruiters would not capture the employment gain since some control and treatment women could have
gotten these jobs without recruiters). Further, to the extent that the recruiters provided job search skills
that helped women get jobs in other sectors (ex., bank teller), we would want to count these gains as well.

                                                                                                         15
treatment village. As noted above, employment data were gathered for all household members
and children of members, including those not living at home (either temporarily or permanently),
so we include these individuals in the sample as well. Since the treatment was focused only on
younger women, we split the sample into age and sex categories.
        Table II shows the results. In villages that received the recruiting treatment, paid
employment was 2.4 percentage points higher for women aged 18−24. The effect is large when
compared to the Round 2 control group mean for women of this age of about 21 percent.22 As
expected given the experimental design, there was no change in paid employment for women
aged 25−44 or 45 and older. The coefficients for these two groups are extremely small and not
statistically significant. Similarly, there is no impact on employment for men of any age, again
consistent with the experimental design. Thus overall, the recruiting intervention increased
employment specifically for the set of younger women it was targeted towards, and only those
women.23 It is these gains that we predict may have effects on investments in girls.


B. Effect on Human Capital
        Table III shows the effects of the treatment on education and anthropometric measures.
The first set of columns shows the specification where the dependent variable is Round 2
outcomes with no additional controls, the middle columns add baseline controls, and the last
columns examine changes in outcomes between the two rounds. Girls (top panel) were about 5
percentage points more likely to be enrolled in school in the treatment villages. The coefficient is
robust across the three specifications, and statistically significant at the 1 percent level in all


Finally, if we focus only on BPO jobs, we could overestimate the impact of the treatment since some
women may just shift to this sector from, say, other white collar jobs, with no net gain in employment.
22
   It is unlikely that the jobs gained in treatment villages came at the expense of women in the control
villages. The pool of women competing for these jobs is large, so the loss of jobs within our set of control
villages is likely to be very small; and since few women in rural areas get these jobs, any losses are likely
to be found in urban areas, which are outside our sample. Though the interpretation would largely be the
same in the face of such effects; observing human capital reductions for girls where job opportunities for
women decline would still show that returns affect investments (unless we believe there are asymmetric
effects where girls are harmed when opportunities decline but do not gain when they increase).
23
   The intervention could have lead to employment gains for men or older women if those who attended
the sessions shared the information or helped recruit others once they got a job. However, most older
women are married and do not work, have too little education or do not speak English. There are several
reasons why men's employment may not have changed: men may have already had access to other high-
education jobs; BPO employers may also have preferred to hire women; and caste-based job networks
may have limited men's occupational mobility, as found in Munshi and Rosenzweig (2006).

                                                                                                          16
cases. The effects are large, representing about 6-7 percent gains for the treatment group relative
to the control group (control group means are presented at the bottom of each column), and close
about 40 percent of the baseline boy-girl gap in enrollment (Table I).
        Columns 2, 5 and 8 show that the treatment also resulted in an average increase in BMI-
for-age z-score of about 0.20-0.30 for girls, again significant at the 1 percent level in all
specifications. The effect is fairly large, particularly relative to the control group mean deficit of
1.3; the treatment closed about 15-20 percent of the BMI gap between our sample and the well-
nourished WHO reference population. Finally, columns 3, 6 and 9 show that point estimates of
the effect of the treatment on height-for-age are positive, but very small and not statistically
significant in any of the specifications.24
        Overall, we find positive point effects of the treatment on human capital outcomes for all
three measures, but only two of the three are statistically significant. The bottom rows of the
panel provide a summary assessment of the effects. With both the Kling-Liebman-Katz average
effect and the F-test, we can reject the hypothesis that the treatment had no effect across the set
of human capital measures for girls at the one percent level or better for each of the three
empirical specifications.
         The bottom panel of the table shows the effect of the treatment for boys. The coefficients
are small across all three human capital measures in all specifications, and none are statistically
significant. The absence of an effect for boys is consistent with the intervention having increased
the expected returns for girls only. However, it is perhaps surprising that parents were able to
increase investments in girls without decreasing investment in boys. This suggests that poverty
and credit constraints may not be as important as "demand constraints" in limiting investment in
girls, i.e., parents may be providing little to girls not because they can't afford to, but because
they don't find it optimal to, due to low expected returns.
        Of course, we are only able to measure short-run effects, and the longer run effects may
be greater or smaller. For example, if a girl is provided better nutrition or health care for more
than three years, there may be a greater cumulative effect on weight or height. Also, our
anthropometric results focus on children aged 5 to 15, and the effects of nutrition or health care
may be greater for infants (Russell and Rhoads 2008). Alternatively, it is possible we overstate

24
   The medical literature suggests that nutrition appears to have little effect on height after the age of 2,
including any possible "catch up" effects (Russell and Rhoads 2008). Thus, though we were not aware of
it when designing the study, it is perhaps not surprising that we find no effect of the treatment on height.

                                                                                                          17
the long-run effects; improved nutrition for younger girls may simply lead to an earlier onset of
puberty, rather than long-term gains in weight.25 The effect of nutrition and medical care on the
onset of puberty and long-term outcomes is complex, and beyond the scope of the present paper
to determine. However, for our conclusions, even if the intervention only lead to an earlier onset
of puberty with no ultimate adult weight gain, this would still serve as an indicator that there had
been greater nutrition and/or health care investments in girls. Our interest in the anthropometric
measures is as an indicator of those unobserved investments; it seems unlikely there is another
mechanism through which the intervention might have influenced the onset of puberty, so we
would still conclude that nutrition and/or health care for girls had improved in response to the
increased potential returns. Finally, we should also mention that it is possible that the long-run
effects of our intervention may be smaller than what is observed here if parents "overreact" to the
treatment and overestimate the future returns to girls' human capital, and later adjust expectations
downward (because, say, they observe that not every woman gets a high paying BPO job).
However, again, our goal is not to test the impact of this recruiting intervention as a policy
instrument, but whether some signal of increased returns leads to greater investment in girls.


C. Attrition
          As noted, because we are only able to weigh and measure children living at home, we
may be selectively missing some girls who differ in human capital from those still living at
home. Though at baseline there should be no difference between treatment and control villages
along this dimension, if our intervention caused some girls to stay home longer, such as by
delaying marriage for work or more schooling, we may systematically skew the treatment sample
and conclude there is an effect of the treatment even if there is none (we noted above that the
treatment and control groups have similar attrition rates, but there could be offsetting effects).
Attrition has less of an impact for our schooling measure, since parents are asked to provide
information on schooling for children not at home (which we verify by contacting schools); thus,
we primarily lose data for children whose entire household has attrited.
          Rather than modeling attrition, Table IV shows that our results continue to hold even
under a fairly extreme assumption about the outcomes of children not living at home in Round 2.
In particular, we assign all non-measured treatment children as not being in school, and give

25
     Though in this case we would expect to see differences in height.

                                                                                                 18
them a BMI and height (or changes in BMI and height) equal to the 25th percentile of the
corresponding distribution for other children of their age and sex, while all non-measured control
children are assigned as being in school and given the 75th percentile of their age*sex BMI and
height distributions. Though we have no reason to believe children from the treatment group that
are not measured are any worse off than children from the control group that are not measured,
even under this assumption that works strongly against our finding an effect, the coefficient for
the treatment indicator is still statistically significant for girls at the 10 percent level or better for
schooling and BFA. Using the Kling-Liebman-Katz and F-tests, we still reject at the 5 percent
level or better that the treatment had no effect on human capital outcomes.26


D. Distinguishing Returns From Other Mechanisms
          While the increase in human capital for girls is consistent with parents responding to the
increased awareness of the returns to human capital for women, as noted above there are many
alternative reasons why economic opportunities for women might lead to greater investments in
girls. Of course, even in these cases, the intervention would still show that increases in women's
employment opportunities have a causal effect on girls' human capital, which is a valuable result
in itself. However, it is important to understand the mechanism underlying this relationship,
which other studies have not been able to identify. Our goal is not to reject that these other
mechanisms are ever relevant, but simply to demonstrate that in our case they are not operative,
and thus show that changes in returns can have a direct effect on girls' human capital. As noted,
the key factor is that most of the non-returns mechanisms (bargaining power, change in the
household allocation of time, etc.) result from changes in the mother's employment, whereas the
returns mechanism is based solely on the potential future economic opportunities of currently
young girls (and thus would take place even with no change in mother's employment).
          First, the results are unlikely to be explained by increases in mother's bargaining power
when she gets a job, the most commonly proposed alternative mechanism. The intervention was
chosen to target the employment opportunities of younger women almost exclusively, in that
older women are less likely to have finished high school, speak English or have computer
experience. The recruiters also told us that most BPO firms prefer to hire young, unmarried
women, which is confirmed by Oster and Millet (2010) and Ng and Mitter (2005). More

26
     For boys, some of the negative effects are statistically significant under these assumptions.

                                                                                                       19
generally, in our rural sample very few women with young children work for pay (less than 5
percent). This is likely to be even more binding for our intervention, since the BPO jobs are not
rural based, but require commuting or migration. Turning to the data, Table II shows there was
no increase in paid employment for women over age 25, and few women 24 or younger are
likely to have children aged 5 or older. In addition, for women with children 5-15, if we regress
Round 2 paid employment on an indicator for the treatment, we get a coefficient of 0.00321 with
a standard error of 0.029. Thus, there were no employment gains for mothers of the children
whose human capital we analyzed. Finally, we can also rule out that the gains for girls are due to
the increased bargaining power of newly working mothers (or other adult women in the
household) by considering households that do not have any women (either living at home or
temporarily or permanently away from home) who work for pay in Round 2. The top panel of
Table V shows that the effects continue to hold for this sample.27
        Of course, it is possible that the mother's bargaining power may increase even if she does
not work, simply by the possibility or threat that she could. However, this seems less likely to
apply in the present case. As noted, most of the jobs that we increased access to require a
secondary school degree, which few older women have. And while a full test of this hypothesis
isn't possible, we can examine whether the treatment had an effect for households with women
for whom the threat of getting a BPO job was much lower, i.e., they do not have a high school
degree.28,29 In the middle panel of Table V, we see that the effects are very similar in magnitude
to the results for the full sample of women in Table III, and remain statistically significant at the
1 percent level. Finally, we can also examine some simple measures of women's bargaining
power. The survey asked women whether they participated in household decision-making for a
range of activities (children's schooling and health care; obtaining health care for themselves;
purchasing major household items; and visiting friends or family) as well as their "autonomy"
(whether they can visit the market without permission; visit family or friends without

27
   One potential problem with this test is that we stratify on a choice variable affected by our intervention.
We could instead look at subsamples where not having a woman work is a function of factors exogenous
to the treatment. For example, it is unlikely there will be a woman working as a result of the intervention
in households where no adult female member has a high school education. This test is presented next.
28
   Of course, there are many employment opportunities for women without a high school degree.
However, our treatment is unlikely to have caused a change in access to those opportunities.
29
   While this is a select sample (though still a vast majority of women), we might perhaps otherwise
expect the treatment to have a smaller effect for this group, since their lower education may signal that
they have lower preferences for education, perhaps even specifically with regards to girls.

                                                                                                           20
permission; and whether they were permitted to keep money set aside to spend as they wish).
Creating two indexes as the sum of the responses to these questions, we find that the treatment
does not have a statistically significant impact on women's autonomy or participation in
decision-making.30 While these are only self-reports and thus may have reporting errors,
provided those errors are uncorrelated with the treatment, the results are at least consistent with
the conclusion that women's bargaining power did not change as a result of the treatment.
        A final possibility to consider is that a mother's bargaining power may be increased even
if she doesn't work and has no increased possibility of working, if an older daughter works and
sends money to her mother. The holding of cash alone may increase the mother's bargaining
power and thereby improve investments in her other daughters.31 To rule this out, we can
examine households where no child is older than 16, and thus could not have gotten one of the
BPO jobs.32 The results in the bottom panel of Table V show the gains for girls continue to hold
for this sample.
        Thus, overall we conclude that a change in the mother's bargaining power is unlikely to
explain our effects. Similar arguments (i.e., that the BPO opportunities are current or future
opportunities for daughters, not women old enough to already be mothers themselves, and that
the effects hold even in households where no women work), can rule out several other
mechanisms: that parents invest more in girls because they become more valuable to the
household when the mother works; changes in the couple's intended fertility, via changes in the
value of the mother's time; or that a working mother means others take over care of her children,
and may provide more equal treatment than she does. The fact that we find an effect of the
treatment even in households where no women work also rules out that the gains are driven by
female household members other than the mother getting one of the jobs (e.g., if an older
daughter got a job, she might send money to her younger sisters to buy food or health care to




30
   The coefficient on the treatment indicator is 0.112 (0.347) when autonomy is the dependent variable
(control group mean 1.38) and -0.071 (0.184) when it is participation in decision-making (mean 1.64).
31
   Alternatively, the mother may just directly use the money to increase spending on her daughters, either
by not telling her husband (so he doesn't offset the additional expenditures) or if the money is more than
what was previously being spent on children.
32
   The previous results where no women work (including those away) also eliminates this possibility.

                                                                                                       21
compensate for poor treatment by their parents, or her younger sisters might now be more
valuable to the household because they take over the older sister's household responsibilities).33
        Finally, we can explore whether our experiment affected human capital investments in
girls via changes in income. Changes in current income can be ruled out as in Table V, where
there were gains for girls even in households where no woman (including those who have
temporarily or permanently left home) works for pay.34 Regarding changes in future or
permanent/lifetime income (e.g., since a daughter or the mother may work in the future), Table
III showed that the intervention had no effect for boys. If the gains for girls are driven by
increases in parents' expected lifetime wealth, we would expect at least some human capital
gains for boys as well (in fact, we often expect greater effects of wealth on boys than girls; Table
II provides some evidence of that in the present case). While girls' education may be considered
a luxury, so we might expect greater increases for girls than boys in response to wealth increases
once the household is beyond a certain threshold, given the diversity of wealth in our sample it
seems unlikely that all households just happened to be at the exact wealth level where boys were
receiving what the household considered to be the optimal amount of schooling and health, so
that all marginal increases in wealth go only to girls' human capital, with no effect at all for boys
(especially since boys are still very malnourished by international standards, as seen in Table I).
        Thus, overall, while there is no test that can rule out every alternative, most of the
primary explanations put forward (changes in bargaining power, income, fertility or household
time allocation) are not applicable in the present case because the opportunities were (per our
intent and design) not for current mothers. It therefore seems likely that it was the increase in the
potential future value of human capital that lead to increased investment in girls.
        However, although we can rule out these alternative mechanisms, we do not wish to
claim that the results are driven entirely by future monetary rewards to women's human capital.
Parents may expect greater non-market returns for their daughters from these jobs, perhaps even



33
   Similar results hold if we look at younger couples (under 35) who could not yet have children old
enough to get one of the BPO jobs or, as noted, households where no child is over 16. Stratifying in this
way is less likely to be endogenous with respect to girl's outcomes than whether a woman works.
34
   We also note that changes in current income could not explain all of the observed human capital gains,
since the 5 percentage point increase in school enrollment is greater than the 2.4 percentage point increase
in employment. It would then have to be that every woman who got a job had on average almost 2 girls
aged 5-15, who additionally went from none enrolled to all enrolled, which seems very unlikely.

                                                                                                         22
including greater bargaining power in their future marital household.35 However, the experiment
still represents the appropriate one, since these non-monetary gains will also be associated with
much of the gains in women's employment being realized today in India, and observed in the
past in wealthy countries. What is most relevant is that we can still identify parents as having
made forward-looking decisions regarding their daughters based on some perceived increased
future value of their human capital, i.e., that investment in girls will respond to increases in their
future economic opportunities. This remains distinct from changes in investments in young girls
driven by changes related to the mother's employment, such as her greater ability to influence
household expenditure or allocation decisions regarding children. Even just ruling out for the
present case the other mechanisms operating via mother's employment is informative because if
the lesson of the large literature linking women's employment and investment in girls is that it is
all driven by bargaining power, fertility, etc., there may be other policy instruments available
(e.g., reform or enforcement of divorce laws, strengthening women's inheritance or property
rights, family planning services, etc.) that also address these factors, and that may perhaps be
more direct or effective. Another way to view this is that our results show that it is possible to
have gains for girls without first needing to change bargaining power, income or fertility.



                               V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
        We find that an intervention making employment opportunities for women more salient
and accessible increased human capital investments in girls. Two key advantages of this study
are that we supply exogenous variation in opportunities for women and that we can exclude other
explanations for the link between employment opportunities and investment in girls, such as
mother's bargaining power or the allocation of time within the household.
        Our intervention did not create any new jobs for women, and thus we do not view
recruiting as a solution to the problem of gender disparities in human capital. Rather, the value of
our results is in demonstrating that human capital investments in girls respond to their future
economic opportunities. Many approaches to gender bias by governments, NGO's, rights groups
and international organizations have emphasized the social or cultural component of bias (Croll

35
  Thus, we do not wish to argue that bargaining power is irrelevant to girls' human capital attainment, but
instead to emphasize the distinction between bargaining power wielded by the mother and best viewed as
acting on the current household decision-making process, vs. bargaining power that is just one of many
future benefits the child herself may receive from human capital investment and future employment.

                                                                                                        23
2001). While there is certainly some role for such efforts, our results suggest that expanding
economic opportunities for women, which should involve a focus on the private sector, can play
an important role in reducing gender disparities in human capital. Public policy instruments
include enforcement of anti-discrimination laws in hiring and promotion, and ensuring equality
in public sector employment and promotions. Other instruments include reducing barriers to
women entering the labor market, such as workplace laws strengthening part-time work and
maternity leave or expanding women's access to credit, either via commercial banks or
microfinance programs, so women can engage in more entrepreneurial activities (though Field,
Jayachandran and Pande 2010 discuss possible barriers to this kind of activity for women).
        The results also suggest there are likely to be improvements in women's human capital
even in the absence of policy interventions. The rise of the BPO sector, along with rapid growth
in the white-collar service sector more generally, has been shifting the Indian economy away
from agriculture and manufacturing. Though employment growth in these new sectors has been
slower than the growth in their GDP share, this shift is likely to continue to generate a greater
demand for female labor and a corresponding increase in female labor force participation, as has
been observed in other countries (Goldin 1990, 1995, 2006). And historical evidence suggests
such changes can be rapid. As recently as the 1960s, paid labor force participation rates were
only around 30 percent in both the United States and Great Britain, increasing to 58 and 71
percent respectively in less than three decades (Costa 2000). Our results indicate that any coming
gains in employment opportunities for women will likely result in human capital gains as well.
        Finally, the results are also valuable in that they show that there is a demand side
limitation to investment in girls for at least some households. For these households, the limiting
factor in investment in girls is not related to poverty, or access, costs, distance or quality of
schooling, nutrition or health care. Though these other factors are certainly important concerns,
at least some of the problem of low human capital for girls is that parents see little value to
investing in them. Our experiment shows that clear and salient evidence of greater returns can
lead to gains for girls even without changes in any of these other factors.

REFERENCES
Agarwal, Bina (1994). A Field of One's Own: Gender and Land Rights in South Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press.
Agnihotri, Satish, Richard Palmer-Jones, and Ashok Parikh (2002). “Missing Women in Indian Districts: A
    Quantitative Analysis.” Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 13, p. 285–314.
Atkin, David (2009). "Working for the Future: Female Factory Work and Child Health in Mexico," Yale University.

                                                                                                            24
Bardhan, Pranab K. (1974). “On Life and Death Questions,” Economic and Political Weekly, 9, p. 1293-1304.
Behrman, Jere R. (1997). “Intrahousehold Distribution and the Family,” in Mark Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, eds.,
      Handbook of Population and Family Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
- -, - -, and - - (1988). “Intrahousehold Allocation of Nutrients in Rural India: Are Boys Favored? Do Parents Exhibit
      Inequality Aversion?” Oxford Economic Papers, 40 (1), p 32-54.
- - Andrew D. Foster, Mark R. Rosenzweig and Prem Vashishtha (1999). "Women's Schooling, Home Teaching,
      and Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 107(4), p. 682-714.
Boserup, Esther (1970). Woman‟s Role in Economic Development. London: Allen and Unwin.
Chen, Lincoln C., Emdadul Huq, and Stan D'Souza (1981). "Sex Bias in the Family Allocation of Food and Health
      Care in Rural Bangladesh," Population and Development Review 7 (1), p. 55–70.
Chen, Martha Alter (2000). Perpetual Mourning: Widowhood in Rural India. Oxford University Press: New Delhi.
Costa, Dora (2000). "From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women's Paid Labor," Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 14(4), p. 101-122.
Croll, Elizabeth (2000). Endangered Daughters: Discrimination and Development in Asia. Routledge: London.
de Onis, Mercedes, Adelheid W. Onyango, Elaine Borghi, Amani Siyam, Chizuru Nishida, and Jonathan
    Siekmann, J. (2007). "Development of a WHO Growth Reference for School-aged Children and
    Adolescents," Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 85, p. 661-668.
Das Gupta, Monica (1987). “Selective Discrimination against Female Children in Rural Punjab, India,” Population
     and Development Review, 13(1), p. 77–100.
- -, Woojin Chung and Li Shuzhou (2009). "Evidence for an Incipient Decline in Numbers of Missing Girls in China
     and India," Population and Development Review, 35(2), p. 401-16.
Deaton, Angus (2007). "Height, Health and Development," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
     104(33), p. 13232-13237.
Dube, Leela and Rajni Palriwala (1990). Structures and Strategies: Women, Work, and Family. New Delhi: Sage.
Duflo, Esther (2005). “Gender Equality in Development,” Manuscript, Department of Economics, MIT.
Dyson, Tim, and Mick Moore (1983). "On Kinship Structure, Female Autonomy, and Demographic Behavior in
     India," Population and Development Review, 9(1), p. 35-60.
Field, Erica, Seema Jayachandran and Rohini Pande (2010). "Do Traditional Institutions Constrain Female
     Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India," American Economic Review.
Foster, Andrew and Mark R. Rosenzweig (2009). “Missing Women, the Marriage Market, and Economic Growth,”
     Brown University Working Paper.
Goldin, Claudia (1990). Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women. New York-
     Oxford: Oxford University Press.
-- (1995). "The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development and Economic History," in T.
     Paul Schultz, ed. Investment in Women's Human Capital. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- - (2006). "The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family," American
     Economic Review, 96(2), p. 1-21.
Haddad, Lawrence, John Hoddinott and Harold Alderman (1997). Intra-household Resource Allocation in
     Developing Countries: Models, Methods, and Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Holman, David, Rosemary Batt and Ursula Holtgrewe (2007). The Global Call Centre Report: International
     Perspectives on Management and Employment. Global Call Centre Research Network.
International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and Macro International (1995). National Family Health
     Survey (MCH and Family Planning), India 1992-93. Mumbai: IIPS.
- - and ORC Macro (2000). National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2), 1998–99: India. Mumbai: IIPS.
- - and Macro International (2007). National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3), 2005–06: India. Mumbai: IIPS.
Jensen, Robert T. (2010). "The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling," Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 25(2), p. 515-548.
- - and Nolan Miller (2010). "Keepin' 'em Down on the Farm: Old Age Security and Strategic Underinvestment in
     Boys," mimeo UCLA.
Kishor, Sunita (1993). “„May God Give Sons to All‟: Gender and Child Mortality in India,” American Sociological
     Review, 58, p. 247-265.
-- (1995). "Gender Differentials in Child Mortality in India: A Review of Evidence" in Women's Health in India,
     Monica Das Gupta, T. N. Krishnan and Lincoln Chen. Bombay: Oxford University Press.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz (2007). "Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
     Effects," Econometrica, 75(1), p. 83-119.


                                                                                                                   25
Mammen, Kristin and Christina Paxson (2000). "Women's Work and Economic Development," Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, 14(4), p. 141-164.
Miller, Barbara D. (1981). The Endangered Sex: Neglect of Female Children in Rural North India. Ithaca, New
     York: Cornell University Press.
Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig (2006). “Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World: Caste, Gender,
     and Schooling in a Globalizing Economy,” American Economic Review, 96(4), 1225-1252.
Murthi, Mamta, Anne-Catherine Guio and Jean Drèze (1995). "Mortality, Fertility and Gender Bias in India: A
     District-Level Analysis," Population and Development Review, 21(4), p. 745-782.
Ng, Cecilia and Swasti Mitter (2005). "Valuing Women's Voices: Call Center Workers in Malaysia and India,"
     Gender, Technology and Development, 9(2), p. 209-233.
Oster, Emily and M. Bryce Millett (2010). "Do Call Centers Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from India,"
     mimeo, University of Chicago.
Qian, Nancy (2008). “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Specific Earnings on Sex
          Imbalance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), p. 1251-1285.
Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Shultz (1982). “Market Opportunities, Genetic Endowments and Intrafamily
     Resource Distribution: Child Survival in India,” American Economic Review, 72 (4), 803–815.
Russell, William E. and J. Marc Rhoads (2008). "Nutrition and the Humoral Regulation of Growth," in Christopher
     Duggan, John B. Watkins and W. Allan Walker, eds. Nutrition in Pediatrics. Ontario: BC Decker.
Schultz, T. Paul (1990). “Testing the Neoclassical Model of Family Labor Supply and Fertility,” Journal of Human
     Resources, 25(4), p. 599-634.
- - (2001). “Women‟s Roles in the Agricultural Household: Bargaining and Human Capital Investments” in
     Agricultural and Resource Economics Handbook, B. Gardner and G. Rausser, Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing.
Sen, Amartya (1990). “More than 100 Million Women are Missing,” New York Review of Books, December 20.
- - and Sunil Sengupta (1983). "Malnutrition of Rural Children and the Sex Bias," Economic and Political Weekly,
       18(19/21), p. 855-864.
Shastry, Gauri Kartini (2010). "Human Capital Response to Globalization: Education and Information Technology
       in India," mimeo, Wellesley College.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas (1995). “Human Resources: Empirical Modeling of Household and Family
     Decisions,” in T.N. Srinivasan and Jere Behrman, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 3A,
     Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing, p. 1883-2023.
-- and -- (1998). “Health, Nutrition and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36(2), p.766-817.
Thomas, Duncan (1990). “Intra-household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach,” Journal of Human
     Resources, 25(4), p. 635-64.
Visaria, Pravin M. (1969). The Sex Ratio of the Population of India, Census of India 1961, Vol. 1, Monograph #10.




                                                                                                              26
                              TABLE I. MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS
                AND TESTS OF TREATMENT-CONTROL COVARIATE BALANCE AT BASELINE

                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)
                                                                                                     Difference
                                                          All         Control      Treatment          (3) − (2)

 Log (expenditure per capita)                            6.38          6.37           6.38              0.01
                                                        [0.66]        [0.65]         [0.67]           (0.023)
 Head's years of schooling                               3.76          3.67           3.86              0.19
                                                        [3.77]        [3.72]         [3.81]            (0.13)
 Spouse's years of schooling                             1.80          1.79           1.80             0.022
                                                        [2.67]        [2.62]         [2.72]           (0.094)
 Family Size                                             5.46          5.42           5.49             0.072
                                                        [2.37]        [2.41]         [2.32]           (0.084)

 Expect Money From Son When Old                          0.96          0.97           0.96             -0.007
                                                        [0.19]        [0.18]         [0.20]           (0.007)
 Expect Money From Daughter When Old                     0.04          0.04           0.04              0.003
                                                        [0.20]        [0.20]         [0.20]           (0.007)
 Appropriate for women to work for pay:
   Before marriage                                       0.16          0.16           0.16             -0.002
                                                        [0.37]        [0.37]         [0.37]           (0.014)
    After married, before children                      0.068         0.066          0.071              0.006
                                                        [0.25]        [0.25]         [0.26]           (0.009)

 In school: girls 7-15                                    0.74          0.75           0.74            -0.011
                                                        [0.44]        [0.43]         [0.44]           (0.020)
 In school: boys 7-15                                     0.87          0.87           0.86            -0.010
                                                        [0.34]        [0.34]         [0.35]           (0.015)
 BMI-for-age (z-score): girls 5-15                       -1.25         -1.25          -1.26            -0.015
                                                        [1.35]        [1.38]         [1.33]           (0.057)
 BMI-for-age (z-score): boys 5-15                        -1.31         -1.29          -1.34            -0.056
                                                        [1.54]        [1.51]         [1.55]           (0.065)
 Height-for-age (z-score): girls 5-15                    -2.03         -2.02          -2.04            -0.014
                                                        [1.34]        [1.32]         [1.37]           (0.057)
 Height-for-age (z-score): boys 5-15                     -2.01         -1.99          -2.03            -0.034
                                                        [1.36]        [1.36]         [1.33]           (0.056)

Notes: Baseline values for key variables, collected in the Round 1 survey (September-October, 2003). Standard
deviations in brackets in columns 1-3; heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering in
parentheses in column 4. The last column contains t-tests of the difference in means between the control and the
treatment samples. *Significant at 10%; **Significant at 5%; ***Significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                  27
 TABLE II. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION ON PAID EMPLOYMENT


                                             WOMEN                                            MEN
                                  (1)          (2)             (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)

                                18-24          25-44         45-60             18-24         25-44          45-60
                                        **
 Treatment                      0.024         0.0031         -0.006            0.002          0.006         -0.004
                                (0.010)       (0.0088)       (0.013)           (0.011)       (0.023)        (0.033)


 R2                              0.054         0.001         0.000             0.000          0.001         0.000
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village-level in parentheses. All
variables measured in round 2 survey. Dependent variable is an indicator for whether an individual was in paid
employment in the round 2, post-treatment survey. All regressions also include an indicator for whether expenditure
data was unavailable (these household are assigned the median sample expenditure). *Significant at 10 percent level.
**Significant at 5 percent level. ***Significant at 1 percent level.




                                                                                                                      28
TABLE III. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION ON HUMAN CAPITAL
 PANEL A. GIRLS                   Round 2 Outcomes                    Round 2 Outcomes                  Round 2-Round 1)
                               (1)       (2)      (3)              (4)       (5)      (6)              (7)       (8)     (9)
                                       BMI-     Height-                    BMI-     Height-                    BMI-    Height-
                             Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age
 Treatment                  0.052***    0.24***     0.063        0.053***     0.23***     0.060      0.051***    0.27***     0.051
                             (0.019)    (0.070)    (0.066)        (0.019)     (0.069)    (0.063)      (0.21)     (0.051)    (0.051)
 log (expend per cap)                                              0.025        0.11*    0.147**
                                                                  (0.018)     (0.058)    (0.057)
 Head's Education                                                 0.005*       0.017      0.008
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.012)    (0.009)
 Spouse's Education                                              0.008**      -0.033*     0.040
                                                                  (0.004)     (0.018)    (0.014)
 Family Size                                                       0.002       -0.014    0.030**
                                                                  (0.004)     (0.014)    (0.013)
 Child's Age                                                       -0.002    -0.038***   0.265***
                                                                  (0.004)     (0.011)    (0.092)
 R2                           0.004      0.007      0.001         0.016       0.017        0.06        0.010      0.012      0.005
 Observations                 1,830      2,031      2,031         1,830       2,031       2,031        1,265      1,556      1,556
 Control Group Mean            0.75      -1.25      -2.02          0.75       -1.25       -2.02         0.76      -1.27      -2.05
 Mean Effect                            0.11***                              0.11***                             0.12***
                                        (0.027)                              (0.025)                             (0.024)
 F-stat                                   7.40                                 7.62                                9.81
      (p-value)                          0.000                                0.000                               0.000

 PANEL B. BOYS                    Round 2 Outcomes                    Round 2 Outcomes                  Round 2-Round 1)
                                       BMI-     Height-                    BMI-     Height-                    BMI-    Height-
                             Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age
 Treatment                    -0.011     -0.020     0.005          -0.013      -0.030      -0.007      -0.007     0.083      -0.018
                             (0.013)    (0.076)    (0.052)        (0.013)     (0.074)     (0.049)     (0.017)    (0.068)    (0.046)
 log (expend per cap)                                            0.033***      0.064     0.206***
                                                                  (0.013)     (0.061)     (0.051)
 Head's Education                                                  0.003       0.008       0.008
                                                                  (0.002)     (0.011)     (0.009)
 Spouse's Education                                                0.004       0.013       0.018
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.014)     (0.014)
 Family Size                                                       0.000       0.001       0.017
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.012)     (0.012)
 Child's Age                                                     -0.011***   -0.102***   -0.087***
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.011)     (0.008)
 R2                            0.00       0.00       0.00         0.017       0.041       0.065        0.001      0.001       0.00
 Observations                 2,013      2,295      2,295         2,013       2,295       2,295        1,385      1,735      1,735
 Control Group Mean            0.87      -1.29      -1.99          0.87       -1.29       -1.99         0.87      -1.32      -1.96
 Mean Effect                             -0.012                               -0.019                              0.007
                                        (0.023)                              (0.021)                             (0.021)
 F-stat                                   0.28                                 0.44                                0.53
      (p-value)                           0.84                                 0.72                                0.67
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village-level in parentheses. Columns 1-6 use
Round 2 outcomes as the dependent variable, and Columns 7-9 use the change in outcome from Round 1 to Round 2. For the first
6 columns, the sample is children aged 7-15 for schooling and 5-15 for BMI and height. For the first columns, the sample is
children aged 5-12 at baseline (8-15 at round 2). BMI- and Height-for Age are z-scores. All control variables in columns 1-6 are
measured in Round 2. All regressions also include indicators for whether expenditure or mother's or father's education data was
unavailable (these household are assigned median values for these variables). "Mean effect" is the mean effect of the treatment
across the three outcomes for a given specification, computed using the methodology described in Kling, Liebman, and Katz
(2007). F-stat is from a joint test that the treatment variable is zero in the three specifications. *Significant at 10 percent level.
**Significant at 5 percent level. ***Significant at 1 percent level.

                                                                                                                            29
TABLE IV. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION ON HUMAN CAPITAL: SENSITIVITY TO ATTRITION
 PANEL A. GIRLS                   Round 2 Outcomes                    Round 2 Outcomes                  Round 2-Round 1)
                               (1)       (2)      (3)              (4)       (5)      (6)              (7)       (8)     (9)
                                       BMI-     Height-                    BMI-     Height-                    BMI-    Height-
                             Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age
 Treatment                   0.037*      0.15**      -0.015      0.039**      0.14**      -0.013       0.028     0.160**     0.011
                             (0.019)     (0.068)    (0.062)      (0.019)     (0.068)     (0.060)      (0.023)    (0.064)    (0.049)
 log (expend per cap)                                             0.023       0.101*     0.140**
                                                                 (0.018)     (0.057)     (0.055)
 Head's Education                                                0.006**      0.015       0.006
                                                                 (0.003)     (0.011)     (0.009)
 Spouse's Education                                              0.009**     -0.032*    0.037***
                                                                 (0.004)     (0.017)     (0.014)
 Family Size                                                      0.004       -0.011     0.032**
                                                                 (0.004)     (0.013)     (0.012)
 Child's Age                                                      -0.003    -0.041***   -0.083***
                                                                 (0.004)     (0.010)     (0.009)
 R2                           0.002      0.003       0.00         0.016      0.013       0.058         0.001      0.004       0.00
 Observations                 1,854      2,124      2,191         1,854      2,124       2,191         1,282      1,674      1,649
 Mean Effect                            0.059**                             0.060**                              0.070**
                                        (0.026)                             (0.025)                              (0.027)
 F-stat                                   2.88                                3.01                                 3.07
      (p-value)                          0.038                               0.032                                0.030

 PANEL B. BOYS                    Round 2 Outcomes                    Round 2 Outcomes                  Round 2-Round 1)
                                       BMI-     Height-                    BMI-     Height-                    BMI-    Height-
                             Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age
 Treatment                   -0.029**     -0.09      -0.061      -0.030**     -0.097      -0.066      -0.021      -0.029     -0.064
                              (0.013)    (0.073)    (0.050)       (0.013)    (0.072)     (0.047)      (.017)     (0.064)    (0.044)
 log (expend per cap)                                            0.028**      0.063     0.196***
                                                                  (0.013)    (0.059)     (0.049)
 Head's Education                                                  0.002      0.008       0.008
                                                                  (0.002)    (0.010)     (0.008)
 Spouse's Education                                                0.005      0.013       0.018
                                                                  (0.004)    (0.014)     (0.013)
 Family Size                                                       0.002      0.002       0.018
                                                                  (0.003)    (0.012)     (0.012)
 Child's Age                                                     -0.01***   -0.10***    -0.09***
                                                                  (0.003)    (0.011)     (0.008)
 R2                           0.002      0.001      0.001         0.017      0.042       0.066         0.001      0.001      0.001
 Observations                 2,047      2,388      2,388         2,047      2,388       2,388         1,403      1,851      1,828
 Mean Effect                            -0.061***                           -0.066***                           -0.049**
                                         (0.023)                             (0.021)                             (0.023)
 F-stat                                    3.10                                3.95                                1.62
      (p-value)                           0.028                               0.009                                0.19
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village-level in parentheses. Columns 1-6 use
Round 2 outcomes as the dependent variable, and Columns 7-9 use the change in outcome from Round 1 to Round 2. For the first
6 columns, the sample is children aged 7-15 for schooling and 5-15 for BMI and height. For the first columns, the sample is
children aged 5-12 at baseline (8-15 at round 2). BMI- and Height-for Age are z-scores. All control variables in columns 1-6 are
measured in Round 2. All regressions also include indicators for whether expenditure or mother's or father's education data was
unavailable (these household are assigned median values for these variables). "Mean effect" is the mean effect of the treatment
across the three outcomes for a given specification, computed using the methodology described in Kling, Liebman, and Katz
(2007). F-stat is from a joint test that the treatment variable is zero in the three specifications. *Significant at 10 percent level.
**Significant at 5 percent level. ***Significant at 1 percent level.



                                                                                                                            30
TABLE V. EFFECT OF THE INTERVENTION: TESTING ALTERNATE HYPOTHESES
 NO WOMAN                        Round 2 Outcomes                   Round 2 Outcomes                  Round 2-Round 1)
 WORKS FOR PAY                (1)       (2)      (3)             (4)       (5)      (6)              (7)       (8)     (9)
                                      BMI-     Height-                   BMI-     Height-                    BMI-    Height-
                            Enrolled for-Age for-Age           Enrolled for-Age for-Age            Enrolled for-Age for-Age
 Treatment                  0.056***   0.19**      0.027       0.060***    0.18**      0.032       0.059**    0.23***     0.060
                             (0.021)   (0.075)    (0.072)       (0.021)    (0.074)    (0.070)       (0.26)    (0.079)    (0.059)
 R2                          0.005      0.005      0.001         0.014      0.017      0.053        0.005      0.008      0.001
 Observations                1,353      1,501      1,501         1,353      1,501      1,501         935       1,156      1,156
 Mean Effect                           0.094***                           0.098***                            0.13***
                                        (0.031)                            (0.029)                            (0.030)
 F-stat                                   4.37                               4.94                               5.96
      (p-value)                          0.006                              0.002                              0.001

 MOTHERS W/ NO                     Round 2 Outcomes                   Round 2 Outcomes                 Round 2-Round 1)
 HIGH SCHOOL                            BMI-      Height-                  BMI-      Height-                   BMI-      Height-
                            Enrolled for-Age     for-Age       Enrolled for-Age     for-Age        Enrolled   for-Age    for-Age
 Treatment                  0.051*** 0.23***        0.07       0.051*** 0.22***       0.065        0.050***   0.24***     0.068
                             (0.020)   (0.072)    (0.067)       (0.019)   (0.071)    (0.065)        (0.22)    (0.070)    (0.052)
 R2                          0.004      0.007      0.001         0.014      0.015      0.054        0.004      0.009      0.001
 Observations                1,676      1,851      1,851         1,676      1,851      1,851        1,192      1,426      1,426
 Mean Effect                           0.11***                             0.11***                            0.12***
                                       (0.027)                             (0.026)                            (0.025)
 F-stat                                  6.90                                7.04                               9.03
      (p-value)                         0.000                               0.000                              0.000
                                                                                                                 
 NO CHILD >16                     Round 2 Outcomes                    Round 2 Outcomes                 Round 2-Round 1)
                                       BMI-      Height-                   BMI-      Height-                    BMI-     Height-
                            Enrolled for-Age    for-Age        Enrolled for-Age     for-Age        Enrolled   for-Age    for-Age
 Treatment                  0.055** 0.204***      0.021        0.058*** 0.199***      0.026        0.061**    0.211***    0.046
                            (0.024)   (0.085)    (0.078)        (0.024)   (0.086)    (0.072)       (0.029)     (0.091)   (0.081)
 R2                          0.005      0.013      0.002         0.016      0.028     0.0062        0.006      0.009      0.000
 Observations                1,076      1,202      1,202         1,076      1,202     1,202          720        905        905
 Mean Effect                           0.15***                             0.15***                            0.13***
                                       (0.034)                             (0.032)                            (0.033)
 F-stat                                  7.29                                7.86                               5.36
      (p-value)                         0.000                               0.000                              0.002
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors accounting for clustering at the village-level in parentheses. Columns 1-6 use
Round 2 outcomes as the dependent variable, and Columns 7-9 use the change in outcome from Round 1 to Round 2. For the first
6 columns, the sample is children aged 7-15 for schooling and 5-15 for BMI and height. For the first columns, the sample is
children aged 5-12 at baseline (8-15 at round 2). BMI- and Height-for Age are z-scores. All control variables in columns 1-6 are
measured in Round 2. All regressions also include log expenditure per capita, head's and spouse's education, family size, child
age, and indicators for whether expenditure or mother's or father's education data was unavailable (these household are assigned
median values for these variables). "Mean effect" is the mean effect of the treatment across the three outcomes for a given
specification, computed using the methodology described in Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007). F-stat is from a joint test that the
treatment variable is zero in the three specifications. *Significant at 10 percent level. **Significant at 5 percent level.
***Significant at 1 percent level.




                                                                                                                         31
