                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW CAN BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS INFORM NON-MARKET VALUATION?
        AN EXAMPLE FROM THE PREFERENCE REVERSAL LITERATURE

                                         Jonathan E. Alevy
                                             John List
                                         Wiktor Adamowicz

                                        Working Paper 16036
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16036


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2010




Alevy, Assistant Professor of Economics, University of Alaska Anchorage; List, Professor of Economics,
University of Chicago and NBER; Adamowicz, Professor of Economics, University of Alberta. Thanks
to Ian Bateman, Daniel Kahneman, Glenn Harrison, Liesl Koch, and Robert Sugden for helpful comments.
 Seminar participants at several universities and conferences also provided useful feedback. Any errors
or omissions remain our responsibility The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jonathan E. Alevy, John List, and Wiktor Adamowicz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Can Behavioral Economics Inform Non-Market Valuation? An Example from the Preference
Reversal Literature
Jonathan E. Alevy, John List, and Wiktor Adamowicz
NBER Working Paper No. 16036
May 2010
JEL No. C9,Q5,Q51

                                              ABSTRACT

Psychological insights have made inroads within most major areas of study in economics. One area
where less advance has been made is environmental and resource economics. In this study, we examine
the implications of preference reversals over evaluation modes, in which stated economic values critically
depend on whether the good is valued jointly with others or in isolation. The question arises because
two commonly used methods for eliciting stated preferences differ in that one presents objects together
and another presents objects to be evaluated in isolation. Beyond showing an example of the import
of behavioral economics, our empirical evidence sheds new light on the factors associated with insensitivity
of valuations to the scope of the good.


Jonathan E. Alevy                                    Wiktor Adamowicz
University of Alaska Anchorage                       University of Alberta
afja@uaa.alaska.edu                                  Department of Rural Economy
                                                     515 General Services Building
John List                                            Edmonton, AB T6G-2H1
Department of Economics                              Canada
University of Chicago                                dasskdadfask@ww.edu
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
I.      Introduction

        Over the past few decades                economists have increasingly turned to

psychologically-based explanations of individual behavior. Whether used to explain

involuntary unemployment, excessive risk taking, gender differences, firm entry and exit

patterns, discrimination patterns, or labor supply, behavioral economists have lent

important insights into the underlying data patterns observed. Interestingly, even though

environmental economists provided early ammunition to the pioneers of behavioral

economics, we have been slower to adopt psychologically-based explanations throughout

our field.1 To provide a step in that direction, this study explores how the preference

reversal literature can be used by environmental and resource economists.

        Beginning with the work of Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968) evidence has

accumulated that theoretically equivalent measures of preference elicitation can lead to

systematically different preference orderings.             The early results from psychology

laboratories received added attention from economists after Grether and Plott (1979)

found that these inconsistencies were robust to salient incentives and other controls

consistent with best practices in experimental economics. Their study confirmed that

preference orderings over lotteries could be sensitive to the elicitation’s response mode,

either choices or prices.

        More recently, another type of choice anomaly has been discovered—preference

reversals which occur over joint and isolated evaluation modes. In the isolated evaluation

mode, a single good is valued on its own. In the joint evaluation mode, two or more

goods are compared.         Reversals of preference across evaluation modes have been


1
 A puzzle arose nearly three decades ago when researchers discovered that the WTP measure of value
differed starkly from the WTA measure (see, e.g., Hammack and Brown, 1974).

                                                   3
observed both for hypothetical choices between private goods and in market

environments (Bazerman et al. 1999; Hsee et al. 1999; List 2002).

       The apparent robustness of evaluation mode reversals raises an important

practical question for environmental valuation. This is because two prominent methods

for eliciting stated preferences differ precisely in whether goods are evaluated jointly or

in isolation. Contingent valuation exercises typically ask for the valuation of an isolated

program or good.1 Alternatively, choice-based methods ask consumers to value a pair or

set of programs that are presented simultaneously when constructing marginal values of

the characteristics (Adamowicz 2000, Adamowicz et al. 1998, Louviere, Hensher, and

Swait 2000).

       Although both methodologies are widely used, the small lot of studies that contain

estimates using both approaches suggest that valuations can differ substantially across

evaluation modes (Boxall et al. 1996; Frederick and Fischoff 1998; Irwin et al. 1993;

Magat et al. 1988; Takatsuka et al. 2002). Further, the direction of the difference is not

uniform across studies. For example, Irwin et al. (1993) find that public goods are more

likely to be chosen when they are directly compared with a private good that is presented

at the same time, while Boxall et al. (1996) report contingent valuation estimates that

greatly exceed those from their choice experiments, a result they attribute to subjects

ignoring the value of substitute goods in the isolated evaluation mode.

       Our experimental treatments test for evaluation mode effects using both public

and private goods. The private good treatment is an extension of List’s (2002) sportscard

market study. To provide a test of joint and isolated valuations over public goods, we

examine willingness-to-pay for farmland preservation and water quality improvements



                                            4
with the questions structured to parallel the market treatments.       The public goods

treatments are designed to identify the impact of evaluation mode on the ability of

respondents to interpret information, shedding light on one source of scope insensitivity

that should be considered in the design of stated preference surveys.2 Thus, in contrast to

earlier studies that argue that respondents are unable to formulate economic values for the

goods or are expressing general attitudes (see for example, Kahneman and Knetsch

(1992), and Desvouges et al. (1993)), we focus on identifying the cognitive

underpinnings of scope effects, using both market and non-market valuations for

robustness. In this way, our work complements Heberlein et al. (2005), who argue that

“we need to better understand the conditions that produce scope failure.”

       The remainder of our study is structured as follows. Section II summarizes

briefly the related literature. Section III describes the experimental design. Section IV

discusses the experimental results. Section V discusses the import of these results, and

Section VI concludes.

II.    Background and Related Literature

       Bazerman et al. (1992) were the first to demonstrate the existence of preference

reversals over joint and isolated evaluation modes. They presented subjects with a

hypothetical dispute between neighbors and asked them to evaluate alternative

resolutions. In the isolated evaluation mode, equitable settlements, in terms of monetary

payoffs, were preferred. In the joint evaluation mode, the preference for equity was

overturned in favor of settlements that maximized social welfare. Additional studies

have elicited the preference reversal across examples that include hiring practices, and

the provision of public versus private goods (see, e.g., Hsee 1996; Hsee 1998). We



                                            5
present an example from this literature in some detail to make clear the character of the

reversal.

          Hsee (1998) examined the valuation of goods where one of the goods, good L

(where L represents “Less”), is a proper subset of the other, good M (“More”).        Hsee

compared choices over two sets of dinnerware with the following characteristics:

          Set M: 40 pieces     31 in good condition, 9 are broken

          Set L: 24 pieces     all in good condition

The two sets shared the same 24 pieces (8 dinner plates, 8 salad plates, 8 dessert plates)

in good condition. In addition, set M contained cups and saucers of which 7 were intact

and 9 were broken. Set L was priced higher in the isolated evaluation mode, between

subjects, while set M was preferred when the two were evaluated jointly, within subjects.

The reversal has been characterized as a “more is less” preference reversal by Hsee

(1998).

          List’s (2002) study, which is extended here, incorporates a problem similar in

character to Hsee’s dinnerware example, but in a naturally occurring marketplace for

sports memorabilia.     Importantly, subjects endogenously select into the market (and

select their roles in the market) and rather than giving hypothetical responses, voluntarily

used their own funds to bid in an incentive-compatible auction. List finds that the “more

is less” reversal is alive and well in the market setting, although attenuated among a

group of super-experienced subjects (sportscard market dealers).

          The underlying causes of the evaluation mode reversals have been discussed

primarily by psychologists. Bazerman et al. (1999) argue that differences in valuation

across modes arise because information about the attributes of a good has different



                                             6
salience – or evaluability – in the different modes. In the “chipped plate” example,

discussed above, the evaluability hypothesis suggests that the number of plates in the

package received increased salience in the joint evaluation mode because quantities are

easily compared in that setting. In the isolated evaluation mode quantity has reduced

salience, and the chips in the plates take on importance as valuation cues. Hsee et al.

(1999) also note that the value function for attributes with little “evaluability

information” is relatively unresponsive to changes in the attribute level, consistent with

findings regarding insensitivity to scope. The combination of changes in salient cues and

scope insensitivity can, in extreme cases, lead to the observed evaluation mode

preference reversals.

       In his Nobel Prize lecture, Daniel Kahneman discusses evaluation mode reversals

in the context of a research program investigating the “architecture of cognition”

(Kahneman 2003). The cognitive model posits two systems: “System 1” is quick,

associative, and intuitive while “System 2” is slower and based on rules and reasoning

(Kahneman and Frederick 2002; Chaikin and Trope 1999). The use of automated choice

heuristics by System 1, such as representativeness or affect, has been shown to produce

biases that may be mitigated by System 2’s supervision of intuitive judgments.3

       The ability of System 2 to carry out its role may be compromised in isolated

evaluation, however, since relevant cues, such as the quantity changes in Hsee’s (1998)

example, are absent. Kahneman (2003) argues that these changes are generally more

accessible than absolute values, and their absence makes the use of an automated

heuristic more likely. In the case of the cracked dinnerware it seems plausible that in the

isolated evaluation mode a System 1 response to the poor quality items affected the



                                            7
willingness-to-pay for the bundle. In joint evaluation, the information was available to

promote System 2 responses. Differences in behavior across experience levels, reported

by List (2002), can also be understood in the context of dual-process theory, which

suggests that complex cognitive operations can migrate from System 2 to System 1 with

repeated exposure to similar tasks (Kahneman and Frederick 2002).

       While the literature has focused on psychological explanations, it is worthwhile to

consider whether an economic model of quality signaling can rationalize the preference

reversal results as well as, or along with, the cognitive theories. List’s (2002) study

provides some evidence on this issue since the goods were explicitly graded for quality

by an independent third party with an established reputation in the marketplace. If

quality signaling was sufficient to explain the pattern of results, we would expect the

bundle of goods, in this case 13 sportscards, to be priced similarly across evaluation

modes, since identical information on quality is available in both settings.           The

hypothesis of equal values, however, is rejected in favor of the one-sided alternative that

the prices are greater in the joint evaluation mode.4 This finding suggests that the cues

regarding the low quality cards receive additional emphasis under isolated evaluation.

This represents the starting point for our private good market treatments.

III.   Experimental Treatments and Hypotheses

       The experiments we conduct include both an extension of List’s (2002) study of

private goods in the sportscard market and contingent valuation treatments over public

goods. The sportscard market experiment alters List’s original study by changing the

information that the participants receive about the cards in a simple way—removing the

cards from their sealed, graded cardholders, effectively removing the signal of their



                                             8
quality. We hypothesize that the removal of the grading information will accentuate

valuation differences across the valuation modes, although the dual process theories

suggest that sportscard dealers may be less affected by the informational change than

nondealers (see also List, 2003; 2004). The use of ungraded sportscards in the new

experiments also provides a conceptual bridge to the public goods treatments, since the

quality of the public goods we present is more difficult to gauge than that of the graded

sportscards.

A. Market Treatment

       The market study was conducted on the floor of a sportscard show in Orlando,

Florida and closely followed List (2002).       Each participant’s experience typically

followed three steps: (1) inspection of the goods, (2) learning the auction rules and

placing a bid, and (3) conclusion of the transaction. Subjects approached the table

voluntarily, and if they agreed to participate were randomly allocated into one of the four

treatments.

       In treatment LI (LI denotes less, isolated), ten 1982 Topps baseball cards were

auctioned off. The 10-card bundle had a book value of approximately $15. These cards

were the same ones that List (2002) used, except in this case the grade of the cards was

removed so the professional grader’s opinion was not observable to the participants.5 In

treatment MI (MI denotes more, isolated), a bundle of 13 cards was auctioned: the

identical 10 Topps baseball cards and an additional 3 different 1982 baseball cards that

were previously professionally graded as in “poor” condition—the worst grade possible.

While the three additional cards are of much lower quality than the original 10 cards, they

do have economic value: in aggregate, the 13-card bundle has a book value of



                                            9
approximately $18. As in the LI treatment, the grades were not observable to the market

participants.

       In the third treatment, treatment JP (Joint Price), the same two bundles were

auctioned off side-by-side. Accordingly, each subject submits two bids, one for each

commodity bundle. To provide comparable budget sets across the three treatments we

informed subjects in treatment JP that if they were winners in both auctions, a random

coin toss would determine which auction was binding. Finally, to provide an explicit link

to the extant preference reversal literature on evaluation scales, and provide insights into

behavior over choices, a fourth treatment, treatment JC (Joint Choice), was conducted in

which market participants simply paid $3 and chose their most preferred bundle (rather

than bidding in an auction). Panel A in Table 1 summarizes the 2x3 experimental design.

Akin to List (2002), we allow both experts (dealers) and non-experts to participate in the

experiment.

       To gather individual values, we use an incentive-compatible mechanism; the

random nth price auction. As described in Shogren et al. (2001), the random nth-price

auction can be characterized by 4 simple steps: (1) each bidder submits a bid; (2) all bids

are rank-ordered from lowest to highest; (3) the monitor selects a random number (n)

uniformly distributed between 2 and Z where Z is the number of bidders; and (4) the

monitor sells one unit of the good to each of the (n-1) highest bidders at the nth-price.

Akin to Vickrey’s (1961) second-price auction, the random nth price auction is

theoretically incentive compatible. Determining the number of goods available through

the random device is useful to us, since it means that every participant is potentially in

the market. Thus bidders have an incentive for truthful revelation even if they believe



                                            10
they are not near the upper tail of the value distribution.6 Since we are not testing the

incentive compatibility of the institution, and want to avoid excess noise, we inform the

subjects that it is in their best interest to bid their true value in the auctions. We reinforce

this notion via several examples that illustrate the optimal strategy of truthtelling.

       After learning the auction rules, the subject placed their bid(s) to complete Step 2.

Finally, in Step 3 the experimenter concluded the experiment by informing the subject

that he should return at 6PM on Sunday to find out the results of the auction. Subjects

were informed that if they could not return for the specified transaction time, they would

be contacted and would receive their cards in the mail (postage paid by the experimenter)

within three days of receipt of payment.

B. Public Goods Treatments

       In the public goods treatments respondents valued either wetlands restoration (W)

or farmland preservation (F). The experimental design parallels the market study in that

sets of goods are valued either jointly (J) or in isolation (I). Further, the sets of goods can

be characterized as L or M with L          M.      As in the sportscard study, the additional

goods in the M bundle are of lower quality than those in L. In the farmland preservation

treatment the L question asks for a contribution to the permanent preservation of 500

acres at a specified price. The good in the M question includes the 500 acres and an

additional temporary preservation of 50 acres. The wetlands example similarly augments

a full cleanup with a partial cleanup of an additional area of polluted wetlands. As in the

sportscard treatment a ‘more is less’ interpretation of the results depends on the fact that

the lower quality goods do in fact have positive economic value.78




                                              11
       Treatments were conducted at contribution levels of $50 and $100 for the

wetlands study and at the $50 level for the farmland study and are denoted as W50,

W100, and F50.9 In the isolated evaluation mode subjects had the hypothetical choice of

contributing the indicated amount or refusing. In the joint evaluation mode subjects could

choose to contribute either to the L or M goods, or not contribute (N).

       Subjects for the W50 and W100 treatments were recruited from visitors to a booth

displayed by the Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics at the University

of Maryland on Maryland Day in April 2002.           Participants were paid $1 for their

responses and completed the protocol in 2 to 3 minutes.         Sixty-five percent of the

Maryland Day subjects were students at the University. In the F50 treatment, subjects

were University of Maryland undergraduates who responded to the questionnaire before

participating in an unrelated set of experiments. Panel B of Table 1 summarizes the

public goods experimental design.

C. Hypotheses

       We examine the impact of evaluation mode on bids in the market treatments and

on contribution rates in the public good treatments. To clarify the hypotheses and results

we make use of the following definitions:

Definition 1: A strong evaluation mode effect is observed when, in aggregate, preferences
over the bundles are: LI (Less, Isolated) MI (More, Isolated) and MJ (More, Joint)
LJ (Less, Joint).
Definition 2: A weak evaluation mode effect is observed when, in aggregate, preferences
over the bundles are: LI ~ MI and MJ     LJ.

A strong evaluation mode effect requires an inverse relationship between the scope of the

good and the valuation in the isolated evaluation mode - the “more is less” reversal. A

weak evaluation mode effect requires insensitivity to scope in the isolated evaluation


                                            12
mode. The two definitions are identical with respect to the joint evaluation mode where

MJ  LJ.

       In addition to testing for the existence of evaluation mode effects we examine

subsidiary hypotheses on (i) the impact of grading on the extent of evaluation mode

effects in the market treatments and (ii) the impact of evaluation mode on aggregate

contributions to public goods. The nature of the test for (i) requires examining bids from

the joint and isolated modes simultaneously. To control for the two bids per person in the

joint mode we estimate an error components model that is described in detail, below.

Parameter estimates from this model also provide evidence on the tests of the primary

hypotheses on the existence of strong and weak evaluation mode effects.

       The specific hypotheses are presented in Table 2. The table also presents the

linear combinations of coefficients from the regression model that is used to test the

hypotheses in the market setting. The model contains indicator variables for good type

(More), evaluation mode (Joint) and their interaction, along with dealer status (Dealer)

and the information condition (Grade), and all interactions. Each variable is coded one

when the condition is consistent with the variable name and zero otherwise and so the

baseline (constant only) estimate represents the bids on ungraded cards of nondealers in

the Less and Isolated condition, a structure we exploit in constructing the tests of

hypotheses outlined in Table 2.10

       The subsidiary hypothesis (ii) for the public good treatments examines whether

contribution rates differ between the evaluation modes by comparing the proportion of

respondents who offer to contribute in the joint versus isolated modes.




                                            13
IV.    Experimental Results

A. Market Treatment

       Table 3 summarizes the sportscard market data. For each treatment two rows of

data are included. The first row contains the results from the new field experiments

conducted with the ungraded cards. In the row below, in italics, are the results from

List’s 2002 study in which the identical cards were graded. We present three results from

the sporstcard market treatments, the first two from the new ungraded card data, and the

third comparing the bids for the graded and ungraded sportscards.

Result 1: Inexperienced agents exhibit a strong evaluation mode effect consistent with a
preference reversal. For this group average bids are significantly higher for the 10-card
L bundle than for the 13-card M bundle in the isolated evaluation mode. The relationship
is reversed under joint evaluation.

Result 2: The experienced agent subject pool is characterized by a weak evaluation mode
effect. Bids on average are higher for the 10-card L bundle in the isolated evaluation
mode and for the 13-card M bundle under joint evaluation. However, the differences are
not significant at conventional levels. Evidence of a weak effect of evaluation mode
exists, with M preferred to L in the joint evaluation mode.

Result 3: Among inexperienced agents the strong evaluation mode effect is accentuated
when the information on quality is removed.


Statistical inference to support these three results makes use of nonparametric and

parametric tests.   The parametric tests include t-tests for independent and matched

samples, and a tobit regression model in which the bid, censored at zero, is regressed on

treatment indicator variables and their interactions. The model uses a random effects

error structure and is given by:                       if     and zero otherwise, with

 representing bidder i’s tth bid with t = 1 (t =1, 2) in the isolated (joint) evaluation

mode, and  the vector of indicator variables and their interactions. The distribution of

the error components is                 ,             , and the vector of


                                                  14
parameters, β, is estimated with maximum likelihood techniques (Woolridge 2002).

Results presented in Table 4 include the magnitude and statistical significance of

individual coefficients as well as combinations of coefficients relevant for identifying the

existence of evaluation mode effects (Result 1 and 2), and the impact of grading on their

extent (Result 3).

       Descriptive statistics supporting Result 1 are presented in the first panel of Table

3. In the isolated evaluation mode the average bid for non-dealers is $4.05 for the 10-card

bundle (LI) but only $1.82 for the 13-card bundle (MI), a difference of approximately

121 percent. Both a large-sample t-test and a Mann-Whitney rank-sum test indicate that

prices across the evaluation modes differ significantly at a level of p < .01, with the LI

bundle strongly preferred to the MI bundle. The tobit estimation provides additional

support for Result 1 due to the large negative and statistically significant coefficient on

the More variable, reported in column 1 of Table 4.

       Treatment JP yields the opposite result with the M bundle valued more highly.

The mean bid for the 10-card LJ bundle is $2.89, whereas the 13-card MJ bundle’s mean

bid is $3.32, a difference of approximately 13 percent. Using both a matched pairs t-test

and a Wilcoxon signed-rank test for matched pairs, we find that the null hypothesis of

identical values is rejected at the p < .01 level. Further, the sum of More and the More x

Joint interaction term from the tobit model, presented as Result 1 in Table 4, is positive

(0.548) and significant (p < 0.01). Synthesizing the results across evaluation modes, we

find that preferences do reverse; the L (M) bundle is valued more highly under isolated

(joint) evaluation. This is the ‘more is less’ result found in List’s initial study and

elsewhere in the literature.



                                            15
          Descriptive statistics supporting Result 2, for the market professionals, are

presented in the lower panel of Table 3. While directionally the values are in accord with

the data gathered from non-dealers, the magnitudes of the differences are smaller. In the

isolated evaluation mode, the dealers average bid is $3.52 ($3.36) for the L (M) bundle,

and the difference is not significant using any of the statistical methodologies. In the

joint evaluation mode, the dealers bid $3.48 ($3.21) for the M (L) bundle. The statistical

significance of this result differs across methodologies. A matched pairs t-test yields a

significant difference (p< 0.01) but the tobit coefficients (Result 2b in Table 4) do not (p

= 0.14). Hence, by the first measure, we do find evidence of a weak evaluation mode

effect and conclude that evaluation mode has a minor impact on the dealers’ willingness-

to-pay.

          Result 3 considers how the information on sportscard quality interacts with

evaluation mode by examining willingness-to-pay across the graded and ungraded cards.

We limit attention to the nondealer subject pool, where significant evaluation mode

effects are observed, and find that the preference reversal in the isolated evaluation mode

is accentuated for nondealers when the information on card quality is removed.

Comparing the LI and MI treatments in the first panel of Table 3, the $4.05 and $1.82

mean values for the ungraded cards represent a 122% difference in pricing. For the

graded cards the L good is priced 58% higher than the M good ($4.85 vs. $3.06). The

coefficient on the interaction term Graded x More is positive (1.71) and significant (p =

.027) indicating that the magnitude of the preference reversal increases when the grading

is removed. This finding provides fresh evidence and support for the hypothesis that

information across evaluation modes is critical in determining the strength of valuation



                                            16
anomalies. The result further heightens the stakes when considering applications to

public goods, where the quality may not always be as easily observed.

B. Public Goods Treatments

       Hypotheses tests on the existence of evaluation mode effects and on aggregate

contributions in the public goods treatments are reported as results 4 and 5, and are as

follows:

Result 4: Contributions to public goods are characterized by a weak evaluation mode
effect in which M is preferred to L under joint evaluation and L and M do not differ
significantly under isolated evaluation.

Result 5: Contribution rates are higher in the joint evaluation mode for the pooled
wetlands treatments and in the aggregate public goods data.

Table 5 summarizes the data for Result 4 which reflects a pattern of results consistent

with a modest effect of evaluation mode. Columns LI and MI report results for the

isolated evaluation mode. In all treatments we find that the proportion contributing to the

L good is greater than that contributing to the M good, although the results are not

statistically significant even if responses are pooled across all treatments. Thus we

observe that LI ~ MI; contributions are insensitive to the scope of the good in the isolated

evaluation mode, a result on contribution rates similar to that observed on the bidding

behavior for the professionals in the sportscard market.

       The columns labeled Joint Evaluation Mode in Table 5 provide some evidence

that M is preferred to L in this setting. Column J reports the proportions choosing the L

and M public goods as well as those declining to contribute (N).11 Column LM reports

on tests of proportions between the L and M goods conditional on contribution. For the

farmland preservation data presented as treatment F50, there is clear evidence that MJ 

LJ. The same is true for the pooled public goods data.       Combining these results with


                                            17
those in the isolated evaluation mode where there is no statistical difference between LI

and MI contribution rates, yields results consistent with the definition of a weak

evaluation mode effect.

       Finally, as noted in Result 5, we observe that contributions are higher in the joint

evaluation mode. Table 6 presents a summary of the data that compares contribution

rates in the joint and isolated evaluation modes, where a contribution represents a

willingness to contribute to either the L or M good. We find that contribution rates are

uniformly higher in the joint evaluation mode, ranging between 70% and 80% in contrast

to rates between 55% and 63% under isolated evaluation.               These differences are

statistically significant in the pooled watershed data and in the data pooled over all the

public goods treatments (treatment WFP). These results also indicate that the evaluation

mode affects the valuation results.

V.     Discussion

       The experimental sessions yield evidence of evaluation mode effects in the

valuation of private goods, and weak evaluation mode effects in the valuation of public

goods. The extent of the effects, where we see variability, depends on both experience

and the provision of information that helps bridge the differences in information

evaluability across modes.      Dual process theories of cognition can deepen our

understanding of these results, and guide stated preference design.

       The strong preference reversal observed by the nonprofessionals in the sportscard

market provides the most dramatic evidence of the importance of these cognitive

processes.   The inability to compare goods in the isolated evaluation mode places

individuals in a situation of relative uncertainty. As a result, the observable low quality



                                            18
of a subset of the goods has a strong effect on the overall valuation, consistent with the

idea that rapid System 1 processes are less likely to be moderated or constrained by

System 2 cognition in the isolated evaluation mode. The weak preference reversal

exhibited by the market professionals provides additional evidence consistent with dual-

process theory since experience can provide an internal referent of value, mitigating the

importance of information evaluability. The informational treatment provides additional

evidence consistent with the evaluability hypothesis. The impact of mode on valuation is

accentuated when information readily available across modes – the sportscard grades – is

removed.

       The similarity of the public good results to those of the market professionals is

interesting. The weak evaluation mode effect observed in the public good setting

indicates that the expression of preferences is affected by framing, consistent with

insensitivity to scope. In analogy with the sportscard dealers, we hypothesize that those

valuing the public goods have internal referents that mitigate Type 1 responses, perhaps

due to the extensive publicity that these issues have received from governmental and

nongovernmental sources in the region which, in effect, provide respondents with

experience in valuing the goods.

       The source of the insensitivity to scope observed in this study differs from that

most frequently discussed in the literature. Rather than arguing that respondents are

expressing general attitudes or are unable to formulate economic values for the goods

(see for example, Kahneman and Knetsch (1992), and Desvouges et al. (1993)), we focus

on identifying the cognitive underpinnings of scope effects, using both market and non-

market valuations for robustness. Our emphasis complements recent work by Heberlein



                                           19
et al. (2005) who also argue that “we need to better understand the conditions that

produce scope failure.” Their study examines the impact of affect and cognition on

sensitivity to scope, restricting attention to the isolated evaluation mode. They find lack

of scope in valuations is widespread, but note that it is consistent with the respondents’

cognitive and affective focus on the smaller, usually local, goods. Our study introduces

an additional important consideration by demonstrating that the cognitive and affective

contributions to valuation can differ significantly across joint and isolated valuation

modes.

VI.      Conclusion

         Mainstream economists have begun to more fully recognize that a firm

understanding of the psychological processes of individuals is necessary to model human

behavior and prescribe efficient public policies.     In the environmental arena, where

nonmarket valuation is a critical tool, the stakes are quite high, and one can learn a great

deal by more fully understanding psychological concepts and how they influence

individual choices. Using two related but distinct experimental frameworks to compare

value statements across joint and isolated evaluation modes, this study presents results

directly at the intersection of the disciplines of environmental economics and psychology.

         Our findings confirm and extend previous work on the importance of differences

in information evaluability across evaluation modes. Perhaps most provocatively, the

results reaffirm the importance of the “more is less” preference reversal phenomenon and

extend it to the domain of public goods. Overall, our data suggest that preferences are

inconsistently expressed over the joint and isolated evaluation modes for both private and




                                            20
public goods. The effect is accentuated when uncertainty exists about the good’s quality,

but is reduced with the experience of the respondent.

       Needless to say, this research has raised more questions than it has answered. We

believe, however, that researchers and policymakers who must decide which valuation

technique to use should consider the issues raised by the cognitive processes associated

with the joint and isolated evaluation modes. From one perspective, the joint evaluation

mode is preferred since the monotonicity of valuations in the joint evaluation mode yields

results consistent with the fundamental idea that “more is more.” Decisions made in the

isolated evaluation mode, however, have a relevance that is also undeniable: once a

policy is implemented, after all, its impact is experienced largely in isolation.

       More generally we believe that it is important to understand the nuances and

biases of our valuation techniques, particularly since the U.S. federal government

requires that every economically significant proposal (about 50-100 per year) receive a

formal analysis of the benefits and costs. In this sense, our hope is that the pattern of

results discovered herein will eventually lead to theories and behavioral generalizations

that become part of the analyst’s tool box.




                                              21
Appendix A: Random nth Price Auction

Detailed procedures:

    Welcome to Lister’s Auctions. You have the opportunity to bid in an auction for the goods on
    the table. The number of auction participants, denoted “n” below, will be determined by how
    many subjects choose to participate in the auction during this sportscard show.

Auction Rules:
   You are asked to submit one bid in the auction, and there will be a total of n bids submitted,
   where n, is unknown at this time and depends on how many people agree to participate. The
   monitor will rank all the bids from highest to lowest and the winning bidder(s) will be
   determined in a random fashion. Here is how it works: The monitor will put all the bids in a
   bag and randomly draw out one of them. If the monitor randomly selects the bid ranked #20
   (the 20th highest bid), then each of the 19 bidders who bid more than this bid would win in the
   auction and receive the goods after they sent me the value of the 20th highest bid. There is an
   equal chance that the selected bid will be the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, …or nth highest bid. Let’s
   go through an example to be sure you understand the auction rules.

    In this example the number of bidders, n, is equal to 10. After receiving all the bids I will
    rank the bids from highest to lowest as follows:

        $C      High bidder
        $D      2nd highest bidder
        $A      3rd
        $B      4th
        $F      5th
        $G      6th
        $L      7th
        $K      8th
        $V      9th
        $Z      Low bidder

    I will draw from the bag one of these bids. Assume that the bid drawn randomly is the 8th
    highest which corresponds to $K. If this bid is drawn, the top 7 bidders win and pay the
    value of the 8th highest bid for the cards. In this case all the players would pay $K.

    In this type of auction you should bid your true value for the goods (i.e. what they are worth
    to you). If you bid too much, you increase your chance of winning, but face the risk of
    paying more than the cards are worth to you. If you bid below your true value, then you risk
    not being among the winners when a bid of your true value might have won and you would
    have paid less than your true value for the cards. This is true because in this type of auction
    your bid never affects the price you pay in the auction, just whether you win or lose. In this
    example, note that since all seven winners pay the 8th highest price, they will all pay less than
    their true value, when that is their bid.

    Here are a couple of examples that demonstrate that it is best for to bid your true value. First
    consider the case where I bid more than my true value. Suppose I bid $C, and turn out to be
    the highest bidder. In this case I am guaranteed to win in the auction since the winning bid is
    drawn from those ranked 2nd through 10th. Suppose now that the random draw brings up the


                                                 22
    3rd highest bid, $A which is the price I must pay as an auction winner. If my true value is less
    than $A, I have won the auction with my bid of $C but actually suffer a loss. My loss is the
    difference between the price I pay, $A, and my true value for the cards. Similarly consider
    the case where I bid less than my true value. Suppose that I bid $Z and am the low bidder.
    Assume this time that the random draw pulls up the 9th highest bid $V. If my true valuation
    were greater than $V, I have missed an opportunity to buy at a price less than my true value,
    by bidding too low.

    Do you have any questions about the bidding process?

Final Transaction:

       At 6 PM Sunday night I will determine the winners of the auction. After the winners pay
me (cash or check) they will receive the goods. Note that, regardless of the price, the goods will
be awarded to the winners. In case you cannot attend the “determination of winners” session at 6
PM, please provide your name, mailing address, and phone number below.


Name___________________________________
Address_______________________________________________________________________
Phone # _________________________________

        If you are unable to attend at 6 PM, I will contact you by phone. Upon receipt of your
check or cash, I will send you the goods that you have won. All postage will be paid by Lister’s
Auctions for goods mailed to winners.

         Note that I guarantee to sell the goods to the winners no matter what the final auction
price turns out to be. Your bid represents a binding commitment to buy the goods you win at the
prices specified by the auction outcomes.


Good Luck – please write your bids on the sheets provided.

Thanks for participating.




                                                23
Confidential Bidding and Survey Sheet


BID: $ _______________________


Signature: ______________________________________________


  I verify that if I am determined a winner I will be liable for paying the determined amount in
                                 exchange for the bundle of cards.

 Please complete the information below. THIS INFORMATION WILL BE KEPT STRICTLY
                                     CONFIDENTIAL.

1. How long have you been active in the sportscards and memorabilia market?

                                         ____________yrs

2. Are you a sportscard or sports memorabilia professional dealer? ________________

3. Gender:     Male             Female

4. Age ___________              Date of Birth ______________

5. What is the highest grade of education that you have completed? (circle one)
               1) Eight grade      3) 2-Year College               5) 4-year college
              2) High School      4) Other post-High school      6) Graduate school

6. What is your approximate yearly income from all sources, before taxes?
                   1) Less than $10,000                5) $40,000 to $49,999
                   2) $10,000 to $19,999               6) $50,000 to $74,999
                   3) $20,000 to $29,999               7) $75,000 to $99,999
                     4) $30,000 to $39,999              8) $100,000 or over

7. Have you ever seen these goods before this show? _____________________




                                               24
Appendix B: Public Goods Questions

1. Wetlands treatments W50 and W100. X is 50 in W50 and 100 in W100.

Question L:
Thanks for participating!

A special Maryland Day 2002 environmental conservation program has been discussed at the
University of Maryland. This program, if funded, would entirely clean up 500 acres of wetlands
in the Chesapeake Bay. The clean up program would by funded by individual contributions.
Each individual who contributes to the clean up program would receive a certificate indicating
that they helped the effort.

I would contribute $X to a program that would result in an entire clean up of 500 acres of
wetlands:

                        Yes                      No

Question M:
Thanks for participating!

A special Maryland Day 2002 environmental conservation program has been discussed at the
University of Maryland. This program, if funded, would entirely clean up 500 acres of wetlands
in the Chesapeake Bay and partially clean up 50 acres. The clean up program would by funded
by individual contributions. Each individual who contributes to the clean up program would
receive a certificate indicating that they helped the effort.

I would contribute $X to a program that would result in an entire clean up of 500 acres of
wetlands and a partial clean up of 50 acres:

                        Yes                      No

Question J:
Thanks for participating!

A special Maryland Day 2002 environmental conservation program has been discussed at the
University of Maryland. This program, if funded, would clean up wetlands in the Chesapeake
Bay. The clean up program would by funded by individual contributions. Each individual who
contributes $X to the clean up program would receive a certificate indicating that they helped the
effort.

Please choose your most preferred choice from below:

        A. For a contribution of $X, an entire clean up of 500 acres of wetlands would
          occur.
        B. For a contribution of $X, an entire clean up of 500 acres and a partial clean up of 50
           acres would occur.
        C. I would not contribute $X to this program.



                                                25
2. F50 – closed-ended farmland preservation question

Question L:
Thanks for participating!

A special Maryland Day 2002 environmental conservation program has been discussed at the
University of Maryland. This program would permanently preserve 500 acres of Maryland
farmland. The farmland conservation program would be funded by contributions to conserve
farmland in parcels 1/10 of an acre in size (1/10 of an acre is about the size of a basketball court).
Each individual who purchases 1 unit (basketball court size) of farmland for the conservation
program would receive a certificate indicating that they helped the conservation effort.

If a farmland conservation package were offered to you at a price of $50 (to permanently preserve
500 acres), would you purchase one?

                 Yes                      No

Question M:
Thanks for participating!

A special Maryland Day 2002 environmental conservation program has been discussed at the
University of Maryland. This program would permanently preserve 500 acres of Maryland
farmland and temporarily (5 years) preserve 50 acres. The farmland conservation program would
be funded by contributions to conserve farmland in parcels 1/10 of an acre in size (1/10 of an acre
is about the size of a basketball court). Each individual who purchases 1 unit (basketball court
size) of farmland for the conservation program would receive a certificate indicating that they
helped the conservation effort.

If a farmland conservation package were offered to you at a price of $50 (to permanently preserve
500 acres) and temporarily (5 years) preserve 50 acres, would you purchase one?

                 Yes                      No
Question J:
Thanks for participating!

A special Maryland Day 2002 environmental conservation program has been discussed at the
University of Maryland. This program would preserve farmland throughout Maryland. The
farmland conservation program would be funded by contributions to conserve farmland in parcels
1/10 of an acre in size (1/10 of an acre is about the size of a basketball court). Each individual
who purchases 1 unit (basketball court size) of farmland for the conservation program would
receive a certificate indicating that they helped the conservation effort.

Please choose your most preferred choice from below:
    A. I would purchase a farmland conservation package offered to me at a price of $50 if it
        would permanently preserve 500 acres of Maryland farmland.
    B. I would purchase a farmland conservation package offered to me at a price of $50 if it
        would permanently preserve 500 acres and temporarily (5 years) preserve 50 acres of
        Maryland farmland.
 I would not purchase a farmland conservation package if it were offered to me at a price of $50

                                                  26
                                      References

Adamowicz, W. L. 2000. Environmental Valuation. Stated Choice Methods: Analysis
     and Application. eds. J. Louviere, D. Hensher, and J. Swait. Cambridge, UK:
     Cambridge University Press.

Adamowicz, W. L., P. Boxall, M. Williams, and J. Louviere. 1998. Stated Preference
     Approaches for Measuring Passive Use Values: Choice Experiments and
     Contingent Valuation. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 80, no. 1: 64-
     75.

Bazerman, M. H. D. A Moore A. E. Tenbrunsel K. A. Wade-Benzoni and S. Blount.
      1999. Explaining how Preferences Change Across Joint versus Separate
      Evaluation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 39: 41-58.

Bazerman, M. H. G. F. Loewenstein and S. B. White. 1992. Reversals of Preference in
      Allocation Decisions: Judging an Alternative versus Choosing Among
      Alternatives. Administrative Science Quarterly: 220-240.

Boxall, P. C., W. L. Adamowicz, J. Swait, M. Williams, and J. Louviere. 1996. A
       Comparison of Stated Preference Methods for Environmental Valuation.
       Ecological Economics 18, no. 3: 243-53.

Carson, Richard T., Nicholas E. Flores, and Robert C. Mitchell. 1999. The Theory and
       Measurement of Passive-Use Value. Valuing Environmental Preferences: Theory
       and Practice of the Contingent Valuation Method in the US, EU, and Developing
       Countries: Controversies and Evidence. pp. 97-130. Eds. Ian J. Bateman and
       Kenneth G. Willis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Carson, Richard T., Nicholas E. Flores,and Norman F. Meade. 2001. Contingent
       Valuation: Controversies and Evidence. Environmental and Resource Economics
       19: 173-210.

Chaikin, S., and Y. Trope, Eds. 1999. Dual-Process Theories in Social Psychology. New
       York: Guilford Press.

Desvousges,W.H., F.R. Johnson, R.W. Dunford, K.J. Boyle, S.P. Hudson, K.N. Wilson,
      1993. Measuring natural resource damages with contingent valuation: tests of
      validity and reliability, Contingent Valuation: A Critical Assessment, pp. 91–159.
      Ed. J.A. Hausman, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Frederick, Shane 2002. Automated Choice Heuristics. Heuristics of Intuitive Judgment.
       Eds. T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman, 548-58. New York: Cambridge
       University Press.

Frederick, Shane, and Baruch Fischoff. Scope (In)sensitivity in Elicited Valuations, Risk
       Decision and Policy, 1998, 3, pp. 109-123.


                                           27
Grether, David M. and Plott, Charles. Economic Theory of Choice and the Preference
       Reversal Phenomenon, American Economic Review, September 1979, 69, pp.
       623-638.

Heberlein, Thomas A., Matthew W Wilson, Richard C. Bishop and Nora Schaeffer.
       Scope Sensitivity and the Validity of Contingent Valuation, Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management, 2005, 50. pp 1-22.

Hsee, C. K. 1996. The Evaluability Hypothesis: An Explanation of Preference Reversals
       Between Joint and Separate Evaluations of Alternatives. Organizational Behavior
       and Human Decision Processes 46: 247-57.

———. 1998. Less is Better: When Low-Value Options are Valued more Highly than
   High-Value Options. Journal of Behavioral Decision-Making 11: 107-21.

Hsee, C. K G. F. Loewenstein S. Blount and M. A. Bazerman. 1999. Preference
      Reversals Between Joint and Separate Evaluations of Options: A Review and
      Theoretical Analysis. Psychological Bulletin 125, no. 5: 576-90.

Irwin, J. R., P. Slovic, S. Lichtenstein, and McClelland. G.H. 1993. Preference Reversals
        and the Measurement of Environmental Values. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
        6: 5-18.

Kahneman, Daniel. Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral
      Economics. American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (5), 1449-1475.

Kahneman, D., and S. Frederick. 2002. Representativeness Revisited: Attribute
      Substitution in Intuitive Judgment. Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of
      Intuitive Thought. T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman, 49-81. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.

Kahneman, D. and J.L. Knetsch. 1992. Valuing Public Goods: The Purchase of Moral
      Satisfaction, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 22, 57-70.

List, J. A. 2002. Preference Reversals of a Different Kind: The "more is less"
        Phenomenon. American Economic Review 92, no. 5: 1636-43.

List, John A., “Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 118 (2003), pp. 41-71
List, John A., "Neoclassical Theory Versus Prospect Theory: Evidence from the
       Marketplace," Econometrica, 72 (2004), pp. 615-625.

Louviere, J. J. D. A. Hensher and J. D. Swait. 2000. Stated Choice Models: Analysis and
       Application. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Magat, W. A., W.K. Viscusi, and J. Huber. 1988. Paired Comparison and Contingent
      Valuation Approaches to Morbidity Risk Valuation. Journal of Environmental

                                           28
       Economics and Management 15, no. 4: 395-411.

Shogren, Jason F., Michael Margolis, Cannon Koo, and John A. List. 2001. A Random
      nth-price Auction. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 46: 409-421.

Slovic, Paul, Melissa Finucane, Ellen Peters, and Donald G. MacGregor. 2007. The
       Affect Heuristic. European Journal of Operational Research 177 (3): 1333-1352.

Slovic, Paul., and S. Lichtenstein. 1968. Relative Importance of Probabilities and Payoffs
        in Risk Taking. Journal of Experimental Psychology 78: 1-18.

Takatsuka, Y., J. Kahn, and S. Stewart. 2002. Choice Model and Contingent Valuation
       Estimates of the Value of Ecosystem Attributes. Working Paper: University of
       Tennessee.

Vickrey, W. 1961. Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders. Journal
       of Finance 16:8-37.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Estimation of Cross Section and Panel Data.
      Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                           29
Table 1 Experimental Design


Panel A: Sportscard Market
                                               Auction Bids                              Choice

 Subject                     Isolated Evaluation           Joint Evaluation         Joint Evaluation


 Nondealers                         LI & MI                         JP                      JC


 Dealers                            LI & MI                         JP                      JC

Notes: List (2002) conducted a parallel design with the cards graded for quality
LI = Less, Isolated: 10-card bundles valued in isolation
MI = More, Isolated: 13-card bundles valued in isolation
 JP = More & Less: 10 and 13-card bundles priced jointly
JC = More & Less: Choice between 10 and 13-card bundles




Panel B: Public Goods Design

      Good & Price                           Isolated Evaluation                     Joint Evaluation


      Watershed $50                                 LI & MI                              L, M, & N
          W50

      Watershed $100                                LI & MI                              L, M, & N
          W100

Farmland preservation $50                           LI & MI                              L, M, & N
          F50
Notes: Questions are dichotomous (yes/no) and ask about willingness-to-pay for the public good at the
price indicated in column 1.
Separate: LI = Less Separate, MI= More Separate
Joint: L & M bundles in joint evaluation mode with N = ‘no contribution’ option also available,




                                                     30
Table 2 Hypothesis Tests

    Hypothesis                   Alternative                                                 Coefficients of Interest


                                                                               Nondealers:More < 0 & More + More x Joint > 0
Market: Evaluation
                            MI  LI & MJ  LJ             Dealers: More + More x Deal < 0 & More + More x Deal +More x Joint + More x Deal x Joint
     Mode
                                                                                                    >0


      Market:             [LI – MI]U > [LI – MI]G                                          Nondealers:Graded x More > 0
    Information

Public: Evaluation         MS  LS & MJ          LJ                                                      N/A
      Mode

      Public:                MS+LS  MJ + LJ                                                             N/A
    Contribution
The Market Evaluation Mode hypothesis is tested on both the dealer and nondealer subject pools. The Market Information hypothesis is tested on nondealers
across the ungraded (U) and graded (G) sportscards. Public Evaluation Mode Effect and Public Contribution hypotheses are tested by treatment and pooled over
treatments. Mean values of bids are used for the market hypotheses and proportion contributing for the public goods hypotheses. Coefficients of interest are
associated with tobit models for the sportcards which predict bids using indicators and their interactions.




                                                                             31
Table 3 Experimental Results – Sportscard Market
                                                                     Bundle

Treatment                                         10 cards                                  13 cards
Nondealers                                                        Auction Bids
LI (n=33)                                       $4.05 (.45)                                    ---
LI(n = 35)                                      4.86 (0.65)                                    ---

MI(n=30)                                              ---                                 $1.82 (.26)
MI (n = 37)                                           ---                                  3.06 (0.60)

JP (n = 31)                                     $2.89 (.51)                               $3.32 (.55)
JP (n = 33)                                     3.72 (0.53)                                4.52 (0.69)
                                                                     Choices
JC (n = 20)                                      1/20 (5%)                               19/20 (95%)
JC (n = 25)                                      2/25 (8%)                               23/25 (92%)


Dealers                                                           Auction Bids
LI (n = 30)                                     $3.52 (0.33)                                   ---
LI (n = 35)                                      3.20 (0.44)                                   ---

MI (n = 30)                                           ---                                $3.36 (0.65)
MI (n = 35)                                           ---                                 2.70 (0.41)

JP (n = 30)                                     $3.21 (0.53)                             $3.48 (0.53)
JP (n = 28)                                      3.09 (0.47)                              3.45 (0.50)

                                                                     Choices
JC (n = 15)                                   0/15 (0%)                                  15/15 (100%)
JC (n = 13)                                   0/13 (0%)                                  13/13 (100%)
Notes: Mean auction bids are reported. Numbers adjacent to bids in parentheses are standard errors
(percentages for choice treatments). The results in bold are for the ungraded sportscard treatments.
Underneath in italics, are the comparable results for the graded sportscards, reported originally in List
(2002).




                                                      32
Table 4 Tobit Estimates of Auction Bids – Pooled Sportscard Market Treatments
Dependent Variable
Bid                              Parameters                  Linear Combinations
Graded                                        0.007                  Result 1           0.548***
                                            (0.539)                                    (0.198)
More                                        -3.246***                Result 2a          0.138
                                            (0.598)                                    (0.657)
Joint                                       -1.487***                Result 2b          0.293
                                            (0.515)                                    (0.199)
Dealer                                       -0.804
                                            (0.671)
Graded x More                                1.707**
                                            (0.771)
Graded x Joint                               1.500**
                                            (0.693)
Dealer x More                                3.384***
                                            (0.893)
Dealer x Joint                                0.692
                                            (0.797)
More x Joint                                 3.794***
                                            (0.101)
Graded x Dealer                              -0.752
                                            (0.858)
Dealer x More x Joint                       -3.639***
                                            (0.937)
Graded x More x Joint                        -1.334
                                            (0.819)
Graded x Dealer x More                      -2.284**
                                            (1.151)
Graded x Dealer x Joint                      -0.620
                                            (1.090)
Graded x Dealer x More x Joint               2.089*
                                            (1.221)
Constant                                     4.337***
                                            (0.395)
______________________________________________________________________
N                                             509
log likelihood                             -1069.80
chi-square(15)                              122.78
Prob>chi-square                              0.000
Bids on graded cards are from List’s (2002) study. Standard errors are in parentheses underneath the
coefficients. Statistical significance is indicated by: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p< .01. Result 1 tests
More + More x Joint > 0. Result 2a tests More + More x Deal < 0. Result 2b tests More+ Dealer x
More + More x Joint + Dealer x More x Joint > 0.




                                                   33
Table 5: Proportion Contributing to Public Good

                 Isolated Evaluation Mode                Joint Evaluation Mode

Treatment          Less             More                  J                   LM
                   (LI)             (MI)                (LMN)                 χ12
W50                 .67              .63          L=.30,M=.50,N=.20         χ2=1.50
                  n = 30           n = 30               n = 29
                                                                             p=.22
W100                .62              .61         L=.31 M=.45,N=.24          χ2=.73
                  n = 29           n = 31              n = 30
                                                                            p=.39
W Pooled            .64              .62         L=.30,M=.48,N=.22          χ2=2.17
                   n=59             n=61                n = 59               p=.14
F50                 .58              .51         L=.17,M=.53,N=.30          χ2=5.76
                  n = 36           n = 39              n = 30
                                                                             p=.02

W&F                 .62              .58         L=.26,M =.49,N =.25        χ2=6.58
Pooled            n = 95           n = 100             n = 89
                                                                             p=.01
Separate Evaluation Mode: Less and More columns present the portion contributing to the public goods in
the separate evaluation modes. Although contributions to the inferior good are uniformly higher, these
differences are not significant at conventional levels in any treatment.
Joint Evaluation Mode: Column J displays proportions contributing to less (L), more (M) public goods or
not contributing (N). Column ML reports on the significance of one-sample tests of proportions for the L
and M goods in the joint evaluation mode, conditional on contribution.




Table 6: Contribution Rates Across Isolated and Joint Evaluation Modes
Treatments                       Isolated                    Joint                    S vs. J
                                Evaluation                Evaluation                    χ2
WP                                 0.63                      0.79                      3.90
                                 n = 120                    n = 59                    p< .05
F50                                0.55                      0.70                      2.08
                                  n = 75                     n=30                     p=.15
WFP                                0.60                      0.75                      6.26
                                  n=195                      n=89                     p<.02
Notes: Entries are the proportions contributing to the public good pooling the L and M goods within
each evaluation mode.




                                                   34
1
   Carson, Flores and Mitchell (1999) emphasize the isolated evaluation aspect of contingent valuation,
noting that “contingent valuation surveys are centered around the choice between having a good and not
having it. This format serves to focus the respondent’s attention on the distinguishing characteristics.”
2
  Our interest in evaluation mode effects is not meant to imply that insensitivity to scope is inevitable in CV
studies. Carson, Flores, and Meade (2001) review the evidence and find that the majority of published
studies pass scope tests. Our focus is to shed light on the mechanism underlying scope failure when it does
occur.
3
  Previous research has distinguished automated from deliberate choice heuristics. The automated heuristic
with regard to judgments is operative “when the individual assesses a specified target attribute of a
judgment by substituting another property of that object – the heuristic attribute – which comes more
readily to mind” (Kahneman and Frederick 2002; see also Frederick 2002). Kahneman and Frederick
(2002) review the representativeness heuristic, and Slovic et al. (2007) the affect heuristic.
4
  A summary of List’s (2002) results is in Table 3 of this paper.
5
   To remove the grades we had to crack the cards out of their protective containers. Great care was taken
not to damage any of the cards.
6
  Shogren et al. (2001) provide evidence on the effectiveness of the random nth price auction. They note
also that simply making n large would diminish incentives for truthful revelation for high-value bidders.
7
  If the additional low quality good was considered a bad we would expect the L good to be preferred in
joint evaluations. This is not the case in either the public or private good treatments.
8
  The L good is always presented first in the joint evaluation questions for the public goods. While
variation in the order of the stimulus is preferred, any unmeasured order effects in the protocol are likely to
work against our observing the MJ LJ relationship associated with an evaluation mode effect.
9
  An open-ended WTP question was also developed for farmland preservation, however, the structure of the
question differs from the others in this study and in the literature and the results are omitted. The questions
in the remaining public goods treatments are structured to parallel existing investigations of evaluation
mode reversals. We believe that the results of this inquiry suggest the need for additional research with
more detailed stated-preference protocols.
10
    The linear combinations of coefficients for the sportscard market hypothesis tests in Table 2 are derived
as follows:
Market Evaluation Mode Effect hypotheses for nondealers:
MS  LS  Constant + More < Constant  More < 0.
MJ  LJ Constant + More +Joint +More x Joint > Constant + Joint More+More x Joint > 0.
Market Evaluation Mode Effect hypotheses dealers:
MS  LSConstant + Dealer + More + Dealer x More<Constant + Dealer More + Dealer x More < 0.
MJ  LJ Constant + Dealer + More + Joint + Dealer x More + More x Joint + Dealer x Joint + Dealer
x More x Joint > Constant + Dealer + Joint + Dealer x Joint  More+ Dealer x More + More x Joint +
Dealer x More x Joint > 0.
Market Information hypothesis (nondealers):
[LS – MS]U > [LS – MS]G Constant – [Constant + More] > Constant +Grade – [Constant +Grade +
More + Grade x More] Grade x More > 0.
11
   Statistical tests cannot distinguish between the contribution rates to the W50 and W100 treatments. As a
result, we also report the results of the pooled watershed treatments as WP.




                                                      35
