                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SELF-FULFILLING CREDIT MARKET FREEZES

                                        Lucian A. Bebchuk
                                          Itay Goldstein

                                       Working Paper 16031
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16031


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2010




We thank Paolo Pesenti, Jakub Steiner, and Andrew Winton for insightful comments. We also thank
seminar and conference participants at the American Economic Association Annual Meeting, the Bank
of Portugal Conference on Financial Intermediation, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Harvard
University, the IMF Annual Research Conference, the Wharton School, and Temple University. Bebchuk
would like to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Lucian A. Bebchuk and Itay Goldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Self-Fulfilling Credit Market Freezes
Lucian A. Bebchuk and Itay Goldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 16031
May 2010
JEL No. D21,E44,E58,E62,G18,G21,G28

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model of a self-fulfilling credit market freeze and uses it to study alternative
governmental responses to such a crisis. We study an economy in which operating firms are interdependent,
with their success depending on the ability of other operating firms to obtain financing. In such an
economy, an inefficient credit market freeze may arise in which banks abstain from lending to operating
firms with good projects because of their self-fulfilling expectations that other banks will not be making
such loans. Our model enables us to study the effectiveness of alternative measures for getting an
economy out of an inefficient credit market freeze. In particular, we study the effectiveness of interest
rate cuts, infusion of capital into banks, direct lending to operating firms by the government, and the
provision of government capital or guarantees to finance or encourage privately managed lending.
Our analysis provides a framework for analyzing and evaluating the standard and nonstandard instruments
used by authorities during the financial crisis of 2008-2009.


Lucian A. Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Itay Goldstein
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction
          An important aspect of the economic crisis of 2008-2009 has been the contraction
or “freezing” of credit to nonfinancial firms.1 During the crisis, financial firms have
displayed considerable reluctance to extend loans to nonfinancial firms (as well as
households). Some observers attributed the reluctance of financial firms to lend to
irrational fear, while others attributed it to a rational assessment of the fundamentals of
the economy, which can be expected to reduce the number of operating firms with good
projects worthy of financing.
          We analyze in this paper another factor that may contribute to the contraction of
credit in such circumstances. In particular, we show how coordination failure among
financial institutions can lead to inefficient “credit markets freeze” equilibria. In such
equilibria, financial institutions rationally avoid lending to nonfinancial firms (operating
firms) that have projects that would be worthy if banks did not withdraw from the lending
market en masse. They do so out of self-fulfilling fear, validated in equilibrium, that
other financial institutions would withhold loans and that operating companies would not
be able to succeed in an environment in which other operating firms fail to obtain financ-
ing.
          The primary contribution of the paper is in analyzing the effectiveness of various
government policies in getting the economy out of such a self-fulfilling credit-freeze
equilibrium. The analysis identifies the role and potential limitations of standard instru-
ments such as interest rate cuts and infusion of capital into the financial sector. It also
considers less traditional forms of intervention – including direct intervention in lending
to nonfinancial companies, provision of incentives to financial firms to lend to such
companies, and supplying government capital to private funds dedicated to such lending
– and analyzes why and when they may be needed. Our analysis provides a framework
for understanding and assessing the range of instruments used by authorities to revive
credit markets in the course of the financial crisis.
          Our analysis is based on the premise (put forward in earlier work such as Cooper
and John (1988)) that operating firms, or at least a significant fraction of such firms,
benefit from the success of other operating firms in the economy, and the returns they

1
    For a description of the crisis and the events leading to it, see Brunnermeier (2009).



                                                    1
will make on borrowed capital thus will increase if other operating firms are able to
obtain financing. This interdependence can be generated by multiple channels. A firm’s
success depends on the success of firms who use its products, of those who supply its
inputs, and of those whose employees buy its products. As a result of this interdepen-
dence, the decision of any given financial institution whether to lend to a given operating
firm depends not only on the financial institution’s assessment of the firm’s project but
also on its expectations as to whether other financial institutions will lend money to other
operating firms. (Below we refer to financial institutions as banks for simplicity.)
       If fundamentals are sufficiently poor, it may be rational for banks not to lend
regardless of what they expect other banks to do. And if fundamentals are sufficiently
good, it may be rational for banks to lend regardless of what they expect other banks to
do. However, given the positive spillovers among firms, there is an intermediate range of
fundamentals that can give rise to multiple equilibria. In an efficient lending equilibrium,
banks expect other banks to lend to operating firms with worthy projects, and these
expectations are self-fulfilling. In an inefficient credit freeze equilibrium, banks have
self-fulfilling expectations that other banks will withdraw from the lending market, and
they rationally avoid lending to operating firms. We use the global-games methodology,
where banks observe noisy signals about the macroeconomic fundamentals – which
affect the profitability of real projects – to identify when an inefficient credit freeze arises
in equilibrium. We also analyze the effect of various government policies on the proba-
bility of an inefficient freeze and on the overall wealth in the economy.
       One standard policy measure to encourage lending is interest rate reduction. Dur-
ing the recent financial crisis, the Fed and other central banks around the world slashed
interest rates. In our model, interest rate cuts by the central bank make an inefficient
credit market freeze less likely by reducing the payoff to banks that avoid lending and
invest in government bonds. Such cuts, however, still leave a range of fundamentals
where the economy remains in an inefficient credit-freeze equilibrium, in which banks’
self-fulfilling expectations that other banks will not lend lead them to avoid lending to
firms that would be worth funding if other banks were expected to lend.
       Another prominent course of government policy works via capital infusion. Our
analysis indicates that a shock to the banking system that depletes the amount of capital



                                               2
banks have makes an inefficient credit market freeze equilibrium more likely. Such
depletion in the financial sector’s capital makes each bank more concerned that operating
firms in the economy will not receive sufficient capital and therefore more reluctant to
lend the capital it has to operating firms. As a result, intervention through the infusion of
capital into banks, which governments in the US, UK, and other countries did throughout
the financial crisis, can be beneficial and reduces the probability of a freeze in our model.
However, we show that this measure, again, has limited effectiveness. Even when banks
know that the banking sector’s capital is no longer depleted, there is still a range of
macroeconomic fundamentals in which the economy remains in an inefficient credit
freeze and banks avoid lending to operating firms that they would fund if other banks
were expected to lend.
       We then turn to examine the possibility of the government providing capital di-
rectly to operating firms. In macroeconomic circumstances in which an inefficient credit
freeze arises, should the government serve as “lender of last resort” to operating firms?
That is, should the government provide capital directly to Main Street rather than provide
it to Wall Street with the hope that the banks will in turn lend it to operating firms? This
has been attempted during the financial crisis when the government bought commercial
paper of some firms. In our model, direct lending to operating firms is more effective in
reducing the probability of a credit freeze, as it avoids the coordination problem among
banks in lending the money. However, as long as the government does not have the same
ability as banks to distinguish between operating firms with good and bad projects, direct
lending to operating firms, without screening of such firms by intermediating banks, can
waste resources by channeling capital to some firms with bad projects.
       Thus, in some circumstances, providing the government’s capital to banks will
fail to break an inefficient credit freeze, but providing this capital directly to operating
firms will fail to take advantage of the screening expertise of private parties and hence to
allocate capital among productive operating firms.        Therefore, our analysis devotes
considerable attention to alternative mechanisms under which the government harnesses
the screening expertise of financial firms but also provides them with incentives to lend.
For example, during the financial crisis, the US government has used the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) to provide government capital, while limiting



                                             3
the downside risks of funds that extended certain types of credit to the nonfinancial
economy. We analyze and compare the consequences of several alternative mechanisms.
We identify their potential advantages and disadvantages relative to standard policy
instruments as well as to each other. This analysis provides a rationale and framework
for assessing and designing government-supported mechanisms to encourage lending
while harnessing financial firms’ expertise.
       Although we shall explicitly discuss lending by financial firms to nonfinancial
operating firms, it will be clear to the reader that the basic insights of our analysis also
apply to some lending by the financial sector to other nonfinancial borrowers, namely,
individuals and households. That will be the case whenever there is interdependence
among borrowers that makes the ability of some nonfinancial borrowers to repay loans to
a given bank dependent on the ability of other nonfinancial borrowers to obtain financing
from other banks. This might be the case, for example, in the housing market, where the
expected resale value of any given house for which a loan is sought from a bank depends
on future housing prices and thus might depend on the willingness of other banks to
finance house purchases. Our focus in this paper, however, is on lending to business
operating firms, and we leave the extension and adaptation of our analysis to other
lending to nonfinancial borrowers for subsequent work.
       Our paper is related to the large literature on bank runs, where depositors rush to
demand early withdrawal from the bank because they believe that other depositors are
going to do the same. The seminal paper on bank runs is by Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), and it was followed by much subsequent work on the subject (see, e.g., Allen and
Gale (1998), Peck and Shell (2003), and Goldstein and Pauzner (2005)). The ideas in the
bank-run literature have subsequently been applied to also describe runs by investors on
currencies (Morris and Shin (1998)), financial markets (Bernardo and Welch (2004) and
Morris and Shin (2004a)), and other contexts. Our paper, which builds on the analytical
insights of this literature, focuses on a different context. We do not consider a run by
depositors or investors on financial institutions, financial markets, or governments, but
rather a run by financial institutions on the nonfinancial firms of the real economy. More
importantly, our contribution is in analyzing alternative government responses that can be
used in this context.



                                               4
       Several papers analyze policies of deposit insurance or ‘lender of last resort’ to
prevent runs on financial institutions. These include the papers by Rochet and Vives
(2004), Corsetti, Guimaraes, and Roubini (2006), and Morris and Shin (2006). The
policy problem we consider here is fundamentally different. In these papers, the analysis
revolves around capital infusion to an institution that might be subject to a run because it
lacks capital. In our model, on the other hand, coordination failures arise among finan-
cial institutions in their decision to lend to operating firms. Hence, capital infusion to
financial institutions might not be sufficient to eliminate an inefficient credit market
freeze, as they might fail to coordinate on lending this capital. This leads to our discus-
sion on the role of direct government intervention in lending to operating firms, and the
various ways of implementing it without losing the informational advantage that banks
have in lending to such firms.2
       The source of coordination failures among banks in our model is the interdepen-
dence among firms in the real economy that makes the investment in a firm profitable
only if other firms are able to invest and produce. Such strategic complementarities in
the macro economy were motivated in an influential paper by Cooper and John (1988),
and have been used in other papers (e.g., Goldstein and Pauzner (2004)). Our paper
complements this literature by showing how such complementarities can cause an
inefficient credit freeze and analyze government policy in such context.
       Models of strategic complementarities usually yield multiple equilibria and thus
do not lend themselves naturally to policy analysis. To overcome this problem, we
follow recent work on self-fulfilling crises and rely on global-games techniques. The
global-games literature has been pioneered by Carlsson and van Damme (1993) and
Morris and Shin (1998) and is reviewed in Morris and Shin (2003)). In particular, we
build here on the model in Morris and Shin (2004b).
       The recent financial crisis has generated a surge of theoretical research on the per-
formance of markets during the financial crisis. Let us mention a few papers that are
more related to ours. Acharya, Gale, and Yorulmazer (2009) analyze the debt rollover
problem, where the fact that debt needs to be rolled over frequently reduces the debt

2
 A recent paper by Sakovics and Steiner (2009) analyzes a related question of subsidizing agents
who participate in a coordination game. While their paper focuses on who should be subsidized,
ours focuses on how to subsidize.


                                               5
capacity of firms with little credit risk. Diamond and Rajan (2009) argue that the possi-
bility of future fire sales makes banks want to hoard on cash instead of extending new
loans. Benmelech and Bergman (2009) analyze government policies in a model where
credit traps evolve as a result of reduction in collateral value. Philippon and Schnabl
(2009) analyze government policy in a model where credit does not flow because firms
suffer from a debt overhang problem.
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our
framework of analysis.     Section 3 provides an equilibrium analysis, identifying the
conditions under which inefficient credit freeze equilibria will arise. Section 4 analyzes
alternative governmental policies that may be used to produce a credit thaw, identifying
their potential benefits and limitations. Section 5 concludes.



2. The Model
       There is a continuum [0,K] of identical financial firms, which we call banks for
simplicity. Each bank has 1 dollar of capital. Banks can choose whether to invest their
capital in a risk-free asset, such as a deposit with the central bank, generating 1+r (>1)
dollars next period, or lend it to operating (nonfinancial) firms. Banks are risk neutral
and hence make their choices so as to maximize expected payoffs.
       Operating firms have access to investment projects that require investment of 1
dollar, but do not have any capital to finance them. They rely on bank lending to invest
in their projects. There are two types of operating firms. Some operating firms have bad
projects that always generate a gross return of 0. Others have good projects, generating a
gross return of 1+R (>1+r) when the macroeconomic fundamentals are strong and a
sufficient number of operating firms get the required financing to invest. Specifically,
the return on a good project is assumed to take the following form:
                               1
                                                        .                          (1)
                               0
       Here,  is a macroeconomic fundamental that can represent various factors, such
as firms’ productivity, consumers’ demand, the cost of imported oil, etc. The variable L
represents the mass of firms that received loans from banks to invest in their projects. In
the basic model,          , where       0,1 , whose value is determined endogenously in



                                             6
the model, is the proportion of banks that decide to lend to firms. Hence, the macroeco-
nomic fundamentals and the proportion of firms investing in their projects are together
responsible for the profitability of good projects. a is a parameter capturing the impor-
tance of complementarities vs. fundamentals in making projects profitable, and b is a
parameter capturing the threshold needed to become profitable.3
        The effect of     reflects the interdependence in payoffs among operating firms in
the economy. This interdependence can be due to several reasons. For example, many
firms can prosper only when there are other firms in the economy that can provide them
with adequate inputs. In addition, many firms sell some or all of their output to other
firms, and thus depend on the operation of other firms. Even firms that sell their output
solely to individuals might suffer from declining sales if other firms are not able to
employ these individuals. In sum, the success of the economy in our model requires the
coordination among various operating firms and the banks that finance them. Such
coordination issues in the macro economy were proposed before by other authors, e.g., by
Cooper and John (1988).4
        We assume that banks can tell the difference between firms with bad projects
(“bad firms”) and firms with good projects (“good firms”), and thus can choose to lend
only to firms with good projects. The firms with bad projects will have an explicit role in
the model later when we consider the possibility of the government extending direct
loans to operating firms. We assume for simplicity that the mass of firms with good
projects is greater than the mass of banks K, and thus banks are able to extract the full
return R from lending to good firms, whose projects were successful. Given this assump-
tion, we will be able to show that an inefficient credit-freeze equilibrium may arise even
when the competitive conditions enable banks to extract the full surplus from lending and
are thus as favorable to lending activity as possible.



3
 Note that we use a discontinuous return function (i.e., projects either succeed or do not succeed)
for simplicity of exposition. Our results would hold in a model where the return on projects is a
continuous function of  and L.
4
  Clearly, there are some firms (e.g., firms providing services to firms in bankruptcy) that can
become better off when other firms are hurting. Our analysis applies to the universe of nonfinan-
cial firms where positive complementarities are the dominant force.



                                                7
       We assume that the fundamental  is not publicly known. It is normally distri-
buted around a mean of y. We consider y to be public news available to everyone about
the strength of the economy. The standard deviation of  around y is            , and we use
           to denote the precision of the distribution of . Each bank i receives a private

signal regarding the value of , given by                . Here, the individual specific noise
terms i are independently normally distributed with mean 0 and standard deviation           .
We use              to denote the precision of banks’ signals. Banks make their decisions

whether to invest in the riskless asset or to lend to operating firms after observing these
signals.
       Because the profitability of operating firms depends on macroeconomic condi-
tions and the availability of financing to other firms, a bank’s incentive to lend to a given
operating firm with a good project is higher when the economy's fundamentals are
favorable and when the number of banks who are going to lend is high. While the
optimal behavior of a bank usually depends on its belief regarding the behavior of other
banks, there are ranges of macroeconomic fundamentals in which banks have a dominant
strategy. More specifically, when the fundamental  is above b, a bank will prefer to
lend to an operating firm no matter what it believes other banks will do. This is because
in this range the return on lending is guaranteed to be 1+R. Similarly, when the funda-
mental is below           , the bank will invest in a government bond even if it believes
that all the other banks will lend to operating firms.
       Since  is drawn from an unbounded distribution, there are signals at which banks
choose to lend to operating firms independently of their beliefs regarding other banks’
behavior, as well as signals at which they choose not to lend independently of their
beliefs. As for banks that receive a signal in the intermediate range, however, their
optimal decision depends on their expectations about whether other banks will lend to
operating firms. This calls for an equilibrium analysis to which we turn next.




                                              8
3. Equilibrium Analysis


3.1. Credit Freeze
        We solve the model using global-games techniques. In particular, we follow here
Morris and Shin (2004b). Proposition 1 states the basic equilibrium result.


Proposition 1: Suppose that the information in banks’ signals is precise relative to prior
                            √
information, so that            . Then, there is a unique Bayesian Nash Equilibrium in

which all banks lend to operating firms if they observe a signal above         and withdraw
from lending if they observe a signal below      . Investment projects then succeed if and
only if the fundamentals are above the threshold       , between          and , which is
characterized by the following equation:

                                   Φ                         Φ             ,         (2)

where     · is the cumulative distribution function for the standard normal.


Remarks: (i) Intuition: The intuition behind the result of Proposition 1 can be explained
as follows. Due to strategic complementarities, when banks do not know that the funda-
mentals are below           or above , they do not have a dominant action to choose. In
this case, they simply want to do what other banks do. In a model with common know-
ledge about the fundamental , this would result in multiple equilibria, as both the case
where all banks lend to operating firms and the case where none of them does so can be
supported by equilibrium beliefs. The assumption that banks observe slightly noisy
information about  combined with the presence of extreme regions where they have
dominant actions pins down the threshold equilibrium characterized by equation (2) as
the unique equilibrium here.
        Intuitively, with noisy information, banks that observe a signal slightly below the
upper dominance region know that the fundamental may well be higher than their signal
and thus choose to lend. Knowing this, banks with even lower signals will also choose to



                                             9
lend. This rationale can be repeated again and again, guaranteeing a range of signals
below the upper dominance region, where banks choose to lend. Similarly, due to the
noisy information, there will be a range of signals above the lower dominance region,
where banks will choose to invest in government bonds. The proof of equilibrium with
global-game techniques demonstrates that this procedure exactly separates the real line,
so that banks lend above       and do not lend below it, leading to success of real projects
above      and failure below it.
         (ii) The No-Lending Threshold: Equation (2) characterizes the threshold funda-
mental      below which investment projects fail. To gain some intuition for what deter-
mines this threshold, it is useful to consider the limit, as banks’ private signals become
infinitely precise, i.e., as   approaches infinity. In this case,       and   converge to the
same value, which is given by:
                                                                                       (3)

         Intuitively, a bank observing the signal    is indifferent between lending to oper-
ating firms and investing in the risk-free asset under the belief that the proportion of other
banks lending to operating firms is uniformly distributed between 0 and 1.5 This implies

that lending to operating firms will be profitable with probability 1                 , which

yields the following indifference equation:

                                    1         1           1         .

Rearranging this equation, we get (3).
         Because banks’ signals have infinitesimally small noise, the equilibrium result is
that all banks lend when the fundamental is above          and do not lend when the funda-
mental is below      . Hence, below     , the economy ends up in a no-lending equilibrium.
         (iii) Efficient and Inefficient No-Lending Equilibria: When macroeconomic
fundamentals are so bleak that we are below                , the refusal of banks to lend is
efficient because firms’ projects will not produce payoffs exceeding the economy’s


5
  The rationale behind the uniform-distribution belief is that each bank perceives a uniform
distribution on the proportion of banks getting lower signals than its own. Given that the bank
observed  * and that other banks lend if and only if they obtained a signal above , the bank
perceives a uniform distribution on n.



                                              10
riskless rate even if no banks withdraw from the lending market. When fundamentals lie
between            and     , however, the economy is in an inefficient no-lending equili-
brium. In this interval, banks withdraw from lending even though, were banks all willing
to lend, firms’ projects would produce returns exceeding the riskless rate and the banks
would be all better off relative to the no-lending equilibrium. We refer to such an
inefficient equilibrium as a credit freeze.
        (iv) Credit Freezes as a Coordination Failure: When fundamentals lie
tween           and    , the credit freeze can be viewed as due to coordination failure.
Here, banks do not lend to operating firms just because they fear that other banks will not
lend to operating firms.     The fundamentals uniquely determine banks’ expectations
regarding what other banks are going to do and thus (indirectly) uniquely determine
whether a credit freeze will arise; however, the credit freeze is still inefficient. If the
banks could have concluded among themselves an enforceable agreement on how they
would act, they would have agreed on a coordinated strategy of lending to firms. How-
ever, as long as the banks make their decisions separately, based on their expectations as
to how other banks will act, an inefficient credit freeze equilibrium may ensue. Interes-
tingly, this inefficiency could have been avoided if the available capital was held by one
large bank (or a few large banks) instead of many small ones. Thus, from the point of
view of avoiding coordination failures, having large financial institutions may be an
advantage.
        (v) The 2008-2009 Credit Crunch: The analysis above indicates that a credit
freeze can arise in a certain range of fundamentals and that an economy may fall into
such an equilibrium when fundamentals worsen. The credit crunch of 2008-2009 was
preceded by the arrival of bad economic news about macroeconomic fundamentals. For
one thing, the substantial decline in housing prices considerably reduced the wealth of
households, and such a reduction could have been expected to produce a subsequent
decrease in consumer spending and thus the demand for firms’ output. Our model
indicates that the arrival of bad macroeconomic news might trigger a credit freeze that
will lead to the refusal of banks to lend to firms, even though the firms would still be
worth financing notwithstanding the deterioration in macroeconomic fundamentals absent
a self-fulfilling withdrawal of banks from the lending market. Such triggering of a credit



                                              11
freeze will of course further reinforce and exacerbate the effects of the deterioration in
fundamentals that triggered it in the first place.


3.2. Can Reduction in Banks’ Capital Trigger A Credit Freeze?
       The credit crunch of 2008-2009 was preceded not only by deteriorating macroe-
conomic fundamentals but also by a deterioration in the capital positions of financial
institutions as a result of losses from real estate mortgage assets. This subsection ex-
amines whether a reduction in the banks’ capital can trigger a credit freeze, even holding
the fundamental  constant.
       To study this issue, let us introduce the parameter l (between 0 and 1), which de-
notes the proportion of capital lost by banks in the economy due to bad past investments.
For simplicity of exposition, we assume that capital has been lost uniformly across banks,
that is, each bank in the economy lost a fraction l of its capital. With this parameter
introduced into the model, the capital of a single bank (1-l) does no longer suffice to
finance a firm’s project. Hence, each firm will have to pool resources from more than
one bank. Eventually, if a fraction n of banks decide to lend the capital they have to
operating firms, the total capital that will be provided as loans to such firms will be only a
fraction n(1-l) of K, and hence          1        .
       Proposition 2 characterizes the new equilibrium results and the effect that the pa-
rameter l may have on the realization of a credit freeze.


Proposition 2: (a) In the unique Bayesian Nash Equilibrium, investment projects succeed
if and only if the fundamentals are above the threshold            . The threshold             is
characterized by the following equation:

                       1             1       Φ                        Φ              ,   (4)

(b)The threshold           is an increasing function of the parameter l; hence, an increase
in the fraction of bank capital that was lost, l, with no change in the fundamental , can
shift the economy from an efficient lending equilibrium to an inefficient credit freeze.




                                                 12
Remark: The intuition behind the result of Proposition 2, which indicates that a reduc-
tion in the banking sector’s capital raises the threshold, below which banks elect to
withdraw from lending, is as follows. A reduction in the banking sector’s capital makes
each bank “less sure” that other banks will provide enough capital to operating firms to
guarantee adequate return from extending loans to operating companies. Hence, such a
reduction makes each bank more concerned that, in the event it provides a loan to a given
operating company, the firm will nonetheless suffer from the inability of many other
operating companies to obtain financing. Technically, in equilibrium, a higher funda-
mental  is required to make banks indifferent between providing credit to operating
companies and investing in the riskless asset, which leads to an increase in the threshold
  , and thus in turn to a larger range of fundamentals at which an inefficient credit freeze
ensues.
          Thus, our results indicate that banking losses can drive the economy into a credit
freeze even without any accompanying change in other macroeconomic fundamentals.
What is important to stress is that such reduction in capital will make operating firms less
likely to receive financing not only because of the direct effect that some capital which
could have been available for loans is no longer in place, but also because of the indirect
effect, which our result identifies, that it might deprive operating firms even of the capital
that remains in place. By influencing banks’ expectations as to how many operating
firms will be able to obtain financing, the disappearance of some capital can make banks
more reluctant to lend the capital that still remains.



4. Government Policy
          The focus of our paper is on analyzing and comparing various government poli-
cies intended to reduce the inefficiency from credit-freeze equilibria. This analysis,
building on the setup and equilibrium analysis of the preceding two sections, is provided
in this section.




                                              13
4.1.    Interest Rate Reduction
       One governmental measure that is natural to examine as an instrument for ad-
dressing a credit freeze is a cut in interest rates. During the credit crisis of 2008, gov-
ernments around the world have made substantial use of interest rate cuts. During 2008,
in a series of moves, the Federal Reserve Board cut the federal rate considerably, bring-
ing the Federal funds rate down from 4.25% in January to 1% in October. Similar steps
have been taken by other central banks around the world. In October 2008, for example,
facing a worldwide contraction in lending, twenty one countries around the world,
including the US and the UK, simultaneously cut interest rates.
       Under normal market conditions, a cut in a country’s interest rate can be expected
to spur lending. To what extent can a cut in interest rate, however, be relied on to
eliminate a coordination failure that results in an inefficient credit freeze equilibrium? As
we show below, a cut in interest rate (i.e., reducing r) may – but does not have to –
produce a credit thaw. The following proposition summarizes the results.


Proposition 3: (a) For every level of bank losses l, a decrease in the interest rate r on
government bonds reduces the threshold             , below which a credit freeze occurs, and
hence reduces the likelihood of a credit freeze.
(b) Yet, for every r ≥ 0 and l (between 0 and 1), there are realizations of the fundamental
, at which an inefficient credit freeze occurs.


Remarks: (i) The Reduction in the Likelihood of Credit Freeze: A reduction in r makes
investment in the riskless asset less attractive and thus lowers the expected return that
will be necessary to induce banks to lend to operating firms, which in turn lowers the
threshold     above which banks will lend to such firms rather than withdraw from the
lending market. It is interesting to note that the effect of the reduction in r on the deci-
sion of an individual bank is more than just the direct effect on this bank’s payoff.
Because the reduction in interest rate can be expected to affect other banks’ decisions, it
also affects the individual bank’s decision through its effect on the bank’s expectation
concerning how other banks will act.




                                             14
        (ii) The Limits of Interest Rate Cuts: The second part of the proposition says that
interest rate reductions cannot eliminate all inefficient credit freezes. Even if the gov-
ernment reduces r all the way to 0 (or to a very low level just above zero),       will remain
above            1      , which implies that inefficient credit freezes may occur in the
interval between            1       and    . The intuition goes back to the coordination-
failure aspect of credit freezes in our model. Even if the net return on the riskless asset is
close to zero, banks will prefer to invest in it rather than lending to operating firms when
they expect that other banks will all do so. Thus, while governmental reduction in
interest rates can shift the threshold that triggers coordination failure and credit freezes, it
cannot completely eliminate such coordination failures. This result might be thought of
as similar in spirit to the well-known liquidity trap in monetary economics.


4.2. Infusion of Capital to the Banking System
        During the financial crisis of 2008-2009, governments around the world infused
very large amounts of capital into banks to shore up banks’ capital positions, which have
eroded due to losses from real estate mortgage assets and other investments. In the fall of
2008, for example, the US Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) provided about $250
billion in capital to banks, and the UK invested about $90 billion in several major banks.
        Infusion of capital into banks is a policy measure that is natural to consider in fi-
nancial crises. Infusion of capital, e.g., in the form of a lender of last resort, has been
used to prevent or stop bank runs in which depositors seek to withdraw their deposits en
masse from a bank. When a solvent bank faces a problem of a bank run, providing the
bank with capital may ensure depositors that their money is safe and prevent a run on the
bank. Infusion of capital has also been used in the case of insolvent banks when govern-
ments felt that making sure such banks can meet their obligations to depositors is neces-
sary to prevent a contagion effect that would lead to runs by depositors on other banks.
        The subject we examine using our model is different because it does not involve
potential runs by depositors on banks (or financial institutions more generally). Rather, it
is the banks that may “run on the economy” by not extending loans to operating firms. In
our context, therefore, capital infusion will not be designed to enable banks to meet their
obligations toward their creditors. Rather, in our context, capital infusion may be used to



                                              15
facilitate lending by banks to operating firms in two ways: first, the direct and
straightforward way of providing banks with additional capital that they may use for the
purposes of extending loans; and, second, the indirect effect, which our model highlights,
of encouraging banks to lend to operating firms capital that they already have but that
they might elect not to lend in the absence of the capital infusion to the banking sector
and the shift in expectations produced by it.
        To analyze governmental infusion of capital into the banking sector, let us assume
that the government has or can obtain capital that would be sufficient to cover part of
banks’ losses. In particular, let us assume that the government has an amount                  ,
enabling it to inject a proportion   of the lost capital l to all banks in the economy. If the
government injects the capital, each bank will have a total capital of 1       1     .
        Banks will again make a decision whether to lend to operating firms or invest in
the riskless asset. The first option yields a gross return of 1         if firms’ investment
projects succeed, which happens as long as the proportion of banks lending to firms is

above                , while the second one yields a certain gross return of 1+r. To focus

on capital infusion, we will assume from now that r=0, so that the government has
already reduced the interest rate as much as possible. The following proposition analyzes
the effect of injecting capital to the banking system.


Proposition 4: (a) The threshold         , below which a credit freeze occurs when the
government covers proportion α of bank losses is implicitly determined by:
                        1    1

                 1      1        Φ                         Φ               ,             (5)

(b) The threshold        decreases in α .Yet, for every α ≤l, there are realizations of the
fundamental  at which an inefficient credit freeze will occur.


Remarks: (i) The Reduction in the Likelihood of Credit Freeze: By providing capital to
the banking system, the government creates externalities that make the projects of
operating firms more profitable. This is because banks have more capital to lend to




                                                16
operating firms, and so when they decide to lend, operating firms will produce greater
returns. This encourages banks to lend to operating firms, making a credit thaw more
likely to occur. Importantly, the effect of capital infusion is not merely due to the fact
that the government’s capital flows to operating firms, but rather mostly due to the fact
that the availability of this capital makes banks more likely to lend capital that they
already have. This is thus the mechanism behind the effect of TARP if the underlying
problem was indeed a coordination problem.
       Technically, at the threshold, below which a credit freeze occurs, banks will re-
quire a lower fundamental  to be indifferent between lending and not lending to operat-
ing firms when the government injects more capital to the banking system (α is higher).
This is because a higher α implies that under a uniform distribution of banks that decide
to lend, the returns from lending increase. This pushes the threshold  * lower and
increases the likelihood of a credit thaw.
       (ii) The Limits of Capital Infusion: Even when the government covers all the
losses that banks accumulated, banks will be reluctant to lend if they believe other banks
are not going to lend. Hence, this policy of the government cannot fully eliminate
coordination-based credit freezes. This sharpens the difference between infusion of
capital to banks in our model, where crises reflect a run of banks on operating firms, and
infusion of capital in a model of a run on the bank. Because, in our model, coordination
failures arise among banks in their decision to lend to operating firms, banks end up not
using capital that they have for lending purposes. Hence, capital infusion might not be
sufficient to eliminate an inefficient credit market freeze.


4.3. Direct Lending to Operating Firms
       As explained above, the difficulty that the government faces in breaking a credit
freeze by providing capital to banks is that banks might take the capital and not lend it to
operating firms due to the fear that other banks will not lend. An alternative to providing
capital to banks is for the government to forgo the intermediation by banks and lend
directly to operating firms. This approach could be viewed as extending the govern-
ment’s role as a lender of last resort from the financial sector to the nonfinancial sector.
During the financial crisis of 2008-2009, governments provided some direct financing to



                                              17
operating firms. In the US, for example, the government made an unprecedented entry
into the market for commercial paper and purchased the commercial paper of some
nonfinancial firms.
       While such an approach avoids the coordination problems that might impede
lending by banks, it suffers from the disadvantage that the government does not have the
ability that banks have to screen operating firms. Thus, providing capital to firms without
using the intermediation services of banks would lead to lending to some firms that have
bad projects and should not get financing.
       To examine the efficiency of direct lending formally, we have to explicitly de-
scribe the bad operating firms in our model. So far, there was no need to consider them
and how many of them exist, as the assumption was that banks can tell good firms from
bad firms, and thus bad firms would always be avoided. If the government attempts to
lend to operating firms directly, however, it will have to consider the consequences of not
being able to tell good firms from bad firms.
       For the formal analysis, let us denote the mass of bad (good) operating firms in
the economy as B (G). Recall that G is greater than K (the mass of banks). Suppose that
the government has capital at the amount of              (as in Section 4.2) and it has to
decide whether to inject it directly to operating firms or to the banks. When the govern-
ment lends capital to operating firms, the capital is randomly allocated between good or
bad firms. We denote the proportion of the capital that finds its way to bad firms as β ≡
B/(B+G). For simplicity, we assume that the government does not know the realization
of the fundamental  (and does not get any signal about it). Initially, we will assume that
the operation of firms with bad projects, while producing no returns for the lending bank,
still provides a positive externality for other operating firms (as firms with bad projects
do purchase inputs from other firms etc.); below we will discuss how our conclusions
will change if we were to assume that such externalities flow only from the operation of
firms with good projects.
       We begin the analysis by comparing the likelihood of a credit freeze under direct
lending to operating firms vs. under infusion of capital to banks. The result is summa-
rized in the following proposition.




                                             18
Proposition 5: If the government lends              directly to operating firms, there is a credit
freeze equilibrium if and only if the fundamental  is below the threshold             , which is
implicitly defined by:

                 1     1               1        Φ                           Φ             , (6)

Denoting the threshold under capital injection to banks (defined in equation (5)) as
       and the one under direct lending to firms (defined in equation(6)) as                 , we
get that for every α and l,                    , implying that the probability of a credit freeze
is higher under capital injection to banks than under direct lending to operating firms.


Remark: The intuition for why directly lending the government’s capital will reduce the
lending threshold more than infusing the capital into banks is simple. When the govern-
ment injects capital to banks, some of this capital might remain “stuck” in the banking
system as banks fail to coordinate on lending it to operating firms. When the government
lends the capital directly to operating firms, banks know that it will generate the desired
externalities. As a result, lending directly to operating firms more effectively increases
the returns to banks from lending and encourages banks to lend, and thus is more likely to
bring the economy to a credit thaw.
        Focusing attention on the limit case where banks’ private signals become infinite-
ly precise, i.e., as   approaches infinity, the comparison between the two cases becomes
very transparent. Following (3), we can express the thresholds under the two regimes in
the limit case as:
                                  1    1                     1       1                    (7)

                                   1       1                  1                           (8)

Equations (7) and (8) clearly reveal that                        .
        But, as noted above, the fact that direct lending is more likely to generate a credit
thaw is not enough to make this policy measure more efficient. We now carry out a full
comparison between the two measures. For a sharp comparison, we focus attention on
the limit case considered above. This is easier to work with because at the limit either all
banks lend or none of them does, and then we do not have to consider cases where some



                                                19
banks lend but projects fail and vice versa. The following proposition characterizes
which policy ends up producing better results for different levels of the fundamentals.


Proposition 6: (a) When the fundamental  is below                or above        , the overall
wealth in the economy is higher under injection of capital to the banking system than
under direct lending to operating firms.
(b) When the fundamental  is between                  and      , the comparison between the
two regimes yields ambiguous results. For a sufficiently large β and/or small R the
wealth is higher under injection of capital to the banking system.
(c) Ex-ante, when choosing the policy, the government should choose to inject capital to
the banking system when β is sufficiently high, R is sufficiently low, and y is either
sufficiently high or sufficiently low (i.e., outside an intermediate range).


Remarks: (i) When  is below                or above          : In these circumstances, direct
lending is clearly undesirable, as it does not turn a credit freeze into a thaw, but still
generates the costs of lending by the government. In particular, when  is above            ,a
credit thaw is produced under both policies, but direct lending involves lending money to
bad borrowers. When  is below              , there is a credit freeze under both policies, but
direct lending involves lending to bad borrowers and also to good borrowers, whose
projects fail because there is a credit freeze.
        (ii) When  is between              and          : In these circumstances, infusion of
capital into the banks will fail to induce banks to lend efficiently. Direct lending by the
government will accordingly have two benefits: first, it will provide financing to some
operating firms with good projects; second, direct lending will induce banks to lend to
operating firms. On the other hand, direct lending by the government will involve the
wasteful provision of financing to firms with bad projects. If β is sufficiently large – that
is, when the government’s screening ability is sufficiently poor – this cost of a direct
lending program may make it overall undesirable. The same is true when the return on
successful good projects R is sufficiently low.
        (iii) Ex-ante choice between the two policy measures: As noted above, the gov-
ernment does not know the realization of . Hence, it should make its decision between



                                                  20
the two policy measures based on the characterization provided above of what will
happen for different realizations of  and on the prior distribution of . Clearly, based on
the above, we can see that for sufficiently high β and/or low R, the government should
not choose direct lending. In addition, y – the mean of the fundamentals, which can be
interpreted as public news – matters for the decision. Given that direct lending may only
be desirable at an intermediate range of the fundamentals, the government should not
choose it when y is either too high or too low, only when it is in an intermediate range.
       This result can be tied to the policy debate that came up in the recent crisis about
whether the government should bail out Wall Street or Main Street. Infusing money to
banks can be interpreted as helping Wall Street, while lending directly to operating firms
can be interpreted as helping Main Street. Our results suggest that the latter is desirable
when public news about the fundamentals of the economy is in some intermediate range,
and not desirable when it is too bad or too good.
       (iv) The Case in which only Operating Firms with Good Projects have Beneficial
Spillover Effects: Finally, we remind the reader that our analysis was conducted under the
assumption that capital that is lent to bad firms still creates positive externalities to other
firms even though it generates no direct return. It might be argued, however, that some
bad projects create no or lower spillover benefits for other firms. To examine the conse-
quences of this factor, let us assume that the payoffs of operating firms do not depend on
the number of other firms in operation but on the number of other firms in operation with
good projects. Making this assumption weakens the attractiveness of direct lending to
operating firms by the government.
       Formally, note that if only good firms getting capital from the government created
synergies to other firms, than the equation that determined the threshold  Direct
                                                                            *
                                                                                   , below

which a credit freeze occurs in a regime of direct lending, would change from equation
(8) to the following (we consider the limit again, for simplicity):
                                      1   1        1               1                   (9)

Clearly, this would increase the likelihood of a credit freeze under direct lending, making
this regime overall less desirable.




                                              21
4.4.      Government Funds Managed by Private Firms
          While the direct lending program analyzed in the preceding section could ensure
that the government’s capital will flow to operating firms, it is disadvantaged by the
government’s inability to distinguish between operating firms with good and bad
projects. Accordingly, a direct lending program could benefit if it were designed to
utilize the expertise of private parties in screening operating firms with good projects
from operating firms with bad projects.
          Consider the following mechanism. The government places the capital
in a number of funds, which are managed by banks or by other private agents that have
the same expertise. The managers of the funds will be paid a proportion γ on any profit
that they generate on the capital invested by the fund they manage – that is, the excess of
the return they generate over the riskless return. However, like hedge fund managers,
they will not bear any share of the losses generated, if any, and such losses will be borne
by the government.6 The following proposition characterizes the consequences of this
mechanism.


Proposition 7: (a) If the government invests                 in funds dedicated to lending to
operating firms, and managed by private agents promised a proportion γ on any return
they generate above 1, then (i) the funds’ capital will be fully lent to operating firms with
good projects, and (ii) the threshold defining whether banks will lend to operating firms
will be         , as characterized in equation (6).
(b) Consider the case where        approaches infinity: Compared with infusing the capital
    into banks, the setting of government funds proposed here will (i) produce the same
total wealth if  exceeds         , (ii) produce a higher total wealth if  is between
and         , and (iii) produce a lower total wealth if  is lower than          .
(c) Ex-ante, when choosing the policy, the government should choose to inject capital to
the banking system, rather than to place it with private funds, when R is sufficiently low,
and y is sufficiently low.
6
 For a fuller discussion of the institutional details involved in implementing this mechanism, see
Bebchuk (2008b). The mechanism is similar to the one proposed by Bebchuk (2008a) for the
government’s purchase of troubled assets through funds using governments funds and run by
private agents compensated with a cut of the profits generated by the funds.



                                               22
Remarks: (i) The Decisions of the Government Funds’ Managers: The design of the
mechanism ensures that the government’s capital invested in the funds will be fully
provided to operating firms with good projects. Because the government will fully bear
the losses, the managers will have no reason to avoid lending the funds given to them.
Furthermore, because the managers will be promised a cut of the profits, they will have
an incentive to screen operating firms with good projects from operating firms with bad
projects, and their dominant strategy will be to lend funds only to firms with good
projects.
       (ii) The Effect on Banks’ Lending Threshold: Because the government funds
program, like the direct lending program, will ensure that an amount of            will be
lent to operating firms, the threshold for banks’ lending to operating firms will be the
same as the threshold, defined in equation (6), that would result from the direct lending
program under the assumption that all operating firms have positive externalities for other
operating firms.
       (iii) Comparison with the Direct-Lending Program: Relative to the direct-lending
program, the government funds mechanism has the advantage of not involving loans to
operating firms with bad projects; as a result, the government funds program performs
better in a comparison with infusion of capital into banks. While the government funds
program does not have this cost of the direct-lending program, it does, like the direct-
lending program, provide capital to firms in circumstances in which  is below            ,
which are circumstances in which even funding good operating firms is inefficient
(because not enough of them are being funded).
       (iv) Comparison with Infusion of Capital into Banks: In circumstances in which 
exceeds        , where infusion of capital will be sufficient to produce a credit thaw, the
government funds mechanism will perform neither better nor worse than infusion of
capital. In this case, both mechanisms will lead to providing K to operating firms with
good projects. (In these circumstances, the direct-lending program performs worse than
capital infusion into banks, because it involves lending to operating firms with bad
projects.)




                                            23
          In circumstances in which  is between          and      , the government funds
mechanism will be superior to infusion of capital to banks. In these circumstances, the
infusion of capital will not eliminate an inefficient capital freeze, and no funding will be
provided to operating firms. In contrast, in these circumstances, under the government
funds mechanism, both the capital in the government funds and the capital in the hands of
the banks will be provided to operating firms.
          Finally, when  is lower than            , the government funds mechanism will
produce inferior results. In this case, the operation of government funds will not lead
banks to lend to operating firms, and the lending by the government funds will produce
losses.
          (v) Ex-ante choice between the two policy measures: Given that the government
funds mechanism is worse than infusion of capital to banks only when the fundamental is
relatively low, the government would prefer injecting capital to banks only when y – its
prior expectation about the fundamental – is sufficiently low.


4.5.      Government Guarantees
          The problem with the mechanisms discussed in the previous two sections is that
they create excessive waste by having capital lent to operating firms when their projects
fail. Under direct lending by the government (Section 4.3), the problem is most severe
because the government, who is uninformed about borrowers’ type, blindly lends to firms
who have no access to potentially successful projects. Under privately-managed gov-
ernment funds (Section 4.4), the government uses the expertise of private agents in
avoiding bad borrowers, but the incentives for private agents to lend are so strong that
they lend even in a credit freeze when good projects fail because of the lack of lending by
banks. We consider now an alternative mechanism that attempts to encourage lending
without wasting government resources. Here, the government just provides banks with
guarantees in case their loans to operating firms fail. During the financial crisis of 2008-
2009, governments such as those of the US and the UK used the mechanism of guaran-
tees, though they used it primarily (as in the case of Citigroup) to limit the potential
losses of banks on existing loan portfolios. In contrast, our focus is now on encouraging
new lending by providing guarantees that limit the losses from new loan portfolios.



                                            24
        Specifically, suppose that the government guarantees a proportion            of a bank’s
losses. In this case, a lending bank will receive the return 1         when projects succeed
and      1 when projects fail. The following proposition characterizes the consequences
of using this mechanism.


Proposition 8: (a) Suppose that the government provides a guarantee covering a propor-
tion   (between 0 and 1) of banks’ losses, that is, the government pays          when a bank
lends and real projects fail. Then, the threshold       , below which a credit freeze occurs is
given by:

                1            1      Φ                            Φ               ,            (10)

which is decreasing in .
(b) At the limit, as   approaches infinity, the threshold (denoted as                    ) is given
by:

                                        1               1                                  (11)

Then, when the government provides full guarantees (           1), all banks lend and projects
fail only when they are inefficient (               1       ). Otherwise, banks do not always
lend, and projects sometimes fail even though they are efficient (                   1      ).


Remarks: (i) The Nature of the Mechanism: Government guarantees reduce the thre-
shold below which crises occur because they make it more attractive for banks to lend.
Considering the case where banks’ signals are very precise (consider the limit case of part
(b)), the attraction in this mechanism is that the government essentially does not need to
provide any capital. Above                  , where banks lend, the government’s guarantee
of providing capital if loans fail is sufficient to get the economy out of a credit freeze.
Hence, banks lend and loans do not fail, so the government does not need to provide the
capital. Below              , where banks do not lend, there are no loans made, and hence
no loans that fail. This implies that the government’s guarantees again do not lead to any
capital being spent. In sum, this mechanism leads to an improvement in the threshold
below which a credit freeze occurs without any actual cost.




                                              25
           (ii) Comparing this Mechanism with Previous Ones: It is hard to provide a sharp
comparison. Such comparison depends on the extent to which the guarantees can reduce
the threshold        . This, in turn, depends on the level of the guarantees . It would be
tempting to conclude that the government should increase               very close to 1,7 but this is
not so easy. Essentially, while the mechanism does not lead to actual costs, its validity
depends on the credibility of the government in providing the guarantees. That is, banks
have to believe that the government will indeed be able to pay back a proportion                of the
losses. Hence, there is a budget constraint in the background that has to be considered.
The solution is for the government to increase              (still below 1) until this budget con-
straint becomes binding. A reasonable case to consider is where the maximum guarantee
provided by the government is equal to its available capital                  . The maximum that
the government will have to pay is when all banks lend and fail. This will cause a

liability of     1        , implying that     cannot exceed          . The following proposition

compares the government guarantees mechanism with the government funds mechanism

(considered in the previous section) for this level of guarantees (assuming that                    1,

i.e., that the government’s available capital is smaller than the capital left in the banking
sector).


Proposition 9: (a) Suppose that the government provides a guarantee                            1, and

that       approaches infinity. Then the threshold under the guarantee regime (                       )
is higher than under the funds regime (                ), implying that the latter is more effective
in preventing a credit freeze.
(b) Compared with the government funds regime, providing guarantees as proposed here
will (i) produce a lower total wealth if  exceeds                     , (ii) produce a lower total
wealth if  is between             and                 , and (iii) produce a higher total wealth if
 is lower than            .



7
  There is a problem in setting       1, because at that level of guarantees, banks always lend and the
government will have to bail them out sometime. Setting very close but still below 1 ensures that banks
(who have infinitesimally precise signals) never lend when projects fail.



                                                  26
(c) Ex-ante, when choosing the policy, the government should choose to provide guaran-
tees, rather than to place capital with private funds, when y is sufficiently low.


Remark: The advantage of the guarantees regime over the funds regime is that it avoids
the waste of government’s capital when there is a credit freeze. This is because in the
guarantees regime, the government’s capital does not get invested, while in the funds
regime it gets invested in projects that end up failing because of the coordination failure.
The disadvantage, however, is that under the guarantees regime, there are overall more
realizations of the fundamental with a credit freeze, since the government’s investment is
more efficient in breaking the coordination failure. Also, under a credit thaw in the
guarantees regime, the government’s capital does not get invested. Overall, government
guarantees offer a better solution when y is relatively low. In that, the guarantees regime
is closer to the injection of capital to banks considered in Section 4.2. Direct comparison
between the two (not reported here, for brevity) reveals that capital injection to banks
dominates the guarantees regime when               , while the guarantees regime may be
preferred when         .


4.6. Government Funds Managed by Private Firms Exposed to Down-
side Risk
       In this section, we search for a mechanism that will combine the advantages of
previously discussed mechanisms and thus achieve better results. Such a mechanism
should make the government’s capital available to the economy so as to incentivize banks
to lend their capital above          (like the mechanisms in Sections 4.3 and 4.4), and at
the same time it should avoid lending the government’s capital to bad projects or to good
projects in a credit freeze (like the mechanisms in Sections 4.2 and 4.5).
       Suppose that, like in Section 4.4, the government sets up a continuum [0,K] of
private funds, each one receiving     of government capital, but unlike in that section, the
government imposes some downside risk on the managers of these funds. Specifically,
assume, like in Section 4.4, that managers get         0 on any dollar return they achieve
above 1, but, unlike in Section 4.4., they are penalized by c>0 on any dollar return they
achieve below 1.


                                             27
        The mechanism examined in this section is similar to that of the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) developed by US authorities during the 2008-
2009 crisis. Under this government program, public capital was provided to finance
certain portfolios of new loans on a non-recourse basis. Under the terms of financing, the
private manager was able to capture the upside in the event the loans turned out to be
profitable and had to bear only part of the downside, with the remainder absorbed by the
government’s capital.
        In the game we are now considering, there are effectively two types of players:
banks and fund managers.8 Banks face the same tradeoff as before: if they lend to
operating firms, they will get a net return of R if their projects succeed and -1 if they fail.
For fund managers, lending to operating firms will yield a net return of                           if their
projects succeed and –c if they fail. The amount of capital managed by banks is 1
    , while the amount that is managed by the funds is                 . Hence, denoting the propor-
tion of banks that decide to lend to operating firms as              and the proportion of funds that
decide to lend to operating firms as             , the mass of operating firms L that will receive
lending is given by              1                     .
        The following proposition summarizes the equilibrium results under this policy
mechanism.


Proposition 10: (a) Suppose that the government invests                           in funds managed by
private agents, who receive a proportion γ on any return they generate above 1 and a
penalty of proportion c on any return they generate below 1, and consider the case where
    approaches infinity. Then, banks and funds will lend to (good) operating firms and
projects will succeed when           is above:

                                                           1                               (12)




8
   Note that the same agent can act both as a bank and as a fund manager. His incentives to lend will be
different between the two roles due to the compensation structure. Moreover, due to risk neutrality, lending
decisions will be completely independent between the two roles, and hence we can effectively analyze the
game as having two types of agents.



                                                    28
(b) As the penalty c approaches 0, the threshold                             converges to               and so
the solution of setting privately-managed government funds with downside risk dominates
the solutions proposed in Sections 4.2-4.5.


Remarks: (i) Fund Managers’ Incentive Structure: Inspecting Equation (12), we can see
that when the fundamental is at the threshold                           , proportion        of banks lend to

operating firms. This is similar to the behavior of banks in any of the previous mechan-
isms.9 At the same time, the proportion of fund managers that lend when the fundamen-
tal is                  is       . Hence, the ratio between the downside penalty c and the upside

gain        that fund managers are exposed to changes their incentive to lend relative to
banks. Reducing this ratio makes fund managers more eager to lend, and this lowers the
threshold                    .
           (ii) Optimal Level of Downside Risk: In general, there is a tradeoff in setting the
level of downside risk c (or more precisely, the ratio ). Reducing the exposure of fund

managers to downside risk makes credit freezes less likely, but also increases the likelih-
ood that fund managers will lend the government’s capital to failing projects. Hence,
reducing the downside risk gets us closer to the mechanisms discussed in Sections 4.3
and 4.4. Interestingly, in the limit of precise private information (as                             approaches
infinity), it is optimal to set the downside risk to be infinitesimally small. Since fund
managers have very precise information, they know almost surely when the economy is
going to be in a credit freeze, and thus even a tiny downside risk is sufficient to deter
them from lending in a credit freeze. At the same time, the incentive effect of cutting the
downside risk to be infinitesimally small encourages banks to lend, so that the credit-
freeze threshold is pushed down to                      . Hence, in the limit of precise information,
setting up government funds managed by private agents who are exposed to minimal
downside risk emerges as the optimal solution combining the advantages of the mechan-

9
    This behavior stems from the fact that banks find it optimal to lend only if they think that the probability
of success, i.e., the probability that the fundamental is above the threshold, is at least       , while at the
                                                                                                R
threshold, the posterior probability that the fundamental is above the threshold is uniformly distributed
across agents between 0 and 1.




                                                       29
isms analyzed in previous sections. Away from the limit of precise private information,
the cost of reducing downside risk is likely to have more effect, leading to an interim
solution with regard to the optimal level of downside risk.10
         (iii) Equivalence to direct infusion with certain lending commitment: The key of
the mechanism described here is that private agents with lending expertise get to lever up
their profit from lending to operating firms by using government capital. An alternative
way to achieve the same outcome is to have the government allocating its capital to banks
under the condition that they lend this capital in addition to a certain specified amount of
their own capital to operating firms. We analyzed this alternative mechanism and found
that it can achieve the outcome in this section, no matter what is the amount of banks’
own capital that must be lent together with the government’s capital. Essentially, in-
creasing the amount required from banks ensures more private money is lent when the
government’s money is lent, but reduces banks’ incentives to lend. These two effects
cancel out with each other, leading always to the same outcome, which is the outcome in
Proposition 10b. Details of this analysis are available upon request.


5. Concluding Remarks
         In financial crises, banks may contract credit to nonfinancial borrowers as a prod-
uct of rational and efficient response to the deterioration in the future repayment ability of
such borrowers. This paper shows, however, how rational choices by banks may produce
an inefficient outcome. It develops a model of credit freezes that are inefficient but arise
from the rational and self-fulfilling expectations of financial institutions. In this equili-
brium, banks would be collectively better off if they were all willing to extend loans to a
set of operating firms, but each of them avoids doing so out of self-fulfilling expectations
that others will do as well. Our model enables identifying the circumstances in which an
inefficient credit freeze can be expected to arise. In such circumstances, efficiency will
be served by getting the economy out of the inefficient credit freeze equilibrium, and the



10
  As is usually the case in global-games models, the expressions for the thresholds away from the limit do
not lend themselves to tractable comparative-statics analysis (see the expression in the proof of Proposition
10).



                                                     30
developed model has been seen to be useful for studying and assessing government
policies that can be considered for this purpose.
          Our analysis has shown that interest rate cuts and infusion of capital into the fi-
nancial sector can be expected to eliminate an inefficient credit freeze in certain circums-
tances but not in others. Even with ample capital and with low return on hoarded cash,
banks may fail to extend loans to operating firms when they believe that their projects,
even though worthy in an environment in which other such firms obtain financing, will
fail in an environment in which credit to other firms is frozen. If such circumstances
arise, governments may look beyond interest rate cuts and capital enhancement to get the
economy out of the credit freeze.
          Our analysis has examined several supplemental or alternative measures, includ-
ing ones used by authorities in the course of the recent financial crisis. While direct
lending by the government to nonfinancial borrowers can address certain problems
resulting from coordination failure among banks, it forgoes the benefits of expert screen-
ing of such borrowers by private parties. We have accordingly analyzed mechanisms that
harness the screening expertise of private agents and identified features that determine
their effectiveness. Our analysis provides a framework for assessing the benefits and
limits of using standard and nonstandard policies to address a self-fulfilling credit market
freeze.




                                              31
Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1: The proof follows Morris and Shin (2004b). The arguments in
their proof (which we don’t repeat here, for brevity) establish that there can only be a
threshold equilibrium, where banks lend if and only if their signal is above some common
  . Given this result, we now characterize the threshold equilibrium and show that it is
unique.
          Given    , there is a unique threshold fundamental                   , at which investment
projects are on the margin between failure and success. This is given by:

                                             1   Φ

Here, Φ                      is the proportion of banks receiving a signal below                       and

withdrawing from lending when the fundamental is exactly                  .
          This gives us the first equation for the two unknowns               and       . The second equ-
ation comes from the fact that at the threshold signal                a bank has to be indifferent
between lending to firms and investing in the risk-free asset. When bank i observes

signal     , his posterior distribution of       is normal with mean                          and precision

          . He knows that lending to firms yields 1               if and only if the fundamental is
above      , while not lending yields 1          with certainty. The indifference condition is
then given by:


                  1    Φ                                              1             1     r


Which can be developed as follows:
                                                                  1       r
                                                      Φ   1
                                                                  1


Leading to:
                                                                              1     r
                                                              Φ       1
                                                                              1




                                                 32
Plugging this in the first equation, we get:

                                                                                              1     r
                                                                            Φ           1
                         1       Φ                                                            1



Which yields the equation in the proposition statement:

                                                                                        1       r
                                       Φ                                    Φ
                                                                                        1

        The left-hand side is the 45-degree line with respect to                    , and the right-hand side
is increasing in     , and is bounded between                       and . A unique solution for                   is
guaranteed when the right-hand side has a slope of less than 1 everywhere. The slope of
the right-hand side is given by                ·   , where            · is the density of the standard

normal evaluated at the appropriate point. Since                ·           , a sufficient condition for a
                                                                        √

                             √
unique solution is                   . QED.                                                                ■

Proof of Proposition 2: Proving the first part of the proposition is straightforward given
the proof of Proposition 1. The proof just replaces             with        1               to reflect the fact that
when a proportion n of the banks lend, only             1            capital makes its way to operating
                                                                                √
firms. Note that the condition for uniqueness is now                                        , which always holds

when the condition in Proposition 1 holds.
The second part is proved with the implicit function theorem. Denote
                                           ,                    1

                                                                            1       r
                     1       Φ                                      Φ                               0
                                                                            1

Then,
                                                            ,

                                                        ,




                                                   33
We know that


                    ,                                                                                       1   r
                                         1   Φ                                            Φ                                  0
                                                                                                            1



                ,                                                                                                   1   r
                             1           1                                                                  Φ
                                                                                                                    1

                                                                               1
                                              1              1                           0
                                                                              √2

It follows that                  0. QED.                                                                                             ■

Proof of Proposition 3: Proving the first part of the proposition is again done using the
implicit function theorem. Denote:
                                                 ,                             1

                                                                                          1             r
                             1       Φ                                             Φ                                0
                                                                                          1

Then,
                                                                          ,

                                                                      ,


                         ,                       ,
Given that                         0 and                 0, it follows that                   0.

To see why the second part holds, note that, given the capital available to banks                                                1
    , not lending to operating firms is efficient only when the fundamental                                                 is below

            1           . Since Φ                                      Φ                                0 (unless       approaches

infinity),                           1       . Hence, there is a range of fundamentals for which banks
do    not       lend         and     projects        fail,   even     though           this        is       inefficient.      QED.
■




                                                                 34
Proof of Proposition 4: The proof is analogous to the proof of Proposition 3, and thus
omitted. QED          ■
Proof of Proposition 5: Equation (6) is based on the same principles behind the con-
struction of equilibrium in Propositions 1 and 2. The only thing to note in equation (6) is
that all the government’s capital is lent and generates the positive externality. Hence,
investment projects fail when the proportion n of banks that decide to lend is below

             . Having established equation (6) and comparing it with (5) (using the implicit

function theorem, as in Propositions 2 and 3) reveals that                          . QED         ■
Proof of Proposition 6: The overall wealth in the economy under injection of capital to
the banking system is given by 1           1             when the economy is in a credit freeze,
and by 1         1           1        when the economy is in a credit thaw.
         The overall wealth in the economy under direct lending to operating firms is giv-
en by 1              when the economy is in a credit freeze, and by                  1           1
         1        when the economy is in a credit thaw. Note that in a credit thaw, only
 1           of the projects financed by the government succeed, as the government cannot
tell the difference between good firms and bad firms. In a credit freeze, all the projects
financed by the government fail, as even the good firms cannot succeed given that too
many of them do not receive financing (if this was not the case, then banks would lend,
and there would not be a credit freeze).
         Based on these results, we now prove the different parts of the proposition.
         (a) Now, when the fundamental  is below                , we know that there is a credit
freeze under both regimes. Then, since 1             1                 1          , the wealth in the
economy is higher under infusion of capital to the banking system than under direct
lending to firms.
         When the fundamental  is above                 , there is a credit thaw under both re-
gimes.        Then, since    1    1            1             1             1             1     , the
wealth in the economy is again higher under capital injection to banks than under direct
lending to operating firms.
         (b) When the fundamental  is between                   and           , the economy is in a
credit thaw under the regime of direct lending and in a credit freeze under the regime of



                                                35
injection of capital to banks. Then, there is no obvious ranking between the levels of
wealth in the two regimes: Capital injection to banks yields 1         1          and direct
lending yields 1               1         1      . Overall, a high enough β and/or a small
enough R makes capital injection better than direct lending.
         (c) For the choice of regime, the government should consider all possible realiza-
tions of , weighted by their prior probabilities, and the difference in wealth they gener-
ate between the two policy measures. Based on the results above, the expected difference
between wealth under capital injection and wealth under direct lending can then be
expressed as:



     Φ


                               1         1             Φ                   Φ


                           1       1    Φ



         The statement in (c) then follow directly based on (a) and (b). QED.              ■
Proof of Proposition 7: (a) When choosing whether to lend the government’s capital to
operating firms or not, banks managing the government’s funds always prefer to lend.
This is because their only chance to get a return above 1, on which they are compensated,
is when they lend. Moreover, given that the noise, with which the banks observe the
fundamentals is unbounded (even though it can be very small), they always perceive
some probability that lending will generate a return above 1, which will provide compen-
sation for them, while they know that there is no cost in generating a return below 1.
Hence, the government’s capital always flows to operating firms, generating the thre-
shold           characterized in equation (6). Finally, it is straightforward that banks lend
to good firms and not to bad firms, as a positive return only comes from the former and
the banks can distinguish between the two types.
         (b) The second part of the proposition follows similar lines to those used in the
proof of Proposition 6. The difference is that when the government sets private invest-




                                              36
ment funds, as opposed to when it lends directly to operating firms, the government’s
capital does not go to bad firms. Hence, the overall wealth in the economy when the
government lends the money via private funds is given by 1                               when the economy is
in a credit freeze (here the government’s capital still gets wasted because even good firms
fail to produce returns), and by 1               1             1               when the economy is in a credit
thaw. Then, comparing this with the overall wealth levels under infusion of capital to the
banks, we get the result stated in part (b) of the proposition.
       (c) Based on the results above, the expected difference between wealth under cap-
ital injection to banks and wealth under lending via private funds can be expressed as:

          Φ                      1       1                     Φ                        Φ

       The statement in (c) then follow directly. QED.                                  ■
Proof of Proposition 8: The proof follows similar steps to those in Propositions 1, 2, and
3. QED.                                                                                                    ■
Proof of Proposition 9: (a) We need to show that:
                                                      1                                              1
           1        1                1                                     1                 1
                                                 1                                               1
       This can be developed as follows:
                                                      1                                      1
                1       1            1                             1               1
                                                 1                                       1
                                                     1                         1
                                     1                         1
                                                 1                         1
                                     1                     1           1
                            1
                                             1            1
                                                  R
                                 1               1                     1
       Plugging in              , we get:

                                     R       1             1
                                     0       1             1
       which is always true.
       (b) The government guarantees regime generates an overall wealth of 1
 1             when the economy is in a credit freeze (here the government’s capital doesn’t



                                                          37
gets wasted), and of       1               1            when the economy is in a credit thaw (here
the government’s money doesn’t get invested in the real projects). Then, comparing this
with the overall wealth levels under the government funds program (in Proposition 7), we
get the result stated in part (b) of the proposition.
        (c) Based on the results above, the expected difference between wealth under the
funds regime and wealth under the guarantees regime can be expressed as:

        Φ                              1       1        Φ                             Φ


                                   1       Φ

        The statement in (c) then follows directly. QED.                          ■
Proof of Proposition 10: (a) Based on results in the global-games literature (e.g.,
Goldstein and Pauzner (2004)), the equilibrium will be characterized by two threshold
signals: Banks will lend to operating firms if and only if their signal is above                 , while
fund managers will lend if and only if their signal is above                . Then, there would be a
unique cutoff      , such that projects fail below the cutoff and succeed above it. Extending
the logic in the proof of Proposition 1, the three thresholds           ,       , and     are determined
by the following three equations:

                       1       l       1       Φ                 αl 1       Φ


                                                                                 1
                       1       Φ
                                                                             1


                       1       Φ


Then,       is implicitly determined by the following equation:




                                                   38
                                                                           1
                    1    l     1   Φ                              Φ
                                                                       1




                        αl 1       Φ                           Φ




      In the limit of precise information, denoting the threshold as            , we get:


                                                              1
                                                       1

      (b) From (8) and (12) it is clear that as c approaches 0                 approaches
      . Then, because this mechanism achieves the lowest threshold for lending, and
does not have government funds lent to failing projects, it maximizes wealth. QED.
■




                                           39
References

   Acharya, Viral, Douglas Gale, and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2009, Rollover risk and market
freezes, New York University, Working Paper.

   Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1998, Optimal financial crises, Journal of Finance
53, 1245-1284.

   Bebchuk, Lucian, 2008a, A better plan for addressing the financial crisis, The Econ-
omists’ Voice 5.

   Bebchuk, Lucian, 2008b, Unfreezing credit markets, Harvard Law School John M.
Olin Center for Law and Economics, Discussion Paper No. 622.

   Benmelech, Effi, and Nittai Bergman, 2009, Credit traps, Harvard University, Work-
ing Paper.

   Bernardo, Antonio, and Ivo Welch, 2004, Liquidity and financial market runs, Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 119, 135-158.

   Brunnermeier, Markus, 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch of 2007-08,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.

   Carlsson, Hans, and Eric van Damme, 1993, Global games and equilibrium selection,
Econometrica 61, 989-1018.

   Cooper, Russell, and Andrew John, 1988, Coordinating coordination failures in Key-
nesian models, Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 441-463.

   Corsetti, Giancarlo, Bernardo Guimaraes, and Nouriel Roubini, 2006, International
lending of last resort and moral hazard: A model of IMF's catalytic finance, Journal of
Monetary Economics 53, 441-471.

   Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance, and li-
quidity, Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

   Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan, 2009, Fear of fire sales and the credit
freeze, University of Chicago, Working Paper.




                                           40
   Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2004, Contagion of self-fulfilling financial crises
due to diversification of investment portfolios, Journal of Economic Theory 119, 151-
183.

   Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Demand deposit contracts and the probabili-
ty of bank runs, Journal of Finance 60, 1293-1328.

   Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 1998, Unique equilibrium in a model of self-
fulfilling currency attacks, American Economic Review 88, 587-597.

   Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 2003, Global games: theory and applications, in:
M. Dewatripont, L.P. Hansen, S.J. Turnovsky (Eds.), Advances in Economics and
Econometrics, Cambridge University Press.

   Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 2004a, Liquidity black holes, Review of Finance
8, 1-18.

   Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 2004b, Coordination risk and the price of debt,
European Economic Review 48, 133-153.

   Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 2006, Catalytic finance: when does it work?,
Journal of international Economics 70, 161-177.

   Peck, James, and Karl Shell, 2003, Equilibrium bank runs, Journal of Political Econ-
omy 111, 103-123.

   Philippon, Thomas, and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, Efficient recapitalization, New York
University, Working Paper.

   Rochet, Jean Charles, and Xavier Vives, 2004, Coordination failures and the lender of
last resort: was Bagehot right after all?, Journal of the European Economic Association 2,
1116-1147.

   Sakovics, Jozsef, and Jakub Steiner, 2009, Who matters in coordination problems?,
Northwestern University, Working Paper.




                                            41
