NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES TRADE CAUSE CAPITAL TO FLOW? EVIDENCE FROM HISTORICAL
RAINFALL
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy
Jun Hee Kwak
Working Paper 16034
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16034

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

We thank Michael Clemens, James Feyrer, Graciela Kaminsky, Christopher Meissner, Elias
Papaioannou, Alan Taylor, Dietrich Vollrath for helpful discussions and comments, and Ünal
Akkemik for help with historical tree-ring rainfalls data. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, and Jun Hee Kwak. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Trade Cause Capital to Flow? Evidence from Historical Rainfall
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, and Jun Hee Kwak
NBER Working Paper No. 16034
May 2010, Revised August 2020
JEL No. F10,F30,F40,N10,N20,N70
ABSTRACT
We use a historical quasi-experiment to estimate the causal effect of trade on capital flows. We
argue that fluctuations in regional rainfall within the Ottoman Empire capture the exogenous
variation in exports from the Empire to Germany, France, and the U.K., during the period of
1859–1913. The identification is based on the following historical facts: First, only surplus
production was allowed to be exported from the Empire (provisionistic policy). Second, different
products grown in different regions were subject to variation in regional rainfall. Third, different
bundles of products were exported to Germany, France, and the U.K. by the Empire. Using the
export-bundle-weighted regional rainfall as an instrument for Ottoman exports to each country,
our instrumental variable regression suggests the following: When a given region of the Empire
received more rainfall than others, the resulting surplus production was exported more to
countries that historically imported more of those products, and this leads to higher foreign
investment by those countries in the Empire. Our findings support theories predicting
complementarity between trade and finance, in which causality runs from trade to capital flows.
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Tydings Hall 4118D
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and CEPR
and also NBER
kalemli@econ.umd.edu
Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy
Department of Economics
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
alex.rzhevskyy@gmail.com

Jun Hee Kwak
University of Maryland
kwak@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

Theory predicts an ambiguous relationship between trade and financial flows. Mundell (1957)
shows that trade and capital flows are substitutes as an increase in trade integration reduces
the incentive for capital to flow. Formalized by the Heckscher-Ohlin-Mundell paradigm, in a
two-goods, two-factors framework, free trade leads to factor price equalization, and so there
is no need for international capital mobility. Other papers modify this framework by adding
technological differences (Kemp, 1966; Jones, 1967) and/or production uncertainty (Helpman
and Razin, 1978), and these papers show that trade and factor flows can be complements with
causality running from international capital to trade flows.
The recent theoretical models incorporating financial frictions advocate another view. It is
not only that there is the complementarity between trade and capital flows but also the causality
runs from trade to capital flows (Antràs and Caballero, 2009). In this paper, a historical quasiexperimental setting was used to identify the causal effect of trade on capital flows in a dynamic
framework. It is argued that fluctuations in regional rainfall within the Ottoman Empire capture
the exogenous variation in exports from the Empire to Germany, France, and the U.K., during
the period of 1859–1913. The identification is based on the following historical facts: First, only
surplus production was allowed to be exported from the Empire (provisionistic policy). Second,
different products grown in different regions were subject to variation in regional rainfall. Third,
different bundles of products were exported to Germany, France, and the U.K. by the Empire.
Using the export-bundle-weighted regional rainfall as an instrument for Ottoman exports to
each country, our instrumental variable regression suggests the following: When a given region
of the Empire received more rainfall than others, the resulting surplus production was exported
more to countries with higher ex-ante export shares of those products, and this leads to higher
foreign investment by those countries in the Empire. The empirical results show that higher
trade integration leads to higher capital inflows to the capital-scarce country.
We illustrate a plausible mechanism for this cause-effect relationship based on the theoretical
model of Antràs and Caballero (2009) in the historical context of the Ottoman Empire during
the late 18th and early 19th centuries. The Empire was a financially-underdeveloped country
exporting agricultural goods, while Germany, France and the U.K. were financially-developed
countries exporting manufactured goods. This trade pattern was consistent with the fact that
1

the manufacturing sector was more capital-intensive than the agricultural sector, and Germany,
France and the U.K. were financially-developed enough to finance investment in capital. The
Empire was less financially-developed than Germany, France and the U.K., and the Empire
allocated their resources mainly in the agricultural sector, which contributed to an increase
in output and a decrease in prices of agricultural goods. With trade integration, the Empire
could take advantage of the low prices of its agricultural goods (comparative advantage) and
increase export revenues. As a result, the return to capital in the Ottoman agricultural sector
increased, and Germany, France and the U.K. had more incentive to invest in industries that
were complementary to the agricultural sector of the Empire. In fact, railroads constituted
33 percent of the foreign direct investment from Europe in the Empire as of 1888, and the
construction of railroads reduced transportation costs of crops. Thus, the trade integration
attracted capital flows from Germany, France and the U.K. into the Empire, as the return to
capital in the Ottoman agricultural sector rose due to increases in export revenues in this sector.
During the late 18th and early 19th centuries, similar to other countries in that era, the
Ottoman economy was closely determined by the political and administrative environment. The
leading concern of the Ottoman policy was the adequate provisioning of food for the army, palace,
and urban areas. This emphasis on “provisioning” created an important distinction between
imports and exports. Imports were encouraged since they added to the available goods in the
urban markets. Exports, on the other hand, were permitted only once the requirements of the
domestic economy were met (See Genc (1994) and Inalcik (1994)).1 During 1880-1913, 90% of the
labor force was employed in the agricultural sector, while industrial production constituted only
10% of Ottoman GDP (Altug et al., 2008). As a result, during our sample period, the Empire
was an importer of manufactured goods and exporter of surplus agricultural goods. Given
the dependency on widely-used furrow irrigation systems, weather—rainfall variation—was an
exogenous factor that determined exports since surplus production varied with the regional
variation in rainfall in the Ottoman Empire.2
1

Pamuk and Williamson (2011) argue that these provisionistic views paved the way for the Ottoman deindustrialization process that had been completed around 1880. They also argue that the Ottoman Empire
specialized in agriculture and became a net importer of manufactured goods. This is what is predicted by the
model of Antràs and Caballero (2009).
2
The development of irrigation systems occurred in Turkey only at the end of the 20th century (Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009).

2

Our identification methodology can be summarized as follows. The Ottoman Empire only
exported agricultural goods, namely cotton, wheat, grapes, corn, barley, olives, raisins, nuts,
and figs. These goods grow in different regions of the Empire, and hence, depending on regional
variation in the rainfall, there is surplus production in a given region and thus in a given group
of goods. We will group goods as grains and orchards. We use this broad category rather than
the narrow one since we know that the specialization of regions in crops by this broad category
stays more or less the same in the last 200 years, based on the maps provided by the State
Institute of Statistics (SIS) historical and contemporaneous yearbooks. We know the regions
where these goods were grown, and we combine this information with historical rainfall data that
vary by region and by time to obtain good groups specific surplus production. Different regions
of the Empire specialize in different types of good groups. While some consist of cultivated land
and grow various grains, others consist of non-cultivated orchard land and grow primarily fruits
and vegetables. Hence, within the Empire, differences in rainfall ensure that Ottoman grain
and orchard products were affected differently in different years. Ottoman trading partners
were historically purchasing very different export bundles from the Empire: while some were
mainly buying grains, others were interested in olives and grapes. Therefore, if we interact
the time-varying grain and orchard production shocks, caused by the time variation in rainfall,
with the country-specific export bundles, we obtain rainfall-based time-varying country-specific
instruments for Ottoman exports into France, Germany, and the U.K.
We obtain unique yearly panel data for the period 1859–1913 that covers trade and private
financial flows between France, Germany, the U.K., and the Ottoman Empire. As a measure of
private capital inflows, we use foreign direct investment (FDI) of these three source countries into
the Empire. For trade flows, we use exports from the Empire into France, Germany, and the U.K.
Hence, trade flows are outflows from the Empire, and financial flows are inflows to the Empire.
The predominantly uni-directional capital flows were typical for the first wave of globalization
when the industrialized North was investing in the agricultural South. It is important to notice
that our data set covers all major Ottoman Empire investors – as of 1914, FDI from France,
Germany, and the U.K. constituted 96% of total foreign direct investment into the Empire
(Geyikdagi, 2011). A simple OLS regression of FDI in the Empire on exports from the Empire
to France, Germany, and the U.K., using country fixed effects for the investor countries, dummies
3

for important events like default, and time fixed effects on the medium-term cycle, produces a
positive coefficient. This result is the panel version of the cross-sectional findings in the literature.
The advantage of the panel data is that we can use country fixed effects and hence control for
the unobserved investor country heterogeneity in foreign investment. Nevertheless, these OLS
estimates suffer from reverse causality, therefore we run a 2SLS regression instrumenting bilateral
trade with our instrument described above and verifying that our results are causal; that is,
trade flows causally determine foreign investment. Our first stage predicts that a deviation of 10
percent in rainfall from the mean (which approximately corresponds to one standard deviation
in rainfall from the mean) resulted in a 5 percent increase in Ottoman exports.3 Our second
stage regressions deliver an effect of a 3 percent increase in FDI as a result of a 5 percent increase
in exports.
Our instrument is similar to the instrument developed by Nunn and Qian (2014) who identify
the causal effects of US food aid on the conflict in recipient countries. They instrument US food
aid with the interaction of US wheat production and cross-sectional variation in a country’s
tendency to receive any US food aid. Our instrument is year-on-year regional rainfall variation
weighted by the country-specific export bundles, which allows our instrument to vary across
years and countries. This type of identification strategy follows the logic of the difference-indifferences estimator. Conceptually, our reduced-form estimates measure the difference in a
change in foreign investment from a country importing grain and a change in foreign investment
from a country importing orchard in years following an increase in rainfall for grain-growing
regions.
There is an extensive literature that uses weather shocks as an instrument for growth in
GDP in agricultural economies without well-developed irrigation systems that rely on rain.4
Our identification strategy is based on temporary fluctuations in agricultural production caused
by year-to-year changes in regional rainfall around the “permanent” component of rainfall which
might affect long-run production and trade patterns.5 This strategy is relevant for our case since
3

See also Dell et al. (2009, 2012) who focus on the effect of weather changes (temperature and precipitation)
on GDP and exports and find large estimates in the case of exports.
4
This literature goes back to Paxson (1992), who used weather variability to measure the response of savings
to temporary income fluctuations. See Schlenker and Roberts (2006), and Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) who
focus on U.S. agricultural production. See Donaldson (2018) estimates for the India.
5
Miguel et al. (2004) use yearly changes in rainfall to identify the effect of temporary growth on the likelihood
of civil conflict in Africa.

4

we want rainfall to affect capital flows only through exports in the short run. For this strategy
to be valid, there should not be any significant autocorrelation in precipitations, which is indeed
the case as shown in Figure A1. Short-run fluctuations in rainfall create temporary variation
in the size of surplus production, which in turn creates variation in exports. Our strategy of
using short-run fluctuations allows us to avoid the effects of permanent rainfall differences on
permanent incomes, which might also affect capital flows.6 The length of our time series allows us
not only to exploit time-series variation and control for unobserved heterogeneity using country
fixed effects but also makes it possible to include country-specific trends that will account for any
increasing/trending investment by Northern countries into the Ottoman Empire due to certain
trade/war treaties.
We measure historical rainfall based on the “tree-ring” methodology. This methodology
recovers the level of rainfall during a growing season based on the width of the tree rings in a
given year. During droughts, rings are narrower, while extensive moisture results in wider rings.
To check the validity of the tree-ring methodology, we compared our rainfall data constructed
from tree-rings to real-time historical rain data. The real-time historical data comes from the
Ottoman Archives but only for a few regions. The correlation between the real-time data and
our data is 0.495 for the overlapping regions and significant at 5%. We use data that we obtain
using the tree-ring methodology for our analysis since this data is available for all the regions of
the Empire during the entire period we are interested in.
A valid threat to the identification is the possibility of a third variable driving both Ottoman
exports to North and North’s investment in the Empire. Our instrumental variable strategy
will be able to deal with this issue as long as the omitted variable is not correlated with the
instrument. To advance on this, in light of the model of Antràs and Caballero (2009), regressions
control for Ottoman GDP per capita, which can capture a large part of the variation in the
marginal product of capital, the return to capital, and thus capital inflows into the Empire.
Additionally, we use country-specific time trends together with other controls. We also condition
our results on the direct negative effect of 1876 Ottoman default. As a result of default both
6

Temporary fluctuations in income will affect savings only, resulting in net capital outflows, according to the
standard models. During the course of the 19th century, capital flows were one way from the center to the
periphery countries, as argued by Obstfeld and Taylor (2004), and hence capital outflows were essentially zero.
The authors argue that this is either because periphery countries were full colonies or they were not integrated
fully into the world markets to invest their savings.

5

trade and financial flows can go down regardless of the temporary shocks to trade caused by
rainfall (Rose and Spiegel, 2004). We have also created a dummy to control the effect of the
establishment of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration (OPDA) in 1881. The OPDA was
established after the debt restructuring negotiations for the purpose of paying the creditors.
If more trade induces more financial flows since trade serves as an implicit guarantee for the
creditors, once an institution is established to pay the creditors (OPDA), there might be less
need for trade (See Wright (2004), Mitchener and Weidenmier (2005), Rose and Spiegel (2004),
Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)). Our results are robust to all these tests.
The empirical literature tries to identify whether or not trade and finance are complements
or substitutes though the endogeneity issue is hard to solve. Most papers adopt the gravity
approach focusing on the cross-sectional relationship and document a positive correlation between the two, such as Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008), and
Portes and Rey (2005). Taylor and Wilson (2006) use a similar cross-sectional framework and
instrument trade with distance to solve the endogeneity problem, obtaining a positive effect of
instrumented-trade on capital flows. However, Guiso et al. (2009), Portes and Rey (2005), and
Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007) show that distance determines both trade in assets and trade in
goods since distance also captures information asymmetries that are important determinants of
capital flows. Our contribution to this literature is to use a unique historical setting to identify
the causal relationship running from trade to capital flows, using country-specific export-bundle
weighted regional rainfall as an instrument for trade.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the historical context and introduces the data. Section 3 discusses the descriptive statistics. Section 4 presents the empirical
specification, the results, and the robustness analysis. Section 5 concludes.

2

Historical Context and Data

The Ottoman Empire stood at the crossroads of civilizations, stretching from the Balkans to
Egypt for six centuries prior to World War I. Given the coverage of our data from 1859–1913, this
paper focuses on the borders of the Empire from 1830 until World War I, as shown in Figure 1.
These borders include northern Greece, Syria, Iraq, and present-day Turkey but exclude Egypt

6

and Libya.
In light of the new evidence from the archives, historians no longer think that the Ottoman
Empire was in a state of a permanent decline since the 16th century. It is now realized that the
Ottoman state was flexible and pragmatic and was able to adapt to the changing environment.
Although the 17th century was a period of crisis, the 18th century witnessed an expansion of
trade and an increase in production. The Empire was shrinking starting in the middle of the
18th century due to territorial losses, but at the same time, during most of the 19th century, the
Empire became more linked to Europe via commercial and financial networks. The provisioning
of the capital city, armed forces and urban areas, taxation, support, regulation of long-distance
trade, and the maintenance of a steady supply of money were among the main policy concerns
of the state. Hence, the government constantly intervened in economic affairs. The Ottoman
Empire is not unique in this respect, as the pursuit of similar policy goals is thought to have led
to the emergence of powerful nation states in Europe and Asia (Tilly, 1975).
During our sample period, the world economy had witnessed an enormous expansion of
trade between the center and periphery countries. Thanks to the Industrial Revolution, European countries became exporters of manufactured goods. These countries were selling their
manufactured products to the third world (periphery) countries, while at the same time buying
primary products and raw materials from them.
Among the periphery countries, China and the Ottoman Empire had a unique place since
they had a strong central bureaucracy and their governments had the upper hand in the struggle between the bureaucracy and the interest-groups such as merchants and export-oriented
landlords (Genc, 1987; Inalcik and Quataert, 1994). These countries were also never colonized.
In the case of the Ottoman Empire, the sultans and state officials were aware of the critical
role played by merchants. Long-distance trade was very important for the provisioning of the
Empire. Foreign merchants were especially welcome since they brought goods that were not
available in Ottoman lands, and they were granted various privileges and concessions at the expense of domestic merchants. Historians argue that this is the primary reason why mercantilist
ideas never took root in Ottoman lands. While the ideas of domestic merchants and producers were influential in the development of mercantilism in Europe, the priorities of the central
bureaucracy dominated economic thought in the Ottoman Empire.
7

The policy priority was such that only surplus agricultural production could be exported
abroad after the army, palace and the urban markets were satiated. This provisionistic policy
created a difference in the attitude of sultans towards foreign and domestic merchants, and
hence between imports and exports (Genc, 1987; Inalcik and Quataert, 1994). Trade between
the Ottoman Empire and the European countries increased 15-fold between 1820–1914. However,
given the provisionistic policy, the share of Ottoman exports in total production did not exceed
6 to 8 percent and – in agricultural production – 12 to 15 percent until 1910 (Pamuk, 1987). By
1910, 25 percent of agricultural production was exported, whereas 80 percent of manufactured
goods were imported.
The 19th century was characterized by one-way capital flows from center European countries
to periphery third world countries. Our data covers such one-way private capital flows (FDI)
from France, Germany, and the U.K. into the Ottoman Empire during 1859–1913 period. These
three countries were responsible for practically all FDI inflows over that period. For example,
right before World War I, all other countries combined contributed only 4% of total FDI. We
also have data on exports from the Ottoman Empire into France, Germany, and the U.K. and
imports of the Ottoman Empire from these three center countries. Both sets of data come from
Pamuk (2003) and Pamuk (1987), and they are expressed in British pound sterling. Figure 2
shows the total Ottoman exports and imports during our sample period, using data from Pamuk
(1987). There was an eight-fold increase in imports and a quadrupling of exports, a pattern that
led to the accumulation of foreign debt.
The expansion of trade between the center and periphery countries was followed by investment of European powers into the third world. It was not only the case that European
governments lent money to the periphery governments, but in addition private foreign money
flowed into the periphery countries.7 Some of this investment was in the form of foreign direct
investment (FDI) to finance infrastructure such as railroads, with the aim to expand trade even
more. Foreign investment was not solely concentrated on infrastructure. As of 1888, while 33
percent of total foreign investment from Europe in the Ottoman Empire was in railroads, 31
percent was in banking, 9 percent was in utilities, 8 percent in commerce, 12 percent was in
7

Ottoman government bond issues and major purchasers over 1854-1914 are listed in Pamuk (1987) on page
74, Table 4.4

8

industry, and 5 percent was in mining, as shown in Pamuk (1987). Foreign investment in the
agricultural sector remained limited until the end of World War I.
The top panel of Figure 3 shows private investment (FDI) from the U.K., France, and Germany into the Empire. Overall, France was the biggest investor followed by the U.K. and
Germany. German investment did not start until after the signing of the strategic GermanOttoman partnership, which also marks the start of the construction of the Berlin-Baghdad
railroad in 1885. The bottom panel of the same figure shows the country by country decomposition of exports from the previous figure. Again, exports into Germany, in general, are low
compared to the U.K. and France, and only slightly increased during the last three decades of
our sample period, coinciding with the increased FDI from Germany. Similar to exports and
imports in the previous figure, there is a stark decline after 1876 in FDI, up to 60 percent, and
then a recovery. This is also true for Ottoman exports by destination country as shown in the
bottom panel. Both declines follow the default of the Ottoman Empire on its external debt in
1876.
In the course of the 19th century, the Ottomans undertook many reforms to modernize the
economy. They needed foreign capital not only to finance this modernization effort but also to
keep their growing fiscal deficit under control given the increased cost of Russian and Balkan
wars. The Ottomans borrowed heavily from Europe during the 1850s and 1860s. This did not
prevent the financial crisis of 1873 and the subsequent default in 1876 on the sovereign debt. As
of 1876, the outstanding debt was 200 million pounds sterling, and debt servicing was taking up
half of the budget (Pamuk, 1987). After negotiations, the Ottoman Public Debt Administration
(OPDA) was established in 1881 to exercise European control over Ottoman finances and to
ensure debt payments. The outstanding debt was reduced to half of its value in nominal terms
during the debt restructuring negotiations (Blaisdell, 1929). The OPDA helped to repair the
lost reputation of the Ottomans, and hence the Ottoman state gained renewed access to the
international capital markets.

9

3

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics. The longest series for capital inflows is for the U.K.,
where data is available for the entire sample of 55 years. The magnitude of British investment
flows into the Empire, however, was the smallest and constituted on average 0.39 million pounds
sterling versus 1.04 and 0.77 million pounds for France and Germany, respectively. We can also
see from Table 1 that Britain was the biggest trading partner of the Ottoman Empire and
purchased, on average, 4.6 million sterling worth of the Empire’s exports, while selling about 7.6
million sterling worth of imports, on average. The smallest trade was between the Empire and
Germany – only 0.4 million sterling worth of goods were exported into Germany, and 1.1 million
sterling was imported by Germany. Unlike the U.K. and Germany, France was the only country
(out of three) which had purchased more than it sold, with Ottoman exports into France being
3.8 million and Ottoman imports from France being 2.5 million sterling, respectively. Overall,
the Empire was running a current account deficit against all these three countries in total, during
our sample period.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of France, Germany, and the U.K. comes from Mitchell
(1988). Mitchell (1992) and Maddison (1995) also provide some GDP numbers for Turkey. However, we use the GDP data for the Ottoman Empire that comes from Clemens and Williamson
(2004), which is based on Pamuk’s GDP estimates.8 All the GDP data is expressed in local
currencies, which we have converted into British sterling using the “Gold Standard” exchange
rates (see Table A1). During our sample period, 1 sterling corresponded to a fixed 7.3224 grams
of fine gold, and thus we implicitly measure all the “monetary” variables in gold. As shown
in Table 1, the Ottoman Empire was roughly 10 times poorer, per capita, than the European
countries.
Population numbers for the Ottoman Empire come from Behar (1996), while the data on
the population of France, Germany, and the U.K. comes from Maddison (1995). Table 1 shows
that at the beginning of the sample in 1859, France was the largest country among those three,
with a population of over 37 million. The smallest was Great Britain with about 29 million
8

Those sources, however, provide comparable GDP estimates as well as relative ratios. For example, while
Maddison’s UK and Turkey per capita GDP estimates for 1913, expressed in 1990 International Geary-Khamis
dollars, are 4,921 and 1,213, Clemens and Williamson estimates, expressed in British Sterling, are 52 and 10.

10

in population. During 1859–1913, France, Germany, and Great Britain experienced drastic
differences in population growth rates. By 1913, Germany’s population had increased by 85
percent, and it approached WWI with more than 65 million people. The population of France
and the U.K. in the middle of 1913 was 41 and 46 million, respectively.
We impute data on FDI and exports to maximize the sample size in regression analysis.9
However, we use both raw and imputed data, and the main regression results are based on raw
data. Table 1 shows statistics for regression variables including both raw and imputed data.
Summary statistics between raw and imputed data are close to each other. For each source
country, Figures 4 and 5 show imputed data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios,
respectively, together with raw data.

4

OLS Analysis

4.1

Empirical Specification

Our benchmark specification is as follows:
log



F DIit
GDPit




= αi + λt + αi t + βlog

EXP ORT Sit
GDPit


+ γWt + it

(1)

where αi indicates country dummies, and λt indicates either time dummies or event dummies.
Time dummies consist of a series of dummy variables that equal 1 for five consecutive years
without overlapping. Using event dummies, we control for specific events such as a dummy for
the creation of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration (OPDA) in 1881, and other dummies
characterizing the effect of Empire’s default on the foreign debt in 1876, and the Resettlement
of the debt in 1903. αi t controls for country-specific trends.10 The left-hand side variable is
9

We impute missing data on FDI-to-GDP ratios, using the regression of log FDI-to-GDP ratios on log Ottoman
government-debt-flow-to-GDP ratios with country fixed effects and country-specific time trends. This regression
explains substantial variation in historical FDI-to-GDP ratios with an R-squared of 0.4114. We also impute
missing data on Export-to-GDP ratios, using the regression of log Export-to-GDP ratios on log GDP per capita
of each source country and log Ottoman GDP per capita with country fixed effects and country-specific time
trends. This regression gives an R-squared of 0.8405. Remaining missing values are interpolated using the
average of the values in years t − 1 and t + 1. If the value in t + 1 is not feasible, the value in t + 2 is used. When
the value in t − 1 is missing, we fill the value in t with the value in t + 1.
10
Country-specific trends are included as the interaction term (αi t) between country dummies αi and time
trend t.

11

gross FDI inflows from the source countries i, which are France, Germany, and the U.K., into
the Ottoman Empire; Exports are Ottoman exports into these countries. Both FDI and Exports
are normalized by the GDP of each source country GDPit . A control variable Wt is the Empire’s
contemporaneous GDP per capita.

4.2

OLS Results

We report results from the OLS estimation of equation (1) without time dummies in Table 2.11
Our result in column 1 is strong given our sample size of 87 observations for raw data.12 In
column 2, we use imputed data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and the log
export-to-GDP ratio is contemporaneous with the log FDI-to-GDP ratio. In column 3, we
use imputed data for FDI-to-GDP ratio and export-to-GDP ratio, and the log export-to-GDP
ratio is lagged. In all of the specifications, coefficients of exports turn out to be positive and
significant. The results are also economically significant, in which a 10 percent increase in
exports is associated with a 2.1-3.1 percent increase in FDI flows.
In Table 3, we first present results with time dummies and then replace them with dummies
for important events such as default while also allowing for country-specific time trends.13 To
estimate the effect of the Ottoman Empire’s default in 1876, we introduce a “Default” dummy,
which equals 0 before 1876 and 1 thereafter. As was expected, by defaulting on its foreign debt,
the Ottoman Empire discouraged further investment, reducing capital flows into the country.
In 1881, the Ottoman government decided to take action toward repayment of the debt, and it
established a European-controlled organization, called the Ottoman Public Debt Administration
(OPDA), designed to collect taxes, which then were turned over to creditors. We take this event
into account by introducing an “OPDA” time dummy, which is equal to 0 before 1881 and 1 after
that. In 1903, the creditors voluntarily restructured the remaining debt of the Ottoman Empire,
11
We use Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors with the lag length 3, which is robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustering on year and kernel-robust to common correlated disturbances.
12
Even though the raw dataset contains 122 FDI observations (for all three countries combined) and 105 Exports
observations, for some years, one of the variables is missing while the other is not. As a result, we end up with
only 87 complete FDI-Exports pairs, which constitutes the effective sample size.
13
When we include year fixed effects, the coefficients of exports become insignificant. This is because we
have only three countries (trading partners) in panel data, which gives insufficient within-year variation across
countries. Event dummies explained in this paragraph (Default, OPDA, and Resettlement) are not collinear with
other controls such as country-specific time trends. These event dummies will be collinear with year fixed effects,
but we do not have year fixed effects in our regressions.

12

partially reducing its size. We capture that effect by yet another time dummy, “Resettlement,”
which equals 1 after 1903. All the dummies appear to have expected signs. We also control for
GDP per capita of the Ottoman Empire to partial out the effect of exports on FDI via exporter’s
income channel. This variable does not seem to have an impact, and hence we do not report
those results.14
To understand structural breaks in the relationship over time, we re-estimate our baseline
regression (Table 2 column 1) at every 5-year period, using the following specification:
log



F DIit
GDPit



= αi + βj log



EXP ORT Sit
GDPit


+ γWt + it , t ∈ j

(2)

where j refers to each 5-year period during the sample period 1885-1913 (the last period
has only 4 years), and αi indicates country dummies. The left-hand side variable is gross FDI
inflows (raw data) from the source countries i, which are France, Germany, and the U.K., into
the Ottoman Empire; Exports are Ottoman exports into these countries (raw data). Both FDI
and exports are normalized by the GDP of each source country GDPit . A control variable Wt
is the Empire’s contemporaneous GDP per capita in logs. In Table 4, we find that Ottoman
exports and FDI inflows into the Ottoman Empire are positively associated during the periods
1885-1889, 1900-1904, and 1910-1913, and these correlations are significant at a 1 percent level.
Although correlations during some periods are not significant due to the small sample size, these
regression results suggest that there is no evident structural break in the relationship between
exports and FDI.
Furthermore, we perform a placebo test to show that bilateral trade matters in explaining
bilateral FDI. In Table 5 column 2, we switch all three trading partners and rerun the baseline
regression of column 1. We find that exports do not explain FDI after switching trading partners, which suggests that bilateral trade matters for bilateral FDI. Also, we investigate whether
coefficients in our regressions capture the correlation between FDI and unobserved common
time-varying factors. To do this, we construct a measure for the time-varying factor that can
14

For robustness, we also normalize FDI and exports by the population of source countries instead of their GDP.
Note that there is no point in normalizing by the Ottoman GDP and population since that will be a common
factor among the three source countries and be absorbed by the constant term. When we normalize by the
population of the source country, the results are very similar in magnitude to those described and are available
upon request.

13

capture competition amongst source countries, which leads to the boom-bust cycle in capital
flows. We measure this cycle in capital flows (FDI cycle) facing a country i in year t as the
average of log FDI-to-GDP ratios of other countries in year t excluding country i. Table 6 reproduces the baseline regression in column 1 and adds an FDI cycle to the regression in column
2. We find that the FDI cycle is positively correlated with FDI of each source country only at
a 15 percent significance level. Importantly, the coefficient on exports is still significant at a
5 percent level, and the magnitude of this coefficient rarely decreases (from 0.35 to 0.34) after
adding the FDI cycle.

4.3

Dynamic Responses

To investigate dynamic responses of FDI to exports, we run regressions by local projections
(Jordà (2005)) as follows:

log

F DIit+h
GDPit+h




= αi + αi t + βh log

EXP ORT Sit
GDPit


+

3
X

γj Wit−j + it+h

(3)

j=1

where αi indicates country dummies, and αi t controls for country-specific trends. The lefthand side variable is interpolated gross FDI inflows from the source countries i, which are France,
Germany, and the U.K., into the Ottoman Empire in time t + h; Exports are interpolated
Ottoman exports into these countries in time t. Both FDI and Exports are normalized by the
GDP of each source country. The set of control variables Wit includes FDI-to-GDP ratios,
export-to-GDP ratios, and the Empire’s GDP per capita (which does not vary across countries),
and all of them are included up to past three years.
We find that a rise in exports has persistently significant effects on FDI up to a 3-year ahead
horizon at a 5 percent significance level. We collect estimates βh in Figure 6. On impact, a 1
percent increase shock from the export-to-GDP ratio is associated with a 0.18 percent increase
in the FDI-to-GDP ratio. After three years, the FDI-to-GDP ratio increases by 0.20 percent in
response to the same shock.

14

5

IV Analysis

5.1

Rainfall, Agricultural Production, and Trade

In this section, we lay out our argument on the linkage between trade, production, and weather
conditions, specifically the regional variation in the amount of rainfall within the Ottoman Empire. We explain in detail how the composition of exports into the U.K., France, and Germany,
as well as specialization of the Empire’s regions in different types of crops, allows us to construct
the instrument.
The first step is to highlight the dependency between the level of exports and production.
Excessive output in one particular year leads to a surplus of goods that were available for sale
in and out of the country, causing exports to increase. This line of thought mainly comes from
the “provisionistic” nature of the Empire’s policy. As the government policy at those times was
aimed to primarily satisfy the needs of the Ottoman army, the supply of exports was determined
not only by the prices but also by the yield in that particular year. If the yield was low, it had
to go first towards satisfying the army needs; if there remained any excess over this amount, it
could be traded abroad.
As discussed in Pamuk and Williamson (2011), by the beginning of the second half of the
19th century, the de-industrialization of the Ottoman Empire was practically complete. Labor
and other resources were pulled out of the industry, and agricultural production constituted the
biggest part of the Ottoman Empire’s GDP. Altug et al. (2008) state that “Mechanization of
agriculture began [only] in the 1950s, making nature one of the most important determinants of
people’s well-being at those times,” and Quataert (1994) adds that “Mechanized factory output
was and remained relatively insignificant in the 19th century when compared with domestic and
handicraft production.”
Agricultural goods made up a significant share of Ottoman exports. Therefore, the amount
of rainfall was an important determinant of both domestic production and trade. Indeed, Donaldson (2018) for the case of India during 1861–1930 shows that “a one standard deviation
increase in rainfall causes a 27 percent increase in agricultural productivity,” thus affecting both
quantity and quality of crops. For the case of grapes – one of the most important exports –
Hellman (2004) gives an estimated 98 mm of water use per month to maximize the quantity

15

and quality of crops. This estimate is obtained for the most efficient modern drip irrigation
system; for the furrow irrigation that historically was used in the Ottoman Empire, ideal water
usage doubles to 196 mm. Another important agricultural product of the Empire was cotton.
There is substantial evidence that “water deficit during critical growth stages can significantly
reduce cotton yields” (Steger et al., 1998; Grimes et al., 1970). For example, in the time of
emergence (typically, in October) cotton fields require about 60 mm of monthly water usage.
Water requirements increase during the next 5 months, reaching 255 mm a month in late February. Again, one of the main determinants of the yield of dryland (unirrigated) cotton is regular
and predictable rainfall. Similar patterns hold for other important agricultural export goods
of the Ottoman Empire such as corn, grain, and olives. Agricultural production was critically
dependent on rainfall during the sample period, given that the development of irrigation systems
occurred in Turkey only at the end of the 20th century (Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, 2009), which is outside the time frame we consider in this paper.
Measuring the effect of rainfall on various types of crops produced, including grain, grape,
olives, cotton, and others, is possible since the rainfall data is available on a region by region basis,
and different regions specialized in different crops. The area of modern-day Turkey amounts to
300,948 square miles, which equals 779,452 square kilometers. 265,931 square kilometers (a little
more than one third) of those lands are used for agricultural purposes (Prime Ministry Republic
of Turkey and Turkish Statistical Institute, 2005). In the past, a higher fraction of the land
was used for agricultural production, plus there was more land under the Ottoman Empire’s
boundaries. We will focus on the regions that constitute today’s modern Turkey and assume
the specialization of regions in crops stays more or less the same in the last 200 years. This
assumption is based on the maps provided by the State Institute of Statistics (SIS) historical
and contemporaneous yearbooks for grain and orchard production. Hence, we aggregate the
products to groups such as “grains” and “orchards” and focus on bigger geographical regions
than cities.
Let us explain this in detail. Turkey consists of 80 administrative provinces, 12 statistical
regions (SRE) and 7 geographical regions. The first 4 of the 7 geographical regions have the
names of the seas which are adjacent to them. Those regions are Black Sea Region, Marmara
Region, Aegean Region, and Mediterranean Region. The other 3 regions are named according to
16

their location in the Anatolia: Central Anatolia Region, Eastern Anatolia Region, Southeastern
Anatolia Region. In every region, agricultural land is typically split into two parts. The first
part is cultivated field land. These cultivated lands are used to grow various types of grain
(corn, wheat, barley, rye, etc.), as well as cotton and tobacco. The second type is the area of
fruit trees, olive trees, vineyards, vegetable gardens, and an area reserved for tea plantations.
For consistency, we call the first type of land “grain” land, and the second type “orchard” land.
As shown in Table 7, the share of “grain” land varies from 35 percent in the East Black Sea
region to as high as 99 percent in North East Anatolia. These shares of “grain” and “orchard”
lands remained roughly the same in the last 200 years.
Let us work out an example. Assume there is extensive rain in the Aegean region and
abnormally dry weather in the Mediterranean region. We can conclude that first, this event
would have a negligible effect on total “grain” production in the country. Indeed, if we look
at Table 7, we can see that the area of positively affected “grain” land in the Aegean region
equals 2, 187 thousand hectares, and it is fairly close to the negatively affected “grain” area in
the Mediterranean region, which equals 2, 132 million hectares. Second, we expect the whole
country’s output of “orchard” products to increase. The reason is that the “orchard” land in
the Aegean region is much bigger than that in the Mediterranean region (828 thousand hectares
versus 490 thousand hectares). This simple thought experiment will constitute a basis for the
construction of our instrument.
The historical precipitation dataset we employ in this study is assembled based on the “treering” methodology – a technique proposed by A. E. Douglass in the 20th century. This methodology recovers relatively precisely the level of rainfall during a growing season in each particular
year based on the width of age rings, where each ring corresponds to a certain year. During
droughts, rings are typically narrower, while extensive moisture results in wide rings. This data
is not real-time historical data in the sense that it was not collected in the past, but instead is
being reconstructed nowadays.15
Analyzing tree-ring sites location maps in each study (the maps are available in the original
studies), we are able to tie precipitation data series to different statistical regions (SRE), which
15

As a robustness check, we compare reconstructed precipitation data to “true” historical data from the Ottoman
Archives. Unfortunately, archival data only covers limited regions. The correlation between the two datasets for
the overlapping regions is 0.495.

17

are listed in Figure 7. Historical precipitation time series for North-West and South-Central
regions of Turkey (TR8 and TR5) were constructed by Akkemik et al. (2007) and Akkemik
and Aras (2007) respectively, and the time span of those series exceeds 300 years. North-West
study area – Kastamonu-Pinarbasi and its vicinity – was located on the southern side of the
Kure Mountains. This corresponds to TR8 statistical region. The South-Central sampling area
was located in the upper and northern part of the Western Taurus Mountains in proximity to
Konya and corresponds to TR5 region. Griggs et al. (2007) dataset covers North Aegean (TR2),
specifically, North-East Greece and North-West Turkey and goes back by 900 years. The authors
reconstruct (May-June) precipitation based on analysis of oak tree rings. North-West Turkey
under consideration corresponded to TR2 statistical region. Touchan et al. (2003) build the
dataset which reconstructs Southwestern Turkey (TR3) Spring (May-June) precipitations. Their
data starts in 1776, and the sites were located in the TR3 statistical region. Finally, Touchan
et al. (2007) is an extensive reconstruction of precipitations in the Eastern-Mediterranean Region
for the last 600 years. This study covers not only Turkey but also other countries in the region.
The majority of sites located in Turkey are concentrated in TR3 and the West half of TR6.
The rainfall variable constructed from tree-ring methodology might capture overall conditions
that affect plant growth. The reason is that measured tree-ring growth in a given year will be
higher when temperature or timing of rainfall was ideal. We believe that the rainfall instrument
is still valid and relevant, as long as plant growth conditions are exogenous to capital flows and
affect exports given the provisionistic policy of the Ottoman Empire.
To identify whether there was unusually rainy weather or unusually dry weather in a region
j (j = 1..J), and hence whether there was a shock to productivity, we proceed as follows. First,
we measure the percentage deviation of yearly precipitation rjt in a region j during year t from
their average values over the period under consideration (1859–1913):

drjt = log(rjt ) − log

1913
1 X
rjt
T

!

(4)

t=1859

where t indexes years, and T , the sample length, is 55, and drjt measures the deviation from
the average. Positive values of this statistic would indicate that in a year t region j experienced
a large amount of rainfall, which most likely would have resulted in high yield. Having this

18

index and knowing the distribution of land between the “grain” and “orchard” land in each
region allow us to construct a variable, which reflects the country-wide “grain” and “orchard”
production shocks as a result of a unique rain map over the Ottoman Empire in year t. Let Lj
be the agricultural area of region j. It is split into two parts: “grain” land Lgj and “orchard” land
Loj , and Lj = Lgj + Loj . We can define Sj as the share of “grain” land in the total agricultural
area of region j

Sj =

Lgj
Lj

(5)

Then the country-wide output shock to “grain” production Ptg and the output shock to the
“orchard” production Pto in year t would be the average of the regional shocks, weighted by the
share of their area in the total area:

Ptg

g
j=1 Lj × drjt
PJ
g
j=1 Lj
PJ
o
j=1 Lj × drjt
PJ
o
j=1 Lj

PJ

=

Pto =

PJ

=

=

j=1 Sj Lj × drjt
PJ
j=1 Sj Lj
PJ
j=1 (1 − Sj )Lj × drjt
PJ
j=1 (1 − Sj )Lj

(6)
(7)

This set of indices is used to model the deviations in the production of both types of agricultural outputs as a function of the amount and location of rainfall in Turkey, under the assumption that both types of crops are similarly affected by rainfall.16 This gives us the time-series
variation in our instrument.
The best way to illustrate this formula is to go over an example. Suppose, we know that
some year t was especially rainy. Specifically, the percentage deviation from the usual level
of precipitations was 10 percent for the West Marmara region, 20 percent for Aegean, and 6
percent for West Anatolia. All other regions experienced usual level of rainfall. What can
we say about the deviations of grain and orchard production from their average values? The
answer depends on the size of a region Lj and its agricultural specialization Sj . The values of
Lj and Sj come from Table 7, and they are equal to {1,736; 0.87}, {3,010; 0.73} and {4,221;
0.96} for the West Marmara, Aegean, and West Anatolia regions, respectively. To find country16

We do a robustness check for different sensitivities of crop production with regard to rainfall in Table 10.

19

wide shocks to the production of “grain” and “orchard,” we need to use Eq. (6) and Eq. (7).
After substituting the values, we get Ptg =
Pto =

0.10×226+0.20×828+0.06×171
3,526

0.10×1,510+0.20×2,187+0.06×4,050
23,066

= 3.60 × 10−2 and

= 5.63 × 10−2 . These numbers mean that in year t production of

grain has experienced a positive shock of about 4 percent, while the production of the orchard
has experienced a positive shock of about 6 percent. Different rain patterns from year to year
cause the time variation of production.
Our next step is to introduce cross-sectional variation (meaning between the Empire and
the various Northern trading partners) to our instrument. We are able to do this by relying on
the fact that the composition of exports differs for Germany, France, and the U.K. Pamuk and
Williamson (2011) argue that the Ottoman Empire, while importing manufactures, specialized
in the export of primary products. As is evident from Table 8, at the beginning of the sample,
agricultural products constituted about 70 percent of exports to both Germany and the U.K.
For France, this share makes up only 26 percent. We speculate that the reason is that, unlike
Germany and the U.K., France used to purchase high volumes of raw silk. Its share constantly
made up more than 30 percent of France imports, falling to 18.3 percent only in 1880–1882,
right after the default (Pamuk, 2003).
The differences in export bundles allow us to obtain cross-sectional variation of our in−
→
strument. Let m index the country, where m = {France, Germany, U.K.}. And let θ m =
g
o , θ 0 ) represent the decomposition of exports of country m into “grain,” “orchard,” and
(θm
, θm
m

“other” according to Table 8. It is important that we use initial values (first year in our sample)
for these export bundles and do not allow them to vary over time. Hence, these initial export shares can be thought of as structural demand for the Empire’s products by the Northern
countries.
We construct the variable “Rainfall,” Rmt , which reflects export-share-weighted plant productivity shocks for trading country m in year t, and thus this variable is able to instrument for
country-time varying exports:
g
o
Rmt = θm0
Ptg + θm0
Pto

(8)

where as usual, “g” and “o” denote “grain” and “orchard” production, respectively, and the
values of shocks to outputs Ptg and Pto are defined according to Eq. (6) and Eq. (7).
20

5.2

IV Results and Threats to Identification

The top panel of Table 9 shows the two-stage least square (2SLS) results and the bottom panel
reports the coefficient on rainfall from the corresponding first-stage regression.17 We can see
that exports are indeed a significant determinant of FDI. This is true when we do not have event
dummies (column 1) and when we include event dummies (column 2). In column 2, the coefficient
on exports is larger than the OLS counterpart and significant at a 1 percent level. This result
shows that the OLS estimates are biased downward, possibly because omitted factors (such as
regulations on financial flows) – that increase FDI into the Ottoman Empire – are negatively
correlated with Ottoman exports. This also suggests that substitutability between FDI and
exports might exist in which the causal relationship runs from FDI to exports. HeckscherOhlin-Mundell paradigm can explain this finding in that goods need not be traded to achieve
factor price equalization when capital flows into a country.
The first-stage regressions show that rainfall is a significant determinant of exports, in which
the first-stage F statistic exceeds the rule-of-thumb threshold level of 10. The value of the
coefficient is around 0.46, suggesting that an increase in the rainfall index by about 10 percent
(which corresponds to one standard deviation in rainfall from the mean) leads to a 5 percent
increase in Ottoman exports. This rise in exports, in turn, causes a 3 percent increase in capital
inflows, on average. Figure 8 shows the partial plot for column 2 of the first-stage regression,
and it is clear that the strong first-stage correlation is not driven by outliers. Moreover, we take
a formal test of the exclusion restriction, using the Hansen’s overidentifying restriction test.
Hansen’s J statistics do not reject the null hypothesis that instruments are excludable, which
provides suggestive evidence that the rainfall instrument is valid.
In columns 3 and 4, we rerun regressions using the sample in which all observations start
in 1885 to alleviate concerns about missing observations before 1885.18 In column 3 without
the “Resettlement” event dummy, we lose some significance due to the small sample size, but
the coefficient is still positive and significant at a 10 percent level. In column 4 with the
“Resettlement” event dummy, we have a positive causal relationship, which is significant at a 1
17

For all of 2SLS regressions, we use raw data on exports and FDI.
In the full regression sample using raw data on exports and FDI, observations from France start in 1878; the
U.K. in 1871; and Germany in 1885.
18

21

percent level.
Guided by the model of Antràs and Caballero (2009), we validate the exclusion restriction
that rainfall affects FDI only via the export channel. This means that rainfall is not associated
with FDI or unobserved factors that determine FDI, once we control for exports and include our
other control variables. In their model, differences in the returns to capital in the agricultural
sector between the Ottoman Empire (δ H ) and each source country i (δiF ) drive capital flows.
When the return to capital in the Ottoman Empire is greater than the one in source countries,
capital flows from source countries to the Ottoman Empire. Therefore, we can think of capital
inflows into the Ottoman Empire as an increasing function of δ H − δiF , for simplicity. Also, δ H
is determined by the Ottoman variables: the marginal product of capital and export revenues
per unit p(1 − τ ) — in which p is the unit price of exporting goods, and τ is trade costs —
together with structural parameters such as the preference for goods and the degree of financial
development. Thus, from the perspective of the Ottoman Empire, we can characterize capital
flows as a function of the marginal product of capital and export revenues of the Ottoman Empire
given constant structural parameters. Regressions include country dummies αi to control for
differences in structural parameters in δiF across countries i.
In 2SLS regressions, rainfall generates exogenous variation in trade frictions τ and is correlated with export revenues, given the provisionistic nature of the Ottoman policy. If rainfall
was not enough in a given year, and in turn, the production of agricultural goods might have
dropped below the threshold, the Ottoman government banned exports (the trade cost was at
a maximum level, τ = 1). If the level of production was above the threshold, the trade cost τ
would decrease as production increased (rainfall increased), given that a smaller portion of total
production is allocated to the Ottoman government and that τ is a unit cost associated with
trade frictions.
The main threat to the exclusion test is that rainfall can affect capital flows via the marginal
product of capital rather than export revenues. We argue that we can control for the marginal
product of capital by including GDP per capita of the Ottoman Empire. Suppose production
Y is given by ZK α L(1−α) in which Z is aggregate productivity, K is capital, and L is labor.
Then, the marginal product of capital is ∂Y /∂K = αZ(K/L)(α−1) . We can rewrite the marginal
product of capital as (αY /K) = (αY /N ) × (N/L) × (L/K) = α(Y /N ) × 1/(K/N ) in which N
22

is population. We can control for the part of the marginal product of capital using GDP per
capita Y /N . In addition, there is no compelling reason that aggregate capital per capita K/N is
systematically correlated with year-on-year variation in country-specific region-weighted rainfall
after controlling for trends. Thus, as we include GDP per capita in our regressions, we can
control for the bulk of the variation in the marginal product of capital and alleviate the threat
to the exclusion restriction. Nevertheless, given the limitation on data, we cannot fully control
for unobserved factors that are correlated with our instrument and can affect FDI.
In addition, we use country-specific time trends to account for secular time-varying factors of
source countries. Furthermore, using event dummies, we control for events that could drive our
causal estimates. Ottoman default in 1876 could lead both trade and financial flows to go down
(Rose and Spiegel, 2004). We also include a dummy to control the effect of the establishment of
the Ottoman Public Debt Administration (OPDA) in 1881. The OPDA could increase financial
flows, while reducing trade (Wright (2004), Mitchener and Weidenmier (2005), Rose and Spiegel
(2004), Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)).
Moreover, we do a robustness check for the rainfall instrument and find that our IV results
are robust to alternative weights for grain and orchard in rainfall variables. In Table 10, we
reproduce IV regression results in columns 1 and 2, which are without and with event dummies,
g
o ω o P o ) such that
ω g Ptg + θm0
respectively. Then, we reconstruct a rainfall variable (Rmt = θm0
t

sensitivities for grain ω g and orchard ω o are 1.5 and 0.5, and we replace the baseline rainfall
variable with the reconstructed rainfall variable in columns 3 and 4. Columns 5 and 6 present
results with another rainfall variable such that sensitivities for grain and orchard are 0.5 and
g
o P o ) such that
1.5, respectively. Also, we construct a rainfall variable (Rmt = θm0
Ptg + θm0
t
g
o are decreased
export shares of grain θm0
are increased by 20% and export shares of orchard θm0

by 20% for all source countries m. Again, we replace the baseline rainfall variable with the
reconstructed rainfall variable in columns 7 and 8. Columns 9 and 10 show results with another
g
o are increased by 20% for all source
rainfall variable such that θm0
are decreased by 20% and θm0

countries m. We find that coefficients in the first and the second stage regressions rarely change
across columns and that reconstructed instruments are still relevant (all first-stage F statistics
exceed 10).

23

6

Conclusion

This paper investigates the causal effect of trade on financial flows using a historical quasinatural experiment from the Ottoman Empire. We use fluctuations in regional rainfall within
the Ottoman Empire to capture the exogenous variation in exports from the Empire to Germany,
France, and the U.K., during 1859–1913. The provisionistic policy of the Ottoman Empire
provides the basis for our identification. This policy dictates that only surplus production was
allowed to be exported. Since different products grow in different sub-regions of the empire,
there will be differences in the surplus production based on the differences in regional variation
in rainfall. The trading partners of the Empire, namely, France, Germany, and the U.K., have
different demands and hence import different products. As a result, we can link regional variation
in rainfall to exogenous cross-sectional variation in exports over time to these three countries.
When a given region of the Empire gets more rainfall than others, the resulting surplus
production is exported to countries with higher ex-ante export shares for those products, and
this leads to higher investment by those countries in the Ottoman Empire. We find that a one
standard deviation increase in rainfall from the mean leads to a 5 percent increase in Ottoman
exports, which in turn causes a 3 percent increase in capital inflows, on average. This result holds
also after accounting for the negative effect of the Ottoman 1876 default on foreign investment
and trade. Our findings are supportive of trade theories predicting the complementarity between
trade and capital flows as a result of causality running from exports to foreign direct investment.

7

Acknowledgments

We thank Michael Clemens, James Feyrer, Graciela Kaminsky, Christopher Meissner, Elias Papaioannou, Eric Pentecost, Alan Taylor, Dietrich Vollrath for helpful discussions and comments,
and Ünal Akkemik for help with historical tree-ring rainfall data. This work was supported in
full or in part by a grant from the Fogelman College of Business and Economics at the University
of Memphis.

24

References
Akkemik, U. and A. Aras (2007). South-Central Turkey April-August Precipitation Reconstruction. In IGBP PAGES/World Data Center for Paleoclimatology Data Contribution Series
2007-026. NOAA/NCDC Paleoclimatology Program. Boulder CO, USA.
Akkemik, U., N. Dagdeviren, and A. Aras (2007). Western Black Sea Region, Turkey Spring
Precipitation Reconstruction. In IGBP PAGES/World Data Center for Paleoclimatology Data
Contribution Series 2007-025. NOAA/NCDC Paleoclimatology Program. Boulder CO, USA.
Altug, S., A. Filiztekin, and S. Pamuk (2008). Sources of Long-term Economic Growth for
Turkey, 1880-2005. European Review of Economic History 12, 393–430.
Antràs, P. and R. J. Caballero (2009). Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial Frictions Perspective. Journal of Political Economy 117 (4), 701–44.
Aviat, A. and N. Coeurdacier (2007). The Geography of Trade in Goods and Asset Holdings.
Journal of International Economics 71(1), 22–51.
Behar, C. (1996). 1500-1927: The Population of the Ottoman Empire and Turkey. State Institute
of Statistics, Historical Statistics Series, Volume 2.
Blaisdell, D. C. (1929). European Financial Control in the Ottoman Empire. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Clemens, M. A. and J. G. Williamson (2004). Wealth Bias in the First Global Capital Market
Boom, 1870-1913. Economic Journal 114(495), 304–37.
Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken (2009). Temperature and Income: Reconciling New
Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates. American Economic Review 99(2), 198–204.
Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken (2012). Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth:
Evidence from the Last Half Century. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(3),
66–95.

25

Deschênes, O. and M. Greenstone (2007). The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather. American Economic
Review 97 (1), 354–385.
Donaldson, D. (2018). Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure. American Economic Review 108(4-5), 899–934.
Driscoll, J. C. and A. C. Kraay (1998). Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spatially
Dependent Panel Data. The Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4), 549–560.
Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981). Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis. The Review of Economic Studies 48(2), 289–309.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2009). Irrigation in the Middle East
Region in Figures (Karen Frenken ed.). FAO Land and Water Division.
Genc, M. (1987). A Study of the Feasibility of Using Eighteenth Century Ottoman Fiscal Records
as an Indicator of Economic Activity. In The Ottoman Empire and the World-Economy (Huri
Islamoglu-Inan ed.)., pp. 345–73. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Genc, M. (1994). Ottoman Industry in the Eighteenth Century: General Framework, Characteristics, and Main Trends. In Manufacturing in the Ottoman Empire and Turkey, 1500–1950
(Donald Quataert ed.)., pp. 59–86. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Geyikdagi, V. N. (2011). Foreign Investment in the Ottoman Empire: International Trade and
Relations 1854-1914. London and New York: I. B.Tauris Publishers.
Griggs, C., A. DeGaetano, P. Kuniholm, and M. Newton (2007). A Regional High-frequency
Reconstruction of May-June Precipitation in the North Aegean from Oak Tree-rings, A.D.
1089-1989. International Journal of Climatology 27 (8), 1075–89.
Grimes, D., R. J. Miller, and L. Dickens (1970). Water Stress during Flowering of Cotton.
California Agriculture 24(3), 4–6.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2009). Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange? The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3), 1095–1131.
26

Hellman, E. (2004). Irrigation Scheduling of Grapevines with Evapotranspiration Data. Downloaded from: http://winegrapes.tamu.edu/grow/irrigationscheduling.pdf.
Helpman, E. and A. Razin (1978). Uncertainty and International Trade in the Presence of Stock
Markets. Review of Economic Studies 45(2), 239–50.
Inalcik, H. (1994). An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman Empire, 1300–1600. In
An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman Empire, 1300–1914 (Donald Quataert ed.).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Inalcik, H. and D. Quataert (1994). An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman Empire,
1300–1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, R. W. (1967). International Capital Movements and the Theory of Tariffs and Trade.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 81(1), 1–38.
Jordà, O. (2005). Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections. American
Economic Review 95(1), 161–182.
Kemp, M. C. (1966). The Gain from International Trade and Investment: A Neo-HeckscherOhlin Approach. The American Economic Review 56(4), 788–809.
Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2008). International Investment Patterns. The Review
of Economics and Statistics 90(3), 538–49.
Maddison, A. (1992). A Long-run Perspective on Saving. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94(2), 181–196.
Maddison, A. (1995). Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-1992. Washington, DC: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti (2004). Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
Instrumental Variables Approach. Journal of Political Economy 112(4), 725–753.
Mitchell, B. R. (1988). British Historical Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, B. R. (1992). International Historical Statistics Europe 1750-1988. Stockton Press.
27

Mitchener, K. J. and M. D. Weidenmier (2005). Supersanctions and Sovereign Debt Repayment.
Journal of International Money and Finance 29(1), 19–36.
Mundell, R. A. (1957). International Trade and Factor Mobility. The American Economic
Review 47 (3), 321–35.
Nunn, N. and N. Qian (2014). US Food Aid and Civil Conflict. American Economic Review 104(6), 1630–66.
Obstfeld, M. and A. M. Taylor (2004). Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pamuk, S. (1987). The Ottoman Empire and European Capitalism, 1820-1913. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Pamuk, S. (2003). Ottoman Foreign Trade in the 19th Century. In Historical Statistics Series,
Volume 1. State Institute of Statistics.
Pamuk, S. and J. G. Williamson (2011). Ottoman De-industrialization, 1800–1913: Assessing
the Magnitude, Impact, and Response. The Economic History Review 64(s1), 159–84.
Paxson, C. H. (1992). Using Weather Variability to Estimate the Response of Savings to Transitory Income in Thailand. The American Economic Review 82(1), 15–33.
Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005). The Determinants of Cross-border Equity Flows. Journal of
International Economics 65(2), 269–96.
Prime Ministry Republic of Turkey and Turkish Statistical Institute (2005). TSY: Turkey’s
Statistical Yearbook.
Quataert, D. (1994). The Age of Reforms, 1812-1914. In An Economic and Social History of
the Ottoman Empire, 1300-1914 (H. Inalcik and D. Quataert ed.)., pp. 759–946. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rose, A. K. and M. M. Spiegel (2004). A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default,
and Credit. IMF Staff Papers 51, 50–63.

28

Sanderson, E. and F. Windmeijer (2016). A Weak Instrument F-test in Linear IV models with
Multiple Endogenous Variables. Journal of Econometrics 190(2), 212 – 221.
Schlenker, W. and M. J. Roberts (2006). Nonlinear Effects of Weather on Corn Yields. Applied
Economic Perspectives and Policy 28(3), 391–398.
Steger, A. J., J. C. Silvertooth, and P. W. Brown (1998). Upland Cotton Growth and Yield
Response to Timing the Initial Postplant Irrigation. Agronomy Journal 90, 455–61.
Taylor, A. M. and J. L. F. Wilson (2006). International Trade and Finance under the Two
Hegemons: Complementaries in the United Kingdom 1870-1913 and the United States 192030. Working Paper 12543, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Tilly, C. (1975). The Formation of National States in Western Europe. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Touchan, R., G. M. Garfin, D. M. Meko, G. Funkhouser, N. Erkan, M. K. Hughes, and B. S.
Wallin (2003). Preliminary Reconstructions of Spring Precipitation in Southwestern Turkey
from Tree-ring Width. International Journal of Climatology 23(2), 157–71.
Touchan, R., E. Xoplaki, G. Funkhouser, J. Luterbacher, M. K. Hughes, N. Erkan, Ünal
Akkemik, and J. Stephan (2007). Eastern Mediterranean Spring/Summer Precipitation Reconstruction. In IGBP PAGES/World Data Center for Paleoclimatology Data Contribution
Series 2007-020. NOAA/NCDC Paleoclimatology Program. Boulder CO, USA.
Wright, M. L. J. (2004). New Empirical Results on Default: A Discussion of “A Gravity Model
of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default and Credit”. IMF Staff Papers 51, 64–74.

29

0

300mi
l
es

0

500k
m

Notes: This map is taken from Pamuk (1987).

Figure 1: Ottoman Borders: 1830–1913

30

Ottoman Empire Imports and Exports
1,000£
45000

Default (1876)

40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
1850

1860

1870

1880

1890

Ottoman Empire Imports

1900

1910

1920

Ottoman Empire Exports

Ottoman Empire Exports

Notes: This data is taken from Pamuk (1987). All variables are measured in thousand sterling.
1,000£
30000

Figure 2: Aggregate Imports and Exports
of the Ottoman Empire during 1859–1913
Default (1876)
25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

31

0
1850

1860

1870

Ottoman Empire Exports

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

Ottoman Empire Exports to France, UK, Germany

Private Capital Flows (FDI)
1,000 sterling
1,400

1295

1,200
1,000
800
600

766

717
605

400

281
217
154

200
0

1859-1876

1877-1881

1882-1914

Ottoman Empire Exports
1,000 sterling
6,000
4879

5,000
4306

4124
3803

4,000
3072

3,000

2714

2,000
1,000

553
70

0

1.6

1859-1876

1877-1881
France

UK

1882-1914
Germany

Notes: This data is taken from Pamuk (1987). All variables are measured in thousand sterling and averaged over
each period.

Figure 3: Private Capital Inflow (FDI) and Exports of the Ottoman Empire during 1859–1913

32

FDI/GDP (%)
.8

.6

.4

.2

10

13

10

13

19

07
07

19

04
04

19

01
01

19

98
98

19

95

18

95

92

18

89

18

86

18

83

18

80

18

77

18

74

18

71

18

68

18

65

18

62

18

18

18

59

0

(a) France
FDI/GDP (%)
.2

.15

.1

.05

19

19

19

19

19

18

18

92

89

18

86

18

83

18

80

18

18

77

74

18

18

71

68

18

18

65

18

62

18

18

59

0

(b) United Kingdom
FDI/GDP (%)
1

.8

.6

.4

.2

18
59
18
62
18
65
18
68
18
71
18
74
18
77
18
80
18
83
18
86
18
89
18
92
18
95
18
98
19
01
19
04
19
07
19
10
19
13

0

Actual FDI

Imputed FDI

(c) Germany
Notes: Raw data is taken from Pamuk (1987). We impute missing data on FDI-to-GDP ratios, using the
regression of log FDI-to-GDP ratios on log Ottoman government-debt-flow-to-GDP ratios with country fixed
effects and country-specific time trends. This regression explains substantial variation in historical FDI-to-GDP
ratios with an R-squared of 0.4114. Remaining missing values are interpolated using the average of the values in
years t − 1 and t + 1. If the value in t + 1 is not feasible, the value in t + 2 is used. When the value in t − 1 is
missing, we fill the value in t with the value in t + 1.

Figure 4: Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) from Source Countries to the Ottoman Empire during
the Period 1859–1913
33

Exports/GDP (%)
1

.8

.6

.4

10

13

10

13

19

07
07

19

04
04

19

01
01

19

98
98

19

95
95

18

92

18

92

89

18

86

18

83

18

80

18

77

18

74

18

71

18

68

18

65

18

62

18

18

18

59

.2

(a) France
Exports/GDP (%)
.8

.6

.4

19

19

19

19

19

18

18

89

18

86

18

83

18

80

18

77

18

74

18

71

18

68

18

65

18

62

18

18

18

59

.2

(b) United Kingdom
Exports/GDP (%)
.08

.06

.04

.02

18
59
18
62
18
65
18
68
18
71
18
74
18
77
18
80
18
83
18
86
18
89
18
92
18
95
18
98
19
01
19
04
19
07
19
10
19
13

0

Actual Exports

Imputed Exports

(c) Germany
Notes: Raw data is taken from Pamuk (1987). We impute missing data on Export-to-GDP ratios, using the
regression of log Export-to-GDP ratios on log GDP per capita of each source country and log Ottoman GDP per
capita with country fixed effects and country-specific time trends. This regression gives an R-squared of 0.8405.
Remaining missing values are interpolated using the average of the values in years t − 1 and t + 1. If the value in
t + 1 is not feasible, the value in t + 2 is used. When the value in t − 1 is missing, we fill the value in t with the
value in t + 1.

Figure 5: Exports from the Ottoman Empire to Source Countries during the Period 1859–1913
34

Response of FDI-to-GDP ratio
1% increase shock from Export-to-GDP ratio

FDI-to-GDP ratio, % change

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4

0

2

4
Year

6

8

Notes: We run regressions by local projections (Jordà, 2005) as follows:




F DIit+h
EXP ORT Sit
log
= αi + αi t + βh log
+ γWit + it+h
GDPit+h
GDPit
where αi indicates country dummies, and αi t controls for country-specific trends. The left-hand side variable is
gross FDI inflows from the source countries (denoted as i), which are France, Germany and the U.K., into the
Ottoman Empire in time t + h; Exports are Ottoman exports into these countries in time t. The set of control
variables Wit includes three lagged variables of each of FDI-to-GDP ratios, export-to-GDP ratio, and the Empire’s
GDP per capita. Estimates βh are plotted as a solid line connecting the estimate in each horizon h. The shaded
area shows 95% confidence interval with Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard error (lag length 3).

Figure 6: Dynamic Responses of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) from Source Countries to the
Ottoman Empire

35

TR1
TR8
TR2

TR9

TR4

TRA
TR7
TR3

TRB

TR5
TRC
TR6

Notes: The figure shows the location of the statistical regions (SRE). TR1-Istanbul, TR2-West Marmara, TR3Aegean, TR4-East Marmara, TR5-West Anatolia, TR6-Mediterranean, TR7-Central Anatolia, TR8-West Black
Sea, TR9-East Black Sea, TRA-North East Anatolia, TRB-Central East Anatolia, TRC-South East Anatolia.
Names of the statistical regions and their tags accord to Prime Ministry Republic of Turkey and Turkish Statistical
Institute (2005), page 413 “Classification of statistical regions (SRE)”. Long-term rainfall data is available for TR2
statistical region (Griggs et al., 2007), TR3 region (Touchan et al., 2003), TR5 region (Akkemik and Aras, 2007),
TR6 region Touchan et al. (2007), and TR8 region (Akkemik et al., 2007).

Figure 7: Statistical Regions of Turkey with Long-term Rainfall Data

36

0.8
Germany,1892
Germany,1897

log(Exports/GDP)

0.4

0.0
UK,1887

Germany,1890
UK,1881
Germany,1899
UK,1891
France,1886
Germany,1889
UK,1911
France,1881
UK,1897
Germany,1895
France,1908
France,1891
Germany,1911
UK,1899
France,1910
UK,1885
UK,1883
France,1896 UK,1886
France,1898
France,1899
UK,1908
Germany,1907
UK,1909
France,1893
France,1913
UK,1884
UK,1882
France,1911
Germany,1910
UK,1907
France,1895
Germany,1900
UK,1893
France,1894
UK,1912
UK,1896
UK,1890
UK,1895
UK,1889
France,1912
UK,1888
Germany,1908
UK,1892
France,1880
France,1889
UK,1913
Germany,1913
France,1890
France,1909
UK,1910
France,1897
France,1887France,1888
Germany,1909
France,1900
Germany,1891
UK,1900
France,1885
Germany,1912
Germany,1893 France,1907
UK,1894
France,1892
Germany,1894
UK,1898

-0.4

Germany,1898
UK,1880

Germany,1896

Germany,1885

-0.8
-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0.0
Rainfall

0.2

0.4

0.6

Notes: The scatterplot and the solid line correspond to the first-stage regression in Table 9 column 2 with the
partial effect of rainfall on exports being equal to 0.46 with the standard error of 0.17. The log export-to-GDP
ratio and rainfall variables are purged out of control variables in the first-stage regression.

Figure 8: The Partial Effect Scatterplot of Rainfall and the Ottoman Empire Exports

37

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Source Country: 1859–1913
Variable
France

GDP
FDI
Imports from France
Exports into France
Population

# of Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

55
41
40
40
55

1137.10
1.04
2.49
3.77
39.47

272.21
1.54
4.84
0.59
1.26

706.34
0.04
1.58
2.32
37.24

1965.43
9.23
3.56
4.92
41.46

1401.04
0.39
7.62
4.58
36.63

405.29
0.43
1.47
1.00
5.18

761.00
0.03
3.43
2.49
28.66

2354.00
2.12
9.93
6.34
45.64

1259.98
0.77
1.11
0.43
47.50

633.49
0.76
1.39
0.51
8.69

431.60
0.09
0.02
0.00
35.63

2782.56
3.40
4.66
1.46
65.05

153.27
16.54

36.70
3.10

73.97
10.17

208.64
21.89

Sample)
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.003
30.43
8.825
-0.024

0.001
0.002
0.002
0.002
8.479
1.424
0.141

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
12.11
5.128
-0.716

0.008
0.009
0.005
0.009
51.57
10.89
0.268

UK
GDP
55
FDI
55
Imports from the UK
40
Exports into the UK
40
Population
55
Germany
GDP
55
FDI
26
Imports from Germany
40
Exports into Germany
40
Population
55
Ottoman Empire
GDP
49
Population
55

Regression Variables (Pooled Panel
FDI/GDP (raw)
122
FDI/GDP (imputed)
165
Exports/GDP (raw)
105
Exports/GDP (imputed)
165
Source GDP per capita
165
Host GDP per capita
147
Rainfall
165

Notes: For France, the U.K., Germany, and the Ottoman Empire, all variables except population are measured
in millions of British Sterling. The population is measured in million people. Imports and Exports are the
Ottoman Empire Imports and Exports. FDI denotes Private Capital Inflows from source countries (France,
Germany and the U.K.) into the Ottoman Empire during 1859–1913. Data comes from Pamuk (1987), Table
A3.3. Exports and Imports are values of goods exported from and imported into the Ottoman Empire with
three trading partners (France, Germany and the U.K.) over 1859–1913, from Pamuk (2003) Table 7.5 and
Pamuk (1987) Table 2.3, with values converted from Turkish Golden Lira into British sterlings using Gold
Standard exchange rates from Table A1. GDP of each of source country comes from Mitchell (1992) Table
J1. The table includes data on GDP for France and the U.K. and the NNP data for Germany. NNP figures
for Germany were converted into GDP following the procedure described in Maddison (1992). Ottoman GDP
data comes from Clemens and Williamson (2004) dataset. Population figures for the Ottoman Empire are
from Behar (1996). The data on population of France, Germany, and the U.K. comes from the Maddison
g
o
Pto ) is calculated as the weighted sum of rainfall shocks
dataset. The rainfall variable (Rmt = θm0
Ptg + θm0
g
g
o
o
to grain Pt and orchard Pt in time t, where weights are initial export shares of grain θm0
and orchard θm0
for each source country m.

38

Table 2: Ottoman Exports and FDI Inflows
Dependent Variable: log(FDI/GDP)it

log(Exports/GDP)
Adjusted R2
Number of Observations
Country Dummies
Time Dummies
Country-specific Trends
Controls

(1)
Contemp. Raw

(2)
Contemp. Imputed

(3)
Lag. Imputed

0.31**
(0.13)

0.27***
(0.08)

0.21**
(0.09)

0.2875
87
yes
no
yes
GDP p.c.

0.4655
147
yes
no
yes
GDP p.c.

0.4450
144
yes
no
yes
GDP p.c.

Notes: Exports and FDI are normalized by the GDP of each source country (France, Germany, and the UK).
In column 1, we use raw data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP is
contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. In column 2, we use imputed data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and exportto-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. In column 3, we use imputed
data for FDI-to-GDP ratio and export-to-GDP ratio, and log Exports/GDP is lagged. Time dummies
consist of a series of dummy variables that equal 1 for five consecutive years without overlapping. Country
dummies, country-specific trends, and the log of the Ottoman GDP per capita are included as controls. The
log of the Ottoman GDP per capita is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP in columns 1 and 2 and lagged
in column 3. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively. Driscoll and Kraay
(1998) standard errors (robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering on years and kernel-robust to common
correlated disturbances with the lag length 3) are in parentheses.

39

Table 3: Ottoman Exports and FDI Inflows with Time or Event Dummies
Dependent Variable: log(FDI/GDP)it

log(Exports/GDP)it
Default

(1)
Contemp. Imputed

(2)
Contemp. Imputed

(3)
Contemp. Raw

0.15**
(0.07)

0.22***
(0.08)
-1.05**
(0.42)
0.57
(0.47)
0.30
(0.53)

0.35**
(0.17)
-1.42**
(0.71)
1.30**
(0.64)
0.92
(0.68)

0.5184
147
yes
yes
yes
GDP p.c.

0.4954
147
yes
no
yes
GDP p.c.

0.3247
87
yes
no
yes
GDP p.c.

OPDA
Resettlement
Adjusted R2
Number of Observations
Country Dummies
Time Dummies
Country-specific Trends
Controls

Notes: Exports and FDI are normalized by the GDP of each source country (France, Germany, and the
UK). In columns 1 and 2, we use imputed data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and log
Exports/GDP is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. In column 3, we use raw data for FDI-to-GDP ratios
and export-to-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. Time dummies
consist of a series of dummy variables that equal 1 for five consecutive years without overlapping, which are
included in column 1. In columns 2 and 3, we include event dummies: Default, OPDA, and Resettlement.
Default is a time dummy variable which equals 1 after the default of the Ottoman Empire in 1876. OPDA is
a time dummy variable which equals 1 after the establishment of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration
(OPDA) in 1881. Resettlement is a time dummy variable which equals 1 after 1903 when the Ottoman
external debt decreased significantly after negotiations with creditors. Country dummies, country-specific
trends, and the log of the Ottoman GDP per capita are included as controls. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors (robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustering on years and kernel-robust to common correlated disturbances with the lag length 3) are in
parentheses.

40

Table 4: Ottoman Exports and FDI Inflows: Regressions at Every 5-year Period
Dependent Variable: log(FDI/GDP)it
Sample Period:
log(Exports/GDP)it
Adjusted R2
Number of Observations
Country Dummies
Controls

(1)
1885-1889

(2)
1890-1894

(3)
1895-1899

(4)
1900-1904

(5)
1905-1909

(6)
1910-1913

0.25***
(0.08)

-0.76
(0.50)

-1.67
(1.18)

0.89***
(0.00)

0.84
(1.08)

2.35***
(0.43)

0.0622
12
yes
GDP p.c.

0.5922
15
yes
GDP p.c.

0.2327
15
yes
GDP p.c.

0.9568
6
yes
GDP p.c.

0.1841
15
yes
GDP p.c.

0.7806
12
yes
GDP p.c.

Notes: We use raw data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP is
contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. Country dummies and the log of the Ottoman GDP per capita
are included as controls. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.
Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors (robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering on years and
kernel-robust to common correlated disturbances with the lag length 2) are in parentheses.

41

Table 5: Placebo Test
Dependent Variable: log(FDI/GDP)it

log(Exports/GDP)it
Adjusted R2
Number of Observations
Country Dummies
Event Dummies
Country-specific Trends
Controls

(1)
Baseline

(2)
Placebo

0.35**
(0.17)

0.01
(0.09)

0.3247
87
yes
yes
yes
GDP p.c.

0.3078
87
yes
yes
yes
GDP p.c.

Notes: Exports and FDI are normalized by the GDP of each source country (France, Germany, and the
UK). We use raw data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. In column 1, we reproduce the baseline regression in Table 3 column 3, and
countries which send capital into the Ottoman Empire are also the countries to which the Ottoman Empire
exports. In column 2, we switch trading partners. FDI from France is matched to exports into the UK,
the UK is matched to Germany, and Germany is matched to France. Using event dummies, we control for
specific events such as a dummy for the creation of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration (OPDA) in
1881, and other dummies characterizing the effect of Empire’s default on the foreign debt in 1876, and the
Resettlement of the debt in 1903. Country and event dummies, country-specific trends, and the log of the
Ottoman GDP per capita are included as controls. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels, respectively. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors (robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering
on years and kernel-robust to common correlated disturbances with the lag length 3) are in parentheses.

42

Table 6: A Test of FDI cycle
Dependent Variable: log(FDI/GDP)it

log(Exports/GDP)it
FDI cycleit
Adjusted R2
Number of Observations
Country Dummies
Event Dummies
Country-specific Trends
Controls

(1)
baseline

(2)
FDI cycle

0.35**
(0.17)

0.34**
(0.13)
0.25
(0.16)

0.3247
87
yes
yes
yes
GDP p.c.

0.4431
69
yes
yes
yes
GDP p.c.

Notes: Exports and FDI are normalized by the GDP of each source country (France, Germany, and the
UK). We use raw data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. In column 1, we reproduce the baseline regression in Table 3 column 3. In
column 2, we add an FDI cycle variable for country i in year t, which is calculated as the average of log
FDI-to-GDP ratios of other countries in year t, excluding country i. Using event dummies, we control for
specific events such as a dummy for the creation of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration (OPDA) in
1881, and other dummies characterizing the effect of Empire’s default on the foreign debt in 1876, and the
Resettlement of the debt in 1903. Country and event dummies, country-specific trends, and the log of the
Ottoman GDP per capita are included as controls. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors (robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering on years and
kernel-robust to common correlated disturbances with the lag length 3) are in parentheses.

43

Table 7: Agricultural Land of Turkey by Statistical Region (SRE)
Agricultural Land by SRE, thousand Hectare

Region

Istanbul (TR1)
Marmara
West Marmara (TR2)
East Marmara (TR4)
Aegean (TR3)
Mediterranean (TR6)
Black Sea
West Black Sea (TR8)
East Black Sea (TR9)
Anatolia
West Anatolia (TR5)
Central Anatolia (TR7)
North East Anatolia (TRA)
Central East Anatolia (TRB)
South East Anatolia (TRC)
Total

Total
Land

Cultivated
Field
Area

Non
Cultivated
Area

Share of
Cultivated Land
in Total Land

Lj

“Grain Land”

“Orchard Land”

Sj
(percent)

83

76

7

92

1,736
1,564
3,010
2,623

1,510
1,226
2,187
2,132

226
338
828
490

87
78
73
81

2,251
736

1,996
259

256
476

87
35

4,221
4,003
1,461
1,451
3,453

4,050
3,872
1,443
1,328
3,992

171
131
18
123
461

96
97
99
92
87

26,593

23,066

3,526

87

Notes: The data comes from Prime Ministry Republic of Turkey and Turkish Statistical Institute (2005) Table
11.11 on page 177. “Grain” produce include corn, wheat, barley, and rye. Also, we included cotton into this
category, because cotton is typically rotated with the grain. “Orchard” produce include grape, fig, unspecified
fruits and vegetables, vine, olive oil, acorn, hazelnuts, and peanuts. “Other” produce include animal products
such as sheep, goat and lamb wool, leather, silk, and several minor categories.

44

Table 8: Ottoman Decomposition of Exports
Decomposition of Exports, percent
France

U.K.

Germany

Grain produce
Orchard produce
Other

16.9
9.2
73.9

44.8
21.0
34.2

41.4
31.4
27.2

Total

100.0

100.0

100.0

Notes: “Grain” produce include corn, wheat, barley, and rye. Also,
we included cotton into this category, because cotton is typically
rotated with the grain. “Orchard” produce include grape, fig, unspecified fruits and vegetables, vine, olive oil, acorn, hazelnuts, and
peanuts. “Other” produce include animal products such as sheep,
goat and lamb wool, leather, silk, and several minor categories. Export shares data comes from Pamuk (2003), page 62, Table 7.2. For
the UK and France, the percentage shares are the averages over
1860-1862; for Germany, we take averages over 1880-82. This way,
for all three countries, we are using the initial export shares that
correspond to the beginnings of the respective samples.

45

Table 9: Ottoman Exports and FDI Inflows (2SLS)
A. Second Stage Regression
Full Sample

Starting in 1885

Dependent Variable: log(FDI/GDP)it
log(Exports/GDP)it

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.33**
(0.13)

0.57***
(0.18)

0.31*
(0.16)

0.60***
(0.17)

B. First Stage Regression
Dependent Variable: log(Exports/GDP)it
Rainfallit
Adjusted R2
Number of Observations
Country Dummies
Event Dummies
Country-specific Trends
First-stage F
F (p-value)†
Hansen J (p-value)††
Controls

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.46***
(0.17)

0.46***
(0.17)

0.37**
(0.16)

0.37**
(0.16)

0.2696
73
yes
no
yes
13.34
0.0000
0.1927
GDP p.c.

0.2796
73
yes
yes
yes
11.20
0.0000
0.2482
GDP p.c.

0.2911
66
yes
no
yes
14.13
0.0000
0.1695
GDP p.c.

0.3303
66
yes
yes
yes
12.51
0.0000
0.2903
GDP p.c.

Notes: We use raw data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP
is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. Event dummies are “Default,” “OPDA,” and “Resettlement.” Default is a time dummy variable which equals 1 after the default of the Ottoman
Empire in 1876. OPDA is a time dummy variable which equals 1 after the establishment of the
Ottoman Public Debt Administration (OPDA) in 1881. Resettlement is a time dummy variable
which equals 1 after 1903 when the Ottoman external debt decreased significantly after negotiations with creditors. Country dummies, country-specific trends, and the log of the Ottoman
GDP per capita are included as controls. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10%
levels, respectively. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors (robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustering on years and kernel-robust to common correlated disturbances with the lag length
3) are in parentheses. Adjusted R2 is calculated for second stage regressions. † This p-value
– which is associated with the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) first-stage F test – is used to
test the null that instruments are weak. †† This p-value – which is associated with Hansen’s
overidentifying test – is used to test the null that instruments are excludable. The rainfall
g
o
variable (Rmt = θm0
Ptg + θm0
Pto ) is calculated as the weighted sum of rainfall shocks to grain
g
g
o
Pt and orchard Pt in time t, where weights are initial export shares of grain θm0
and orchard
o
θm0 for each source country m. Contemporaneous rainfall and two lagged variables of each of
rainfall and log Exports/GDP are used as
Pinstruments. The first
Pstage regression is as follows:
log(Exports/GDP)it = βRainfallit + γj 2j=1 Rainfallit−j + δj 2j=1 log(Exports/GDP)it−j +
ωlog(GDP per capita)t + αi + λt + αi t + it where αi indicates country dummies; λt indicates
event dummies; αi t refers to country-specific trends. We use a full regression sample in columns
1 and 2 (observations from France start in 1878; the U.K. in 1871; and Germany in 1885.), while
we use the sample starting in 1885 in columns 3 and 4.

46

Table 10: Ottoman Exports and FDI Inflows (2SLS) with Alternative Instruments
A. Second Stage Regression
Dependent Variable: log(FDI/GDP)it
(1)
(2)
Baseline
log(Exports/GDP)it

0.33**
(0.13)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Sensitivity: Grain 1.5
& Orchard 0.5

0.57***
(0.18)

0.33**
(0.13)

0.57***
(0.18)

(6)

Sensitivity: Grain 0.5
& Orchard 1.5

0.33**
(0.14)

0.57***
(0.18)

(7)

(8)

Exports: Grain +20%
& Orchard −20%

(9)

(10)

Exports: Grain −20%
& Orchard +20%

0.33**
(0.13)

0.57***
(0.18)

0.33**
(0.14)

0.57***
(0.18)

B. First Stage Regression
Dependent Variable: log(Exports/GDP)it
Rainfallit

0.46***
(0.17)

0.46***
(0.17)

0.38***
(0.14)

0.38***
(0.14)

0.56***
(0.21)

0.56***
(0.21)

0.43***
(0.16)

0.43***
(0.16)

0.49***
(0.18)

0.49***
(0.18)

Adjusted R2
Number of Observations
Country Dummies
Event Dummies
Country-specific Trends
First-stage F
F (p-value)†
Hansen J (p-value)††

0.2696
73
yes
no
yes
13.34
0.0000
0.1927

0.2796
73
yes
yes
yes
11.20
0.0000
0.2482

0.2696
73
yes
no
yes
12.92
0.0000
0.2007

0.2797
73
yes
yes
yes
10.87
0.0000
0.2346

0.2698
73
yes
no
yes
13.82
0.0000
0.1857

0.2798
73
yes
yes
yes
11.59
0.0000
0.2717

0.2696
73
yes
no
yes
13.16
0.0000
0.1960

0.2796
73
yes
yes
yes
11.06
0.0000
0.2420

0.2697
73
yes
no
yes
13.52
0.0000
0.1896

0.2796
73
yes
yes
yes
11.35
0.0000
0.2560

Notes: We use raw data for FDI-to-GDP ratios and export-to-GDP ratios, and log Exports/GDP is contemporaneous with log FDI/GDP. Event dummies are “Default,” “OPDA,” and “Resettlement.” Default
is a time dummy variable which equals 1 after the default of the Ottoman Empire in 1876. OPDA is
a time dummy variable which equals 1 after the establishment of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration (OPDA) in 1881. Resettlement is a time dummy variable which equals 1 after 1903 when the Ottoman
external debt decreased significantly after negotiations with creditors. Country and event dummies, countryspecific trends, and the log of the Ottoman GDP per capita are included as controls. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at 1, 5, and 10% levels. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors (robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustering on years and kernel-robust to common correlated disturbances with the lag length 3) are in
parentheses. Adjusted R2 is calculated for second stage regressions. † This p-value – which is associated
with the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) first-stage F test – is used to test the null that instruments
are weak. †† This p-value – which is associated with Hansen’s overidentifying test – is used to test the
g
o
null that instruments are excludable. The rainfall variable (Rmt = θm0
Ptg + θm0
Pto ) is calculated as the
g
o
weighted sum of rainfall shocks to grain Pt and orchard Pt in time t, where weights are initial export
g
o
shares of grain θm0
and orchard θm0
for each source country m. Contemporaneous rainfall and two lagged
variables of each of rainfall and log(Exports/GDP) P
are used as instruments.
P The first stage regression is
as follows: log(Exports/GDP)it = βRainfallit + γj 2j=1 Rainfallit−j + δj 2j=1 log(Exports/GDP)it−j +
ωlog(GDP per capita)it + αi + λt + αi t + it where αi indicates country dummies; λt indicates event dummies; αi t refers to country-specific trends. We reproduce IV regression results from Table 9 in columns 1
and 2, which are without and with event dummies, respectively. Then, we reconstruct a rainfall variable
g
o
(Rmt = θm0
ω g Ptg + θm0
ω o Pto ) such that sensitivities for grain ω g and orchard ω o are 1.5 and 0.5, and we
replace the baseline rainfall variable with the reconstructed rainfall variable in columns 3 and 4. Columns 5
and 6 present results with another rainfall variable such that sensitivities for grain and orchard are 0.5 and
g
o
1.5, respectively. Also, we reconstruct a rainfall variable (Rmt = θm0
Ptg + θm0
Pto ) such that export shares
g
o
of grain θm0 are increased by 20% and export shares of orchard θm0 are decreased by 20% for all countries
m, and we replace the baseline rainfall variable with the reconstructed rainfall variable in columns 7 and 8.
g
o
Columns 9 and 10 show results with another rainfall variable such that θm0
are decreased by 20% and θm0
are increased by 20% for all countries m.

47

A

Figures and Tables (Not for publication)

48

400

Annual precipitations, mm

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

TR3

TR8

TR5

TR2

1911
1913

1907
1909

1903
1905

1901

1897
1899

1893
1895

1889
1891

1885
1887

1883

1879
1881

1875
1877

1871
1873

1867
1869

1865

1861
1863

1859

0

TR6

Notes: For definition of the statistical regions, refer to Section 5.1.

Figure A1: Annual Precipitation in Various Statistical Regions of the Former Ottoman Empire

49

Table A1: Gold Standard Exchange Rates
Country

France

United
Kingdom

Germany

Ottoman
Empire

Currency

Franc

Pound
Sterling

Mark

Gold Lira

04/07/1803
08/05/1914
0.2903
25.2215
5.1827

05/01/1821
08/06/1914
7.3224
1.0000
0.2055

12/04/1871
08/04/1914
0.3584
20.4290
4.1979

01/05/1844
08/03/1914
6.6152
1.1069
0.2275

Adopted
Abandoned
Grams of Fine Gold
Sterling Exchange Rate
Dollar Exchange Rate

Notes: These data come from Global Financial Data, and available for download at http://www.globalfinancialdata.com/gh/GHC_XRates.xls

50

