NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHERE ARE THE HEALTH CARE ENTREPRENEURS? THE FAILURE OF ORGANIZATIONAL
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
David M. Cutler
Working Paper 16030
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16030

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010

This paper was prepared for the NBER meeting on Innovation Policy and the Economy. I am grateful
to Melinda Beeuwkes-Buntin, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern for helpful conversations and to the National
Institutes on Aging for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by David M. Cutler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Where Are The Health Care Entrepreneurs? The Failure of Organizational Innovation in
Health Care
David M. Cutler
NBER Working Paper No. 16030
May 2010
JEL No. I1,L0
ABSTRACT
Medical care is characterized by enormous inefficiency. Costs are higher and outcomes worse than
almost all analyses of the industry suggest should occur. In other industries characterized by inefficiency,
efficient firms expand to take over the market, or new firms enter to eliminate inefficiencies. This
has not happened in medical care, however. This paper explores the reasons for this failure of innovation.
I identify two factors as being particularly important in organizational stagnation: public insurance
programs that are oriented to volume of care and not value, and inadequate information about quality
of care. Recent reforms have aspects that bear on these problems.
David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu

Designing policies to lower medical spending was central to the recent health care debate
in the United States. Rising health care costs are the leading contributor to projected federal
deficits over the next few decades (Congressional Budget Office, 2009) and make health
insurance coverage expansions difficult to afford. In the private sector, high medical costs crowd
out private coverage (Chernew, Cutler, and Keenan, 2005) and lead to reduced employment of
low wage and secondary earners (Sood et al., 2009).
Of course, not all medical spending increases are problematic. A good share of rising
costs is attributable to the development and diffusion of new technologies (Newhouse, 1992),
which bring significant value (Cutler and McClellan, 2001; Cutler, 2004).1 In an efficient
industry, spending more on a good is not a cause for concern.
But alongside valuable innovation is an enormous amount of inefficiency. Evidence
based on cross-sectional comparisons – both across countries and within the United States –
suggest that one-third or more of medical resources is not buying improved health (Institute of
Medicine, 2001; Cutler, 2002; Fisher et al., 2003a,b). In a $2.5 trillion medical care economy,
this amounts to over $700 billion of excess spending annually. Understanding the causes of this
inefficiency, and why it has not been eliminated, is the central goal of this paper.
One explanation for inefficient spending, common in the economic literature, is ‘flat of
the curve’ medicine (Fuchs, 1974). Low patient cost sharing combined with generous provider
reimbursement means that neither patients nor providers have incentives to limit care. Thus, too
much is done. Flat of the curve medicine is indeed common (see below). But it is not the whole
story. There are two other explanations for excessive spending that are important as well.

1

Costs might also increase because of Baumol’s ‘cost disease,’ which would also be appropriate. Medical care has
a very high capital-labor ratio, though.

1

The second explanation is inadequate coordination of care. Many acute conditions that
could be prevented are not, leading to poor health outcomes and higher spending. For example,
about 20 percent of Medicare patients discharged from a hospital are rehospitalized within 30
days (Jencks et al., 2009), often without seeing a doctor or nurse in between; in the best systems,
the rate is as low as 6 percent. Similarly, patients with chronic disease – hypertension, high
cholesterol, diabetes, and depression, for example – are not helped adequately to control their
condition. Rates of chronic disease control are no better than two in five on average. Inadequate
care coordination costs lives, and likely dollars.
The third explanation for inefficiency is poorly designed production processes. Medical
care providers are far less efficient than they should be. Doctors and nurses spend significant
time on routine administrative tasks or clinical services that could be provided by less trained
personnel. Hospitals are slow to adopt efficiency savings in surgical suites, despite evidence that
they save money and improve outcomes. And mistakes are common and costly.
Medical care is complex, and it is natural that there will be inefficiencies in complex
settings. Indeed, in any industry where human action is important, there are bound to be
mistakes.
The failure of medical care is not so much that mistakes are made, but rather that the
system has not evolved mechanisms to minimize those mistakes. For many years, Toyota was
famous for its attention to error reduction; Wal-Mart is equally known for its supply-chain
management. In health care, in contrast, doctors will often redo a test because the prior test
results are not available or would require too much effort to obtain.
The problem in health care is not a lack of possible market organizers. Primary care
physicians, for example, could coordinate care for patients with chronic disease. Similarly,

2

multi-speciality groups of physicians might combine into care organizations to make sure
patients do not fall through the cracks. Alternatively, payers for medical care – insurers or the
employers they contract with – could push for coordination. Even farther removed, a firm from
outside medical care could enter health care and organize the care experience, as Amazon.com
did with book sales and Expedia did with airline tickets. A few firms have tried in health care,
but none has made more than a minor dent. The question is why.
I argue that there are two fundamental barriers to organizational innovation in health care.
The first is the lack of good information on quality. Within a market, it is difficult to tell which
providers are high quality and which are low quality. As a result, most consumers still rely on
reputation to judge providers. Difficulty measuring quality also makes expansion of high-quality
firms more difficult. The quality of a Wal-Mart store in Kansas is virtually identical to that of a
Wal-Mart in Oklahoma. Thus, a firm with a general reputation for high quality can expand
nationally with relative ease. Knowing that an insurer has high quality in California, however,
tells consumers very little about its quality in other markets. Thus, the gains from economies of
scale are limited.
The second barrier is the stagnant compensation system of public insurance plans. In
most industries, higher quality is associated with higher prices. That is not true in medical care,
however, largely because of the public sector. Medicare accounts for 25 percent of physician
and hospital services, and Medicaid accounts for another 13 percent. Since the 1960s, Medicare
has paid providers on a fee-for-service basis, without reference to the quality of care delivered.
Medicaid reimbursements are more flexible, but they are so low that many providers view
Medicaid patients as effectively uninsured. As a result, about 40 percent of the market transmits
incentives to provide more care but not more efficient care (Medicare) or to avoid patients who

3

are sick (Medicaid). With so much of compensation pegged to volume, not value, inefficient
care is the natural outcome.
If inadequate information and misaligned compensation systems are the problems, one set
of solutions is in that arena as well. I discuss the potential efficiency improvements from a
significantly increased commitment to information collection and analysis, and changing the
compensation arrangements in public insurance. I show that such efforts could lower medical
spending by significant amounts. I discuss briefly how the recent reform legislation dealt with
these issues. I also discuss how issues such as capital constraints or the uncertain role of the
consumer factor into this analysis.
The paper is organized as follows. The first two sections provide evidence on the
production inefficiencies in health care and the potential for improved outcomes. The third
section lays out the puzzle of missing innovation. The fourth and fifth sections examine the
barriers to innovation for providers and payers. The sixth section notes the features of the recent
reform legislation that affects these areas, and the last section concludes.

I.

Productivity in Health Care
Inefficient spending is an example of low productivity; more is spent than is needed to

get the outcomes we get (or equivalently, less output is produced than is possible given the
inputs employed). One way to gauge the relative efficiency of health care over time is thus to
compare productivity growth in health care to other industries.
Productivity growth is notoriously difficult to measure in health care (Berndt et al., 2000).
Accurate productivity assessment requires a good output measure. Health is difficult to measure
and even harder to decompose into medical and non-medial factors. As a result, official data are

4

much better on productivity outside of health care than they are in health care.2 Still, I start with
the official data as they are.
Overall productivity growth in the United States as a whole was low from the mid-1970s
to the mid-1990s (the ‘productivity slowdown’). Since the mid-1990s, however, productivity
growth has increased rapidly. Productivity growth in private industry, for example, was 1.25
percent annually from 1987 to 1995 and 2.4 percent between 1995 and 2005 (Oliner et al., 2007).
Oliner et al. attribute the resurgence of productivity growth largely to greater use of information
technology. Industries that use information technology above average experienced productivity
growth approximately 1.5 percentage points higher than industries that did not.
The relative performance of productivity in different industries in the post-1995 era is
shown in Figure 1. The most productive industries were durable goods manufacturing (6.9
percent growth annually) and information technology (5.7 percent growth annually). These
industries are fairly different from health care. There are some industries with high productivity
growth that are more similar to health care, however. Retail trade, for example, used to be a
cottage industry like health care. In the last decade and a half, however, productivity growth in
retail trade averaged 4.3 percent annually. Professional and businesses services had productivity
growth of 1.2 percent annually, another industry that is close in production to medical care.
Productivity growth in health care (along with education and social assistance) is
estimated to be -0.2 percent annually in the official data. As noted above, this is almost surely an
underestimate. But even still, the negative value is striking.
Other studies have looked more closely at health care costs and output, and can be used
to assess the productivity of medical care over time. Figure 2 shows the cost per additional year
2

Output assessment is difficult in other industries too, but the methodology to make quality adjustment is better
developed. Hedonic analysis is used in most industries. In health care, however, the absence of good market signals
makes hedonic analysis very difficult to employ.

5

of life attributable to medical care between 1960 and 2000, as estimated by Cutler et al. (2006).
The lower line is for newborns, with higher lines reflecting people at older ages. The highest
line is for people age 65.
The value of a year of life is generally taken to be about $100,000 (Cutler, 2004). Thus,
costs per year of life below this amount are generally considered to be good value, while costs
above this amount are considered to be poor value. Most of the estimates of cost per year of life
are below $100,000. Thus, medical care on average is giving good value for the dollar. But the
trend is adverse. Cost per year of additional life was lower in the 1960s and 1970s than in the
1980s and 1990s. For the elderly, recent estimates suggest that we are spending too much to
extend life, though these estimates do not account for quality of life.
At one level, the pattern of increasing cost per year of life is not entirely surprising. It
may be that the most beneficial treatments were developed first, and we are simply moving down
the marginal product of innovation curve. Looked at a different way, however, the finding is
quite surprising. In other industries, the common denominator has not been new goods but better
ways of organizing production, distribution, and sales. This organizational change has led to
expanded output per dollar. In health care, however, there has been very little innovation in the
organization of the system.

II.

Categories of Inefficiency in Medical Care
The inefficiency of medical care production can be understood in three dimensions: flat

of the curve medicine; poor coordination; and inefficient production processes.

Flat of the Curve Medicine

6

Significant evidence shows that many people receive more medical care than is
appropriate for their condition, especially in acute settings. Consider the treatment of localized
prostate cancer (Perlroth et al., 2010). Almost all elderly men have cancer of the prostate. In
many cases, however, the cancer grows slowly, and the person will die of something else before
the cancer becomes fatal – or even clinically meaningful. Thus, ‘watchful waiting’ is a common
strategy. In some cases, the cancer will grow rapidly and should be treated. However, it is not
always clear whether a patient has a rapidly growing cancer or not.
There are a variety of different treatments for prostate cancer. In addition to watchful
waiting, men may receive radical prostatectomy (removal of the prostate), brachytherapy
(radioactive implants in the prostate), external beam radiation therapy, and intensity-modulation
radiation therapy. Costs increase with the intensity of care. Costs in the two years after
diagnosis average about $50,000 for watchful waiting and radical prostatectomy,3 about $68,000
for brachytherapy, about $78,000 for external beam radiation therapy, and about $96,000 for
intensity-modulated radiation therapy.
Some clinical evidence has examined the effectiveness of these different strategies. The
results suggest that the therapies are approximately equally efficacious in men aged 65 and older,
the most common group diagnosed with localized prostate cancer.4 In particular, there is no
evidence that the newer and very expensive radiation therapies have better outcomes. There is
some evidence of adverse side effects with surgery – impotence and incontinence are common
outcomes – making watchful waiting even more appropriate for many men.
Still, rates of invasive treatment remain high. Only 42 percent of elderly men with
prostate cancer receive watchful waiting. One-third receive a radical prostatectomy, 15 percent

3
4

Watchful waiting is not lower cost because some men go on to receive active treatment in the two year window.
In younger patients, there is more time for the cancer to metastasize, and hence treatment is more beneficial.

7

receive brachytherapy, 1 percent receive external beam radiation therapy, and 5 percent receive
intensity modulated radiation therapy. A final 4 percent of patients receive a combination of
intensive treatment – which has not even been explored in the literature. Perlroth et al. (2010)
conclude that savings of $1.7 to $3.0 billion annually would be realized by having all Medicare
patients receive guideline-concordant care.
Patient preferences are not a major part of the variation in treatment. Sommers et al.
(2008) show that patients differ in their preferences for side effects and risks of metastatis, but
these preferences do not predict the therapy a patient receives. Rather, patients get referred to a
particular type of specialist, and this specialist then recommends the therapy that they judge best.
Thus, patients who see only a urologist most frequently undergo a radical prostatectomy, while
patients seen by a radiation oncologist undergo some form of radiation.
The standard economic framework rationalizing this outcome is shown in Figure 3 (see
Fuchs, 1974). Potential output is shown by the concave production possibility frontier. The
marginal value of life is shown by the straight line, assumed constant over this interval. The
optimal point for society is for patients to receive care until the marginal value of care is equal to
the marginal cost, shown by point A.
Most patients are insured, however, and physicians are often paid above marginal cost.
Each of these factors provides incentives for additional care above what is optimal. This is
shown by point B in the figure. If the production function is sufficiently flat, outcome
differences between points A and B would be difficult to detect, even at very different treatment
rates. Point B is allocatively inefficient. The care that is provided is technically correct, but is
not appropriate.

8

Other countries appear to have less overused care than does the US. Because of the
tighter restrictions on overall supply, the number of procedures performed is lower elsewhere
(Cutler, 2002). Thus, it is natural to think of lower spending countries as occupying a point like
A in comparison to the U.S., perhaps at point B.
The overall amount of money spent on allocatively inefficient care has been a subject of
some debate. Comparing different regions of the United States, Fisher et al. (2003 a,b) estimated
that about 30 percent of medical care utilization in the Medicare population is associated with
care that is not contributing to improved health. Other studies suggest the number may be
smaller (Elmendorf, 2009) or larger (other countries spend about half the US amount). Table 1
shows the estimate of 30 percent possible savings.
The flat of the curve model is undoubtedly part of the explanation for high medical
spending, but it is unlikely to be the only important factor. Around 1990, 22 percent of elderly
patients with a heart attack who lived in the United States received either coronary bypass
surgery or balloon angioplasty. In Canada, the equivalent number was 2 percent. Yet 30 day
mortality after a heart attack was the same in the two countries (Tu et al., 1997). It is implausible
that the production frontier is this flat over such a large range. There must be some other
explanation for poor outcomes in the U.S.

Poor coordination
The second area of low productivity is poor coordination of care. For many medical
conditions, people need to see generalist and specialist physicians, receive periodic lab tests, take
medications, and modify their behaviors. This complex regimen is almost always left to the

9

patient to plan and coordinate. Many people are bad at this, however. Partly as a result, people
receive too little chronic and preventive care.
If prostate cancer is the poster child for overused care, diabetes care is the equivalent for
coordination. Diabetes is a chronic disease, requiring regular dietary and (often)
pharmacological intervention, and testing for possible complications.5 There are consensus
guidelines for how frequently these should occur.
Figure 4 shows adherence to these recommendations in the United States and seven other
developed countries.6 Adherence to guideline recommendations is low. Only 43 percent of
diabetics in the United States receive recommended therapy. The issue is not just lack of
insurance. The other countries shown have universal coverage, and yet the average success rate
(46 percent) is no better.
Diabetes is not unique. Only one-third of people with high blood pressure have their
cholesterol under control (Cutler et al., 2008), and only one-quarter of those with high
cholesterol are under control (Hyre et al., 2007). Outcomes for patients with conditions such as
depression are even worse. Again, this appears similar in all countries. Unlike excessive use of
care with low value, poor chronic disease care management is a feature of all developed country
medical systems.
It is possible to do better. A number of integrated provider systems achieve outcomes on
diabetes care that are far superior to the norm. Beaulieu et al. (2006) study the case of diabetes
management in HealthPartners, a staff model HMO in Minneapolis, MN. In the mid-1990s,
HealthPartners began a program to improve diabetic outcomes. The plan worked with its

5

These include heart disease, retinopathy, kidney failure, and poor circulation to the extremities.
The survey was conducted by the Commonwealth Fund in 2008 (Schoen et al., 2008) and sampled about 1,000
individuals in each country. The initial sample was people with chronic disease; the sample in figure 4 is the subset
with diabetes.

6

10

physicians to identify diabetic patients that had not received recommended screening and
provided nurse case managers to call the patients. Physicians were encouraged to start
medication therapy in patients for whom diet and exercise were not sufficient. Patients, in turn,
were reminded to take their medications and receive recommended screenings. Individual and
group sessions developed mechanisms for people to manage their disease, and nurse case
managers helped as needed. In the five years after this program was implemented, rates of high
blood sugar fell in half and diabetes was brought under much better control. HealthPartners is
not unique. Kaiser Permanente, an HMO with salaried doctors and (in many areas) fully owned
hospitals, regularly ranks among the top insurers on the basis of quality, largely as a result of
good chronic disease care.
The successful examples are similar in many ways. They all integrate care across
different providers, by having providers in the same physical or virtual organization. They pay
physicians on a salary or productivity basis, not just fee-for-service payment. Finally, they
decentralize decision-making to encourage productivity.
The biggest problem for HealthPartners was that the economics did not work out well.
The cost of the program was a few hundred dollars per diabetic patient. Better diabetes control
translates into fewer adverse events, but that comes a few years down the road. The health plan
feared that many patients would transfer to a new insurer before the benefits of prevention were
noticeable. Beaulieu et al. estimate that the ROI was favorable over a decade, but not by
anywhere near the social value of the program.
The lack of coordination that is endemic to chronic disease care is noticed by consumers.
Figure 5, also taken from the Commonwealth Fund survey, shows that 25 percent of Americans
with chronic disease have had the experience of having records unavailable when needed, and 20

11

percent have had a doctor order a repeat test. Overall, 35 percent of Americans felt their time
was wasted because of poor organization. Other countries do somewhat better, with 25 percent
of people citing such barriers on average. But nowhere are people very happy.
Comparable data on perceptions of other industries are not available. That is not an
accident; consumers are rarely as poorly served in other industries as in medical care. In making
retirement savings decisions, for example, companies such as Fidelity and Vanguard automate
the collection of money and its allocation. Flight information is kept and stored electronically,
for easy access throughout one’s trip. And specialty stores in retail bring together different
products, so consumers do not have to physically compare products from different suppliers.
To be sure, the retail model of organization has imperfections. Electronics stores
encourage people to choose more services than they need, and sell them overpriced insurance for
what they buy (Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2004). The fees collected by mutual funds are far higher
than a perfectly competitive market would suggest (Barber, Odean, and Zheng, 2005). But still,
these market organizers have gained enormous market share because of their service quality and
low price.
The low level of service quality in health care is ironic given the enormous investment in
non-clinical personnel. There are 9 times more clerical workers in health care than there are
physicians, and twice as many clerical workers as registered nurses. This investment has not
paid off in superior outcomes or better customer service, however.
Better preventive care would improve outcomes, though whether it would save money is
unclear. In the medium-term, managing diabetics better reduces rates of heart attack and kidney
failure, lowering spending. However, everyone ultimately gets sick, and the lifetime costs of
treating diabetics may be greater than if they were not treated. Thus, lifetime medical spending

12

may rise or fall, even as total productivity increases. In light of the uncertainty about cost
savings from prevention, I do not assign a dollar amount of cost reduction to improvements in
this area.

Inefficient production
The final aspect of low productivity is excessive costs of providing services. Like the
problem of poor coordination, excessive input costs are a problem of productive efficiency. A
country with inefficient production would be at point C in figure 3.
Every analysis of medical care that has been done highlights the significant waste of
resources in providing care. Consider a few examples: one study found that physicians spent on
average of 142 hours annually interacting with health plans, at an estimated cost to practices of
$68,274 per physician (Casalino et al., 2009). Another study found that 35 percent of nurses’
time in medical/surgical units of hospitals was spent on documentation (Hendrich et al., 2008);
patient care was far smaller.
Half or more of this spending could be easily reduced through current or likely future IT
systems. For example, a segment of administrative costs are attributable to pharmacy and
formulary-related interactions; these costs could be virtually eliminated through administrative
simplification that can accompany ubiquitous use of IT (Gans, 2004). Another part of costs is
associated with basic data entry: recording and transcribing notes, and inputting laboratory and
physiological measures into systems. Advances in voice recognition and computerized ways of
transmitting patient vital status into medical records would reduce these costs. As but one
example, Kaiser Permanente found that use of IT combined with organizational changes led to a
35 minute reduction in nursing overlap time associated with shift changes.

13

Surgical care is also less efficient than need be. A variety of studies show that providing
dedicated surgical suites for particular operations results in lower cost per surgery (Herzlinger,
1997). Yet, most full-service hospitals do not organize their operating suites in this fashion. As
a result, surgery costs more than need be.
Many of the examples just presented are of excessive cost for the same clinical benefit.
In some cases, inefficient production also leads to worse outcomes. This is most common in the
case of medical errors – the poster child for inefficient care delivery. It is estimated four percent
of hospitalized patients suffer an adverse event, of which one-third, or 1 percent of total hospital
admissions, are a result of negligence (Brennan et al., 1991). The Institute of Medicine estimates
that preventable medical errors lead to between 44,000 and 98,000 deaths annually, making such
errors one of the top 10 leading causes of death (Institute of Medicine, 2000). Errors are also
expensive; costing the system about $30 billion annually (Scott, 2009).
There are many models for reducing medical errors. Adverse drug interactions can be
virtually eliminated by computerized physician order entry systems, which cost roughly $8
million each. Yet, only 4 percent of hospitals have fully adopted such a system (Cutler, Feldman,
and Horwitz, 2005). Surgical complications can be reduced through organizational innovations
such as surgical checklists (Haynes et al., 2009); use of checklists is relatively low, however.
A few organizations have become quality leaders. For example, Virginia Mason Medical
Center in Seattle committed itself to lean manufacturing principles in 2002. Over the next
several years, it focused on patient safety, care coordination, supply management, and nursing
productivity. Among the returns have been greater patient volume, reduced capital expenditure,
and less use of temporary and contract nurses (Kaplan and Patterson, 2008). Similarly,

14

Thedacare in Northeastern Wisconsin cut costs by 5 percent in three years and improved quality
by using tools of lean manufacturing (Toussaint, 2009).
Perhaps the biggest transformation of all was the Veterans Administration. Between
1995 and 1999, the VA handled 24 percent more patients despite a budget increase of only 10
percent (compared to 30 percent in the health care system overall). The VA was able to do this
through greater use of IT, greater local financial autonomy, and empowerment of regional
managers (Oliver, 2007; Kizer and Adams, 2009).
Reducing inefficient operations would save significant amounts of money. The
PROMETHEUS payment model initiative estimates that 14-70 percent of costs for common
conditions in the elderly (such as joint replacements, heart attacks, congestive heart failure and
diabetes care) are avoidable (Gosfield, 2008). Similarly, the VA and Virginia Mason examples
suggest that a large share of total hospital costs are unnecessary. If costs could be reduced by
one-quarter – well in line iwht estimates of waste – total system savings would be about 8
percent (see table 1).

III.

Where are the Health Care Entrepreneurs?
The obvious question about health care is why the market has not evolved to become

more efficient. For example, specialized firms might enter to help individuals navigate the
health care system, just as financial services firms do with money management. Alternatively,
new integrated insurance plans might develop, or existing ones could spread across the country.
In still other cases, groups of providers could come together to enhance quality and lower costs,
pocketing the savings as profits.

15

In many other industries, entry is a crucial feature of improved productivity. Wal-Mart,
Southwest Airlines, and Amazon.com were all responses to inefficiencies in supply – in retail,
airlines, and book sales respectively. What is different about health care?
The lack of organizational innovation is apparent in looking at the sources of health care
wealth. Table 2 shows the Forbes 400 richest Americans in the health care, pharmaceutical, and
retail industries. There are 11 health care entrepreneurs on the list, 4 from the pharmaceutical
industry, and 21 from retail. Nine of the 11 health care entrepreneurs made their money by
inventing drugs or devices. Only one person can plausibly claim to have made money by
changing the organization of health care delivery -- Thomas Frist, Jr. who started HCA, a forprofit hospital company. The story is similar in pharmaceuticals. Three people on the list
invented new drugs; only one figured out how to produce existing drugs cheaper (the generic
market).
Contrast health care with retailing. Not a single individual on the retailing list made their
money by inventing a product that consumers use. Instead, all of the people made their money
by changing the way that consumers buy products. This includes Wal-Mart (five heirs to the
Wal-Mart fortune are on the list) as well as consumer products retailers Gap, Home Depot,
Urban Outfitters, and Hobby Lobby. Total wealth on the retail list is over $100 bllion.
The potential savings from improved organization in health care are enough to land many
potential entrepreneurs on the Forbes 400 list. Suppose that a firm developed and sold a system
to improve hospital productivity, and as a result could save half of the 8 percent of medical
spending estimated to be accounted for by productive inefficiency. The money saved would
total $100 billion annually. Similarly, a firm that was able to reduce the overuse of care by even

16

a quarter would save the health system $330 billion annually, again providing an enormous profit
opportunity.
One irony of health care is that there have been attempts at organizational change over
time, but they have not been successful. Since 1980, Kaiser Permanente has attempted to enter
seven new markets (Ho, 2008). In four of those markets (Dallas, Kansas City, North Carolina,
and the Northeast), Kaiser failed and withdrew. In the other three, Kaiser’s market share
averages 10 percent (10 percent in Atlanta, 3 percent in Baltimore, and 18 percent in Washington,
D.C.), well below the 30 percent penetration in its base markets.
In another example, specialized firms have entered health care attempting to manage
chronic disease – the ‘disease management’ industry. Disease management firms were popular
for a while, but have had only limited success. External management of behavioral health care
(mental health and substance abuse, primarily) has been very successful, but management of
more common chronic conditions such as diabetes has been less successful (Congressional
Budget Office, 2004). As a result, the disease management industry has remained relatively
small.
In the next sections, I consider a number of possible explanations for why organizational
innovation has not come to health care. I do this primarily using the three examples above:
reducing use of care for patients with prostate cancer; coordinating care for diabetics; and
eliminating mistakes in hospitals.

17

III.

Provider-Driven Reform
Many of the investments in clinical quality improvement need to occur at the provider

level. Hospitals and physicians need to adopt computer systems so that patient outcomes can be
tracked and shared among relevant individuals. Similarly, physicians need to counsel patients
about treatment options. And doctors need to be involved in care coordination. Thus, it is
natural to start with provider-level incentives.
To understand the economics of provider-driven reform, consider the standard profit
equation. Profits are total revenue (price, P times quantity, Q) minus cost:

Profit = P*Q – Cost

(1)

For organizational innovation to be effective, it must positively affect the price or quantity of
services sold, or reduce costs. I consider how improved quality would affect each of these areas.

Inefficient Production. Hospitals that invest in computer systems can reduce adverse
drug interactions and thus lower treatment costs. Reconfiguring surgical suites can lower
surgical costs. What is the economics of these investments?
Almost all of these interventions require up-front investment – either monetary or
organizational. Computer systems run into the millions of dollars, and changing operating
practices involves re-organizing care throughout the institution. Thus, provider groups need
some return to make these investments.
Price changes are not a part of a favorable return. Hospitals are typically paid on a fixed
fee basis, independent of quality. For example, Medicare reimburses hospitals a predetermined

18

amount per stay, depending on the diagnosis of the patient and whether surgery was performed.7
A less good job earns as much as a better job. Building off Medicare, private insurers generally
use per-stay or per-diem payments: a single payment is made for all services provided in that
stay or during that day, again independent of quality. As a result, improved quality merits no
higher price.
Quantity responses to quality improvements are also limited. One might imagine that
more patients would choose to be operated on in hospitals with safety systems or more regular
surgical times. But information about such forms of quality is not systematically available.
Until very recently, there were no validated measures of provider quality that accurately
accounted for differences in patient severity. And even now, measures of clinical and service
quality are extremely limited. As a result, hospital choice is based on reputation or
recommendation more than actual data.
That leaves only the possibility of cost savings. Many productivity innovations will
reduce costs. Fewer errors means shorter hospital stays, for example, which lower costs. A full
analysis of investment in more efficient production has not been undertaken, and it may be that
providers should be investing in efficiency improvements on this basis alone. To date, however,
the vast bulk of hospitals have concluded that the financial and organizational costs of
transforming their institution are not matched by sufficient cost savings.
An example is telling. In the 1990s, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital decided it wanted to
become a leader in quality of pediatric care (Edmonson and Tucker, 2009). The hospital CEO
and Board of Directors were on board, but the finance team was not. They saw quality
improvement as harming the finances of the institution, which were based on admitting more

7

The exception to the fixed payment is that very costly outliers are reimbursed an additional amount above the perstay payment.

19

children and treating them in a high-tech way. No payer reimbursed them more for higher
quality care; in fact, it was penalized.
In the end, the finance team was brought along, but only by pointing out an error in their
thinking: having fewer medical errors meant more rapid discharges, which could be offset by
admitting more patients from the queue. Thus, there would be no revenue loss from better care.
After demonstrating that revenues would not be harmed, the staff at Cincinnati Children’s
Hospital went ahead with the quality improvement efforts, and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital is
now a model for other institutions. The example of Cincinnati Children’s would apply at similar
prestigious institutions, but not in all of American medicine. For most providers, quality
improvement is unlikely to have a positive ROI.

Care Provision: Limiting and Managing Care. Limiting excessive care provision and
better managing patients with chronic disease have many similarities. In each case, physicians or
nurses expend effort – counseling the patient about treatment options in the case of prostate
cancer and explaining the steps involved in good management in the case of diabetes. A
successful intervention then lowers downstream costs. We can thus analyze these two examples
together.
From the physicians’ perspective, the pricing of medical care makes the switch from
invasive medical procedures to advising and counseling problematic. Most physicians are paid
on a fee-for-service basis. For example, Medicare uses fee-for-service payment for all
physicians. The service units are independent activities that a physician performs when seeing a
patient: a routine office visit, a procedure, or an interpretation of an image. Quality is not a part
of the calculated fee. Rather, it is based on intensity: procedures are valued much higher than

20

counseling. Thus, primary care physicians earn about $190,000 per year, while many specialists
earn double that amount (Medical Group Management Association, 2009). Further, many of the
simple services that are involved in good chronic care management are not reimbursed at all.
There is no billing code for e-mail interaction, nor is there any payment for having a nurse place
a reminder call to a patient. As a result, care management yields among the lowest returns.
Quantity changes are also not conducive to higher quality. Many providers have a
waiting list of patients, so attracting more patients is not a major concern. Those providers that
are not full compete on quality, but quality is again difficult to measure.
Coupled with this financial disincentive is the traditional norm that separates the practice
of medicine in a medical setting from social interventions. Doctors are trained to diagnose and
treat patients. They are not trained to counsel or reach out to patients. Physicians can be made
to see their job differently, but the incentives to change need to be very strong. In the current
system, these incentives are weak, if present at all. With a relatively inelastic quantity, and
prices that are invariant to quality, the incentives for providers to invest in more efficient care
provision are very substantially blunted.

IV.

Payer-Driven Innovation
Given the poor incentives transmitted to medical care providers, the obvious question is

why payers do not intervene. Payers for medical care could significantly affect the productivity
of the system. For example, payers could ensure the flow of appropriate information by
requiring providers to adopt and use interoperable electronic medical records. They could also
move to quality-based payment systems to incentivize more efficient care.

21

The ‘payers’ here include insurers, the employers who contract with them, or third firms
that purchase and manage the care from individual providers (for example, a multispecialty
practice or an oncology care management company). Why do they not do so? Four explanations
have been proposed.

Network externalities. The first explanation for lack of insurer change is network
externalities – a single payer finds it difficult to have compensation arrangements that are
substantially different from other payers. Medicare and Medicaid together account for about 40
percent of acute care payments, and private insurance is another 40 percent.8 Within the private
insurance market, there might be three or four large insurers, for an average market share by each
plan of about 10 percent. It is difficult for an insurer to fundamentally change the practice of
medicine when it accounts for only 10 percent of the market. For example, even an insurer that
put 20 percent of a physician’s revenue at risk for poor performance would affect only 2 percent
of the typical provider’s income. Given the fixed cost associated with provider change, this
incentive system is unlikely to do much good.
The economics are even worse for large firms. A large firm accounts for a smaller share
of the total market, making it difficult for a self-insured firm to affect medical practice to any
great extent. This is why most of the employer-led innovations have involved the combined
effort of many large firms in an area – and usually only areas with a significant presence of
employment in large firms.
Further, because of the fixed costs of providers changing their practice, even if the insurer
were able to change provider behavior, the savings would be realized by all payers. A primary

8

The remaining 20 percent is from other payers, including worker’s compensation, the VA, public health agencies,
and out-of-pocket payments. Out-of-pocket payments track public and private methodologies.

22

care physician that responds to insurer incentives by hiring a nurse case manager to work with
diabetic patients will have that nurse case manager work with all patents, not just those of a
particular insurer. Thus, the benefits of any insurer investing in better care extend well beyond
that insurer.9
Two solutions are generally available for solving the network problem. First, integrated
firms may arise that provide both insurance and medical care and thus internalize all externalities.
Kaiser is an example of such a firm, and it provides among the highest quality chronic disease
care. Like most high quality firms in health care – Geisinger Health Care, the Mayo Clinic, and
the like – Kaiser has walled themselves off from the rest of the health system.
Alternatively, providers could decide to propose new contracts. For example, providers
might suggest that cost savings that result from fewer hospital-based errors be shared between
the innovating firm and the government. The major problem here is Medicare. Medicare
reimbursement has been fixed by law, making that part of revenue unalterable.

Information. The second barrier to expansion of high quality care is lack of good
information. Return to the example of Kaiser health plan, where expansion met with only
haphazard success. Analyzing the Kaiser experience, Ho (2008) argues that lack of good
information was a central barrier: outside of its traditional area, people did not have direct
experience with Kaiser and so did not automatically associate it with high quality.

9

This situation is not unique to health care. In the automobile industry, there was a lengthy debate about the makeor-buy decision: should an automobile company make its own spark plugs (and tires, batteries, etc.), thus reaping all
the benefits of innovation, or should it purchase components from external firms, with attendant spillovers to other
purchasers? In the end, automobile firms chose to purchase, not produce, components. Separate firms made and
innovated in automobile components. In the automobile case, prices were flexible enough that component suppliers
continued to innovate.

23

Within a market, lack of good quality data means that consumers have a difficult time
determining which providers are better and worse. And across markets, lack of good information
means that firms with high quality in one geographic area will not necessarily be perceived to
have high quality in other areas.
The difficulty of measuring quality is a fundamental difference between health care and
most other retail products. Retail stores can be virtually identical across the country, allowing
firms can earn a national reputation for high (or low) quality relatively easily. In health care,
national reputations are uncommon.
The information problem in health care is very much a public good. All insurers would
like to have good data on physician quality, but no single insurer has an incentive to create such
data, since quality information will rapidly disseminate across the market. Thus, some
governmental involvement in information is needed.

Plan Turnover. Suppose that an insurer decides to coordinate care on its own. It might
hire nurse case managers, work directly with patients, and reconcile different physician
recommendations. What is to stop it from realizing the benefits of this strategy?
High plan turnover is one often-cited barrier (Cebul et al., 2010). Investing in better care
has up-front costs, but many of the savings occur only over time. For example, better diabetes
care may lead to fewer complications, but only after five to ten years. Since as many as 20
percent of people change plans annually, the insurer undertaking the original investment may not
realize the savings.
That said, this explanation is not entirely convincing. The high turnover in health
insurance is partly endogenous – customers feel little allegiance to a plan whose perceived

24

quality is low and whose services are comparable to those of every other insurer. In plans with a
reputation for good quality – Kaiser Permanente in California, for example – turnover is much
lower. Thus, I suspect this explanation for lack of investment in organizational change is less
important than it might seem.

The Wrong Customer. The issue of turnover raises a general question about who is the
appropriate customer when payers consider care management. In retail trade, the customer is the
individual shopper. If Wal-Mart finds a way to save money, it can pass that along to consumers
directly. In health care, in contrast, the situation is more complex, since patients do not pay
much of the bill out-of-pocket. Rather, costs are passed from providers to insurers to employers
(generally) and on to workers as a whole.
If this process is efficient, the system will act as if the individual is the real customer,
since they are ultimately paying the bill. It may be, however, that the incentives get lost in the
process, and efforts to innovate are not sufficiently rewarded.
What difference does selling to an employer or selling to an individual make? Even if
insurers wrongly think their customer is the employer purchasing insurance, that employer may
still value improved quality. Many firms, for example, invest in wellness programs, which often
involve attempts to coordinate care. If cost savings or productivity benefits of improved health
are sufficiently high, this is a natural step for employers. The impact of group versus individual
purchase is thus a matter of some debate.

25

V.

The Impact of Recent Legislation
This analysis has highlighted two fundamental factors leading to low health care

productivity: lack of good information on quality of care, and public sector payment systems that
are insufficiently responsive to the value of care provided. It follows that making health care
more efficient will require changes in each of these areas.
There has recently been a push to gather relevant information and measure the quality of
different providers. For example, many states now profile cardiovascular surgeons, based on
criteria developed by the surgeons themselves; the Federal government has produced data on
hospital quality from Medicare records; and non-profit groups are standardizing measures of
good care for different specialties. The report card movement has generated some successes, but
also controversy. Providers with low ratings seem to improve when the low quality of their care
is identified publicly (Cutler, Huckman, and Landrum, 2003), but part of this may be because
they avoid sicker patients (Dranove et al., 2004). It is not clear how extensive this practice is, or
whether better risk adjustment would improve the situation.
The key barrier to more widespread quality assessment is access to appropriate data.
Having high-quality measures of performance requires detailed information from medical
records, but these data are generally not computerized or centrally stored.
Recent legislation may change this. As part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009, the federal government is committing $30 billion over the next five years to finance
a national system of electronic medical records. In addition, the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act of 2010 (a.k.a. the health reform legislation) mandates that Medicare data
be made available to private parties, including insurers and employers, for purposes of forming

26

quality measures. Thus, we may be on the verge of significantly reducing the information
problems in medical care.
The healthcare IT investment was generally applauded. Debate was much fiercer about
payment reform, however. Broadly speaking there are three approaches to payment reform. The
first is a single payer system, where physicians are salaried or paid on a fee-for-service basis
within an overall budget target. Such a system is common in many countries, and can be
successful in reducing unnecessary care.10 The second approach is to turn health care into a
market like other markets, where individuals are more in charge of their spending and service use.
This would take the form of much higher deductibles in Medicare, and incentives to purchase
less generous policies outside of Medicare. The idea behind this model is that providers forced
to compete for individuals would invest in higher quality, the same way that retail firms do.
The third approach is to keep cost sharing as it is, but to reform the way that Medicare
payments operate, to stress value more than volume. The theory underlying this is that changes
in Medicare, integrated with changes in private reimbursement, will provide incentives for more
efficient care delivery.
Following this third path, changes in Medicare reimbursement are a significant part of the
recent reform legislation. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act introduced several
types of payment alternatives to fee-for-service Medicare. Bundled payments are payments
made to a group of providers who jointly agree to care for a patient with a particular condition
and split the overall amount. Accountable care organizations go a step further – groups of
providers agree to accept a capitation payment in exchange for providing all services needed
during a year. Pay-for-performance, or value-based purchasing, is a method of adjusting fee-forservice payments to reflect the quality of the care provided. Finally, care coordination and
10

Like any rationed system, the efficiency of a single payer system depends on how well the rationing is done.

27

transition payments are introduced to provide support to nurses or primary care physicians that
seek to manage care better.
Each of these payment systems have been the subject of experimentation, with some
success in each case. Payment bundles are the best developed. Medicare’s Heart Bypass Center
Demonstration Project in the 1990s bundled all care for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgeries; it achieved savings of more than 15 percent per episode (Cromwell et al., 1997).
Similarly, Geisinger health system has a bundled system in place for cardiac care and has among
the lowest rate of readmissions in the country (Casale et al., 2007).
The idea of global payments for a patient as a whole has been tested in the Medicare
Physician Group Practice Demonstration (PGP). The experiment has so far shown savings of
$17 million, and 4 of the 10 sites exceeded the 2 percent savings threshold in the second year of
the program, making them eligible for bonus payments (Tisolini et al., 2008; McCarthy, Mueller,
and Klein, 2009; Praxel, 2008).
Many care coordination efforts are also promising. In addition to the Group Practice
Demonstration described above, Geisinger’s medical homes initiative saw 7 percent total
medical cost savings and a significant reduction in hospital admissions in the first year (Paulus et
al., 2008). Similarly, a number of sites in the Medicare Coordinated Care Demonstration
successfully contained costs by avoiding initial hospitalizations and rehospitalizations. Overall
coordination efforts appear to be able to save about 15 percent of inpatient costs when they target
populations with chronic illnesses (Brown et al., 2009; Pekis et al., 2009).
Evidence on the impact of pay-for-performance is mixed, reflecting the paucity of large
experiments using these methods and the focus of most programs on quality improvement, not
cost efficiency (Peterson et al., 2006). The documented improvement in quality that some

28

programs achieve suggests that cost saving are feasible, however. Overall, payment reform
shows a good deal of promise as a complement to improved information.

VI.

Conclusion
Health care is notorious for market imperfections. For a number of reasons, medical care

markets do not always work well. Within the plethora of health care problems, though, one
problem sticks out: the mismatch between the medical care that people should get, and the care
that they do get. About one-third of medical spending is not associated with improved outcomes,
significantly cutting the efficiency of the medical system and leading to enormous adverse
effects.
To reduce this waste, organizational innovation will be required. To date, however, such
innovation has been very rare in health care. This paper argues that lack of information and poor
incentives are the key barriers to new organizational models, and accordingly that public action
to address these issues is needed. Recent reform legislation has made changes in each of these
areas. Whether the legislation addresses these problems sufficiently is something that only time
will tell.

29

Figure 1: Productivity Growth by Industry, 1995‐2005
Durable goods
Information
Agriculture and related
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Utilities
Nondurable goods
Transportation and warehousing
Finance and related
Prof and bus services
Arts and related
Health, education, social services
Other services
Construction
Mining
‐3%

‐2%

‐1%

0%

1%

2%

3%

4%

Annual percent change

Source: Oliner et al., 2007.

30

5%

6%

7%

8%

Figure 2: Longitudinal Trends in Cost Per Life Year
$200,000

$150,000

$100,000

$50,000

$0

1960‐1970
Age 65

1970‐1980

1980‐1990

Age 45

Age 15

Source: Cutler, Rosen, and Vijan (2006).

31

Birth

1990‐2000

Figure 3: Productivity of Care
MVH
Health
B

PPF

A
C

Intensity

Note: PPF is the production possibility frontier and MVH is the marginal value of
health. Point A, where the two intersect, is the efficient equilibrium. Point B is
allocatively inefficient; the care is technically correct, but too many people are
treated. Point C is productively inefficient; health improvement is less than is
possible given the amount spent.

32

Figure 4: Share of Diabetics Receiving Recommended Care
100%

percent of paitents

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
CAN

FR

GER

NETH

NZ

UK

US

Note: The specific types of care asked about are: hemoglobin A1c checked in past six
months; feet examined for sores or irritations in past year; eye exam for diabetes in past year;
and cholesterol checked in past year.
Source: Commonwealth Fund 2008 International Health Policy Survey in Eight Countries.
See Schoen et al., (2008).

33

Figure 5: Coordination of Care

percent of paitents

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Records not available

Ordered duplicate test

US

Time wasted because of poor
organization

Non‐US

Note: The specific question is: “In the past 2 years, when getting care for a medical
problem, was there ever a time when…?”
Source: Commonwealth Fund 2008 International Health Policy Survey in Eight Countries.
See Schoen et al., (2008).

34

Table 1: Estimates of Inefficient Health Care Spending
Share of medical
Annual savings from
Category
spending
50% reduction
Flat of the curve medicine
30%
$350 billion
Inadequate care coordination
??
--Productive inefficiency
8%
$100 billion
Note: See text for sources.

35

Table 2: The Richest Americans in Health Care and Retailing
Net Worth
Number Name
($billion) Source
Health Care
68
William Cook
$5.0
Cook Group (catheters, stents, etc.)
123
Barbara Piasecka Johnson
$3.3
Johnson & Johnson
134
Ronda Stryker
$3.0
Stryker (joints, surgical tools, etc.)
215
Jon Stryker
$2.1
Stryker
246
Thomas Frist Jr.
$1.9
HCA
262
Alfred Mann
$1.8
Minimed (insulin pumps)
262
Pat Stryker
$1.8
Stryker
301
Patrick Ryan
$1.6
Re-insurance broker
321
John Abele
$1.5
Boston Scientific
321
Gary Michelson
$1.5
Karlin technology (spinal implants)
355
John Brown
$1.4
Stryker
Pharmaceuticals
65
Patrick Soon-Shiong
158
Philip Frost
190
Michael Jaharis
230
Randal J. Kirk
Retailing
--5 heirs of Sam Walton
44
Frederik Meijer & family
44
John Menard
--3 heirs of Fishers
97
Richard Schulze
117
E. Stanley Kroenke
118
Victor Fung & Family
123
David Green
158
Roger Wang
272
Bernard Marcus
272
Drayton McLane Jr.
317
Arthur Blank
317
Richard Hayne
366
Margaret Magerko
371
William Kellogg
* Combined net worth
Source: Forbes Magazine

$4.0
$2.0
$1.9
$1.6

$81.9*
$5.0
$5.0
$3.3*
$3.0
$2.7
$2.6
$2.5
$2.0
$1.5
$1.5
$1.3
$1.3
$1.1
$1.0

36

Generic drugs
Kay Pharmaceuticals (OTC products)
Kay Pharmaceuticals (OTC products)
New River Pharmaceuticals (Vyvanse)

Wal-Mart
Supermarkets
Menard’s
Gap
Best Buy
Real estate
Li & Fung (global outsourcing)
Hobby Lobby
Retail in China
Home Depot
Wal-Mart (logistics)
Home Depot
Urban Outfitters
84 Lumber
Kohl’s

References
Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, “Out of sight, out of mind: The effects of
expenses on mutual fund flows,” Journal of Business 78, 2005, 2095-2119.
Beaulieu, Nancy, et al., “The Business Case for Diabetes Disease Management at Two Managed
Care Organizations,” Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 2006.
Berndt, Ernst, et al., “Medical Care Prices and Output,” in Anthony Culyer and Joseph
Newhouse, Handbook of Health Economics, Volume IA, 2000, 119-180.
Bodenheimer, Thomas, Mina Matin, and Brian Yoshio Laing, “The Specialist–Generalist Income
Gap: Can We Narrow It?” Journal of General Internal Medicine 23(9):1539–41
Brennan, Troy, et al., “Incidence of adverse events and negligence in hospitalized patients.
Results of the Harvard Medical Practice Study I,” New England Journal of Medicine, 1991,
324(6), 370-376.
Brown, Randall, “The Promise of Care Coordination: Models that Decrease Hospitalizations and
Improve Outcomes for Medicare Beneficiaries with Chronic Illness,” The National Coalition on
Care Coordination. March 2009.
Casale Alfred S., et al. “’ProvenCareSM’: a provider-driven pay-for-performance program for
acute episodic cardiac surgical care,” Annals of Surgery, 2007;246:613-623.
Casalino, Lawrence P., Sean Nicholson, D. N. Gans et al., “What Does It Cost Physician
Practices to Interact with Health Insurance Plans?” Health Affairs Web Exclusive, May 14, 2009,
w533–w543.
Cebul, Randall D., James B. Rebitzer, Lowell J. Taylor, and Mark E. Votruba, “Unhealthy
Insurance Markets: Search Frictions and the Cost and Quality of Health Insurance,” mimeo, 2010.
Chernew, Michael, David M. Cutler, and Patricia S. Keenan, “Increasing Health Insurance Costs
and the Decline in Health Insurance Coverage,” Health Services Research, 40(4), 2005, 10211039.
Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Disease Management Industry, Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Budget Office, 2004.
Congressional Budget Office, The Long-Term Budget Outlook, Washington, D.C.: Congressional
Budget Office, 2009.
Cromwell Jerry L., Debra A. Dayhoff, and Armen H. Thoumaian, "Cost Savings and Physician
Responses to Global Bundled Payments for Medicare Heart Bypass Surgery," Health Care
Financing Review, 19(1), 1997, 41–57.

37

Cutler, David M., Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care System,”
New York, Oxford University Press, 2004.
Cutler, David M., “Equality, Efficiency, and Market Fundamentals: The Dynamics of
International Medical Care Reform,” Journal of Economic Literature, September 2002, 881-906.
Cutler, David M., Naomi Feldman, and Jill R. Horwitz, "US Adoption of Computerized
Physician Order Entry Systems," Health Affairs, 24(6), November/December 2005, 1654-1663
Cutler, David, Robert S. Huckman, and Mary Beth Landrum, “The Role of Information in
Medical Markets: An Analysis of Publicly Reported Outcomes in Cardiac Surgery,” American
Economic Review, 2004, 94(2), 342-346.
Cutler, David M., and Mark McClellan, “Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It?”
Health Affairs, 20(5), September/October 2001, 11-29.
Cutler, David M., Allison B. Rosen, and Sandeep Vijan, “Value of Medical Innovation in the
United States: 1960-2000,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2006; 355(9), 920-927.
Cutler, David M. and Richard J. Zeckhauser, “Extending the Theory to Meet the Practice of
Insurance,” in Robert Litan and Richard Herring, eds., Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial
Services, 2004, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 2004
Cutler, Jeffrey A., Paul D. Sorlie, Michael Wolz, et al., “Trends in Hypertension Prevalence,
Awareness, Treatment, and Control Rates in United States Adults Between 1988-1994 and 19992004,” Hypertension 2008;52:818-827.
Dranove, David, Dan Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite, “Is More Information
Better? The Effects of `Report Cards' On Health Care Providers,” Journal of Political Economy,
2003, 111(3), 555-88.
Edmonson, Amy, and Anita Tucker, “Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center,” Harvard
Business Review Press, 2009.
Elmendorf, Douglas, Letter to the Honorable Kent Conrad, June 16, 2009.
Fisher, Elliott S. et al., “The implications of regional variations in Medicare spending. Part 1: the
content, quality, and accessibility of care,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 2003a, 138(4), 273-287.
Fisher, Elliott S. et al., “The implications of regional variations in Medicare spending. Part 2:
health outcomes and satisfaction with care,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 2003b, 138(4), 288298.
Foote, Sandra M. “Next Steps: How Can Medicare Accelerate The Pace Of Improving Chronic
Care?” Health Affairs, 28(1), 2009, 99-102.

38

Fuchs, Victor, Who Shall Live? New York: Basic, 1974.
Gans, David, “The cost of healthcare complexity,” Medical Group Management Association,
Center for Research, November 2004.
Ginsburg, Paul B., and Jerry M. Grossman, “When The Price Isn't Right: How Inadvertent
Payment Incentives Drive Medical Care,” Health Affairs, 10.1377/hlthaff.w5.376
Ginsburg, Paul B., “Efficiency and Quality: The Role of Controlling Health Care Cost Growth in
Health Care Reform,” Center for American Progress, May 2009.
Gosfield, Alice G., Making Prometheus Payment Rates Real: Ya' Gotta Start Somewhere, 2008,
Available at: http://www.prometheuspayment.org/publications/index.htm.
Haynes, Alex B., et al., “A Surgical Safety Checklist to Reduce Morbidity and Mortality in a
Global Population,” New England Journal of Medicine, 360(5), 2009, 491-499.
Hendrich, Ann, Marilyn Chow, Boguslaw A Skierczynski, and Zhenqiang Lu, “A 36-Hospital
Time and Motion Study: How Do Medical-Surgical Nurses Spend Their Time?” The Permanente
Journal, 12(3), Summer 2008, 25-34.
Herzlinger, Regina, Market-driven health care: who wins, who loses in the transformation of
America's largest service industry. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley; 1997.
Ho, Katherine, “Barriers to Entry of a Vertically Integrated Health Insurer: An Analysis of
Welfare and Entry Costs,” Columbia University mimeo, 2008.
Hyre, Amanda, Paul Muntner, Andy Menke, et al., “Trends in ATP-III-Defined High Blood
Cholesterol Prevalence, Awareness, Treatment and Control Among U.S. Adults,” Annals of
Epidemiology, 17(7), 2007, 548-555.
Institute of Medicine, To Err is Human, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2000.
Institute of Medicine, Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century,
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2001.
Jencks Stephen F., Mark V. Williams, and Eric Coleman, “Rehospitalizations among Patients in
the Medicare Fee-for-Service Program,” New England Journal of Medicine. 360(14), 2009,
1418-28.
Kaplan, Gary H. and Sarah H. Patterson, “Seeking Perfection in Health Care,” Healthcare
Executive, 23(3), May/June 2008, 17-21.
Kizer, Kenneth W. and R. Dudley Adams. “Extreme Makeover: Transformation of the Veterans
Health Care System,” The Annual Review of Public Health 30, 2009, 313-339.

39

McCarthy, Douglas, Kimberly Mueller, and Sarah Klein, “Marshfield Clinic: Health Information
Technology Paves the Way for Population Health Management”, Commonwealth Fund, 2009.
Medical Group Management Association, Physician Compensation and Production Survey:
2009 Report Based on 2008 Data, Washington, D.C.: Medical Group Management Association,
2009.
Newhouse, Joseph P., “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 1992, 6(3), 13-29.
Oliver, Adam, “The Veterans Health Administration: An American Success Story?” The
Milbank Quarterly 85(1), 2007, 5-35;
Paulus, Ronald A., Karen Davis, and Glenn Steele, “Continuous Innovation In Health Care:
Implications of The Geisinger Experience,” Health Affairs, 2008, 27(5), 1235-1245.
Peikes, Deborah, Arnold Chen, Jennifer Schore, and Randall Brown, “Effects of Care
Coordination on Hospitalization, Quality of Care, and Health Care Expenditures Among
Medicare Beneficiaries: 15 Randomized Trials,” JAMA. February 11, 2009 2009;301(6):603-618.
Perlroth, Daniella J., Dana P. Goldman, Alan M. Garber, “The Potential Impact of Comparative
Effectiveness Research on U.S. Health Care Expenditures,” Demography 2010 (in press).
Petersen Laura A., et al., “Does Pay-for-Performance Improve the Quality of Health Care?”
Annals of Internal Medicine, 2006;145(4): 265-272.
Praxel, Ted, “Participation in the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Physician Group
Practice Demonstration Project –Lessons Learned,” 2008, available at
http://www.amga.org/Education/IQL/Presentations/2008/participatingInTheCMSPhysicianGroup
PracticeDemonstrationLessonsLearned.ppt
Schoen, Cathy, Robin Osborn, Sabrina K. H. How, Michelle M. Doty, and Jordon Peugh, “In
Chronic Condition: Experiences of Patients with Complex Health Care Needs, in Eight
Countries,” 2008, Health Affairs Web Exclusive, Nov. 13, 2008, w1–w16.
Scott, R. Douglas, II, “The Direct Medical Costs of Healthcare-Associated Infections in U.S.
Hospitals and the Benefits of Prevention,” Washington, D.C.: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2009.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Clair Beard, Anthony V. D'Amico, et al., “Predictors of patient
preferences and treatment choices for localized prostate cancer,” Cancer. 113(8), 2008, 20582067.
Sood, Neeraj, Arkadipta Ghosh, and José Escarce, “Employer-Sponsored Insurance, Health Care
Cost Growth, and the Economic Performance of U.S. Industries”, Health Services Research,
44(5), October 2009, 1449 -1464.
40

State of North Carolina, Office of the Governor. Governor Easley Announces Community Care
Saves Taxpayers $231 Million. Press Release, September 25 (2007)
Toussaint, John, “Writing The New Playbook For U.S. Health Care: Lessons From Wisconsin,”
Health Affairs, 28(5), 2009, 1343-1350.
Trisolini, Michael, Jyoti Aggarwal, Musetta Leung, Gregory Pope, and John Kautter, “The
Medicare Physician Group Practice Demonstration: Lessons Learned on Improving Quality and
Efficiency in Health Care,” 2008.
Tu, Jack, Chris L. Pashos, C. David Naylor, et al., “Use of cardiac procedures and outcomes in
elderly patients with myocardial infarction in the United States and Canada,” New England
Journal of Medicine, 336(21), 1997, 1500-1505.

41

