NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GREAT EXPECTATIONS:
LAW, EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS, AND LABOR MARKET PERFORMANCE
W. Bentley MacLeod
Working Paper 16048
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16048

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

I am grateful to Janet Currie, Harold Demsetz, Victor Goldberg, Lance Liebman, and seminar participants
at the Columbia Law School Faculty seminar and the American Law and Economics Association meetings
for helpful discussions and comments. I am also grateful to Elliott Ash, Wil Lim, and Uliana Logina
for invaluable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by W. Bentley MacLeod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Great Expectations: Law, Employment Contracts, and Labor Market Performance
W. Bentley MacLeod
NBER Working Paper No. 16048
June 2010, Revised September 2010
JEL No. J41,J5,J8,J33,K31
ABSTRACT
This chapter reviews the literature on employment and labor law. The goal of the review is to understand
why every jurisdiction in the world has extensive employment law, particularly employment protection
law, while most economic analysis of the law suggests that less employment protection would enhance
welfare. The review has three parts. The first part discusses the structure of the common law and the
evolution of employment protection law. The second part discusses the economic theory of contract.
Finally, the empirical literature on employment and labor law is reviewed. I conclude that many aspects
of employment law are consistent with the economic theory of contract - namely, that contracts are
written and enforced to enhance ex ante match efficiency in the presence of asymmetric information
and relationship specific investments. In contrast, empirical labor market research focuses upon ex
post match efficiency in the face of an exogenous productivity shock. Hence, in order to understand
the form and structure of existing employment law we need better empirical tools to assess the ex ante
benefits of employment contracts.
W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bentley.macleod@columbia.edu

W. Bentley MacLeod
Columbia University
Department of Economics
420 West 118th, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027-7296
USA
bentley.macleod@columbia.edu
JEL Classification: J08, J33, J41, J5, K31
Keywords: employment law, labor law, employment contract, employment contract, law and economics.
"Now, I return to this young fellow. And the communication I have got to make is, that he has great
expectations." - Charles Dickens, Great Expectations
"Take nothing on its looks; take everything on evidence. There’s no better rule." - Charles Dickens,
Great Expectations

1

Introduction

New jobs and relationships are often founded with great expectations. Yet, despite one’s best efforts, jobs
and relationships may end prematurely. These transitions might be the result of an involved search for
better opportunities elsewhere, or in the less happy cases they may stem from problems in the existing
relationship. These endings can be difficult, especially when parties have made significant relationshipspecific investments. The purpose of this chapter is to review the role that employment and labor law play
in regulating such transitions. This body of law seeks a balance between the need to enforce promises made
under great expectations and the need to modify those promises in the face of changed circumstances.
The chapter’s scope complements the earlier chapter on labor-market institutions in Volume 3 of this
handbook by Blau and Kahn (1999). That chapter focused on policies affecting wage-setting institutions.
Like much of modern empirical labor economics, Blau and Kahn (1999) use the competitive model of wage
determination as the central organizing framework. Economists begin with the competitive model because
it provides an excellent first-order model of wage and employment determination. The competitive model
assumes that wages reflect the abilities of workers as observed by the market; this information, combined
with information about a worker’s training, provides sufficient information for the efficient allocation of
labor.
Even if a labor market achieves production efficiency, it may nevertheless result in an inequitable distribution of income, as well as inadequate insurance for workers against unforeseen labor shocks. A number
of institutions—such as a minimum wage, unions, mandated severance pay, unemployment insurance, and
centralized bargaining—are viewed as ways to address these inequities and risks. Given that a competitive
2

market achieves allocative efficiency, then these interventions necessarily result in allocative inefficiency.
Hence, the appropriate policy entails a trade-off between equity and efficiency. For example, Lazear (1990)
views employment law as the imposition of a separation cost upon firms wishing to terminate or replace
workers. From this perspective, the policy issue is whether or not the equity gains from employment law
are worth the efficiency costs. Many policymakers, such as the OECD and the World Bank, have taken the
view that these employment regulations have for the most part gone too far—that they restrict the ability of
countries to effectively adjust to economic changes and make workers worse off in the long run.1
Notwithstanding the mainstream skepticism toward efforts to regulate the employment relationship, it
remains true that some form of employment law has operated in every complex market society for at least
the last 4000 years— for example, the first minimum wage laws on record date back to Hammurabi’s code
in 2000 BC. This chapter therefore takes a somewhat different perspective, drawing upon the literature
in transaction-cost economics pioneered by Coase (1937), Simon (1957), and Williamson (1975), as well
as the work on law and institutions by Posner (1974) and Aoki (2001). This research on the economics
of institutions, like empirical labor economics, begins with the hypothesis that long-lived institutions are
successful precisely because they are solving some potential market failure. Accordingly, this chapter is organized around the following question: How can labor-market institutions be viewed as an efficient response
to some market failure? Just as the competitive-equilibrium model supposes that wages are the market’s best
estimate of workers’ abilities, the institutional-economics program views successful institutions as solving
a resource-allocation problem.
This approach does not assume that these institutions are perfect. On the contrary, just as the competitive model yields predictions regarding how wages and employment respond to shock, the hypothesis that
institutions efficiently solve a resource-allocation problem generates predictions regarding the rise and fall
of these institutions. Important precursors to this approach are found in labor economics. In a classic paper,
Ashenfelter and Johnson (1969) suggest that we should be able to understand union behavior, including
the strike decision, as the outcome of the interaction between several interested parties. The work of Card
(1986) demonstrates that observed contracts cannot be viewed as achieving the first best, and hence transaction costs are a necessary ingredient for understanding the observed structure of negotiated employment
contracts. Despite this early progress, the literature I review is still undeveloped. We do not have a good
understanding of how the law works, nor do we understand the impact of legal rules on economic performance. In an effort to summarize what is known, this review is divided into three sections that correspond
to coherent bodies of research.
Section 2 briefly reviews the structure of employment law and discusses some exemplary cases. A full
review of employment law is not provided—for an excellent review, see Jolls (2007). My more modest
goal is to provide some relevant insights into what law is and how it works. This sort of targeted inquiry
is desirable because the standard assumption in economics is that the law enforces contracts as written. In
practice, private law imposes no restrictions on behavior. It is mainly an adjudication system that can, after
1

See the influential Jobs Study by the OECD (1994) and the recent work by the World Bank economists Djankov and Ramalho
(2009).

3

a careful review of the evidence, exact monetary penalties upon parties who have breached a duty. Hence,
private law is a complex system of incentive mechanisms that affects the payoffs of individuals but does
not typically constrain their choices. The distinction is important for economics because it is convenient
to model legal rules as hard constraints on behavior—that is, as structuring the available moves in a game
rather than just altering some of the expected payoffs. This approach also implies, wrongly, that rules apply
equally to all individuals. Treating private law as an incentive system, instead, implies that the impact of the
law is heterogeneous—an individual’s response to a legal rule will vary with an individual’s characteristics,
such as wealth, attitudes toward risk, and the evidence that one can present in court.
Heterogeneity and information also play key roles in the theory of employment contracts reviewed in
Section 3 . The past forty years have witnessed tremendous progress in the economic theory of contract,
especially in terms of teasing out how a particular set of parties should design a contract given the transaction
costs characterizing the employment relationship. The influential principal-agent model, for example, was
developed in the context of the insurance contract, which specifies state-contingent payments.2 The modern
theory of contract, building on the work of Grossman and Hart (1986), recognizes that an important function
of economic institutions and contracts is the efficient allocation of authority and decision rights within a
relationship.
Most economists agree that unions and employment law affect the relative bargaining power of individuals. These institutions are usually interpreted as mere re-distribution of rents, and so any allocation of
bargaining power that results in prices diverging from competitive levels is inherently inefficient. The modern literature on contract views authority as an instrument for mitigating transaction costs due to asymmetric
information and holdup. This perspective also naturally admits a role for fairness in decision-making, and
hence can provide an economic rationale for why fairness concerns are important in the adjudication of a
dispute.3
Section 3 also discusses the empirical content of these models. The modern empirical literature is concerned with identifying a causal link between various labor-market interventions and performance. Unfortunately, much of the economic theory of contract is not amenable to this approach. These models typically
describe how matches with certain observable features (X variables) result in an employment-compensation
package (Y variables). As Holland (1986) makes clear, these are not causal relationships, but merely associations. For example, the predicted relation between the sex of a worker and the form of his/her employment
contract is not causal, since the sex of a worker is not a treatment variable.
This distinction is useful because it helps explain the gulf between much of the theory discussed in
Section 3 and the empirical evidence discussed in Section 4. It is also worthwhile to keep in mind that all
economic models are false. This does not imply that these models are not useful. As Wolfgang Pauli quipped
regarding a paper by a young colleague - “it’s not even wrong!” 4 Rather, economic models are decision aids
2

See Pauly (1968).
See Kornhauser and MacLeod (2010) for a fuller discussion of this point.
4
See Peierls (1960). It is also worthwhile to point out that even though Newtonian physics is false, it is all that one needs for
most practical applications.
3

4

that guide further data collection and help in selecting between different policy interventions. The upshot
for empirical researchers is that one typically tests the associations that the theory predicts, rather than the
theory itself. Empirical determinations of the validity of these associations can help us decide whether and
to what extent we can rely on the model as a decision aid.
The theory section discusses how contract theory can be used to understand employment law, and the
conditions under which it may be desirable. We begin with a discussion of how contract design is affected
by the interplay between risk, asymmetric information and the holdup that arises from the need for parties
to make relationship specific investments. These models can be used to explain the role of the courts in
enforcing the employment contract. The recent property rights theory of the firm developed by Grossman
and Hart (1986) illustrates the importance of governance and the associated allocation of decision rights in
order to achieve an efficient allocation.5 A contract is an instrument that explicitly allocates certain decision
rights between the contract parties. This can also be achieved with unions. This section discusses how the
appropriate allocation of power and decision rights can enhance productive efficiency. Thus, these theories
provide conditions under which union power may enhance productive efficiency, as suggested by Freeman
and Medoff (1984).
Section 4 reviews the empirical evidence on employment and labor law. Here we are concerned with
explicitly causal statements such as the question of whether or not a reduction in dismissal barriers will
reduce unemployment. This is a causal inquiry because it compares the outcomes from two different choices:
having more or less employment protection law. Subsection 4.2 discusses the literature on unions that
addresses two questions. First, does unionization of a workforce increases productive efficiency? Second,
does unionization increase or decrease firm profits? Even if a union increases productive efficiency, if the
increase in rents extracted by the unions is greater than the increase in productive efficiency, then profits
would fall as a consequence, which in turn may lead to a decrease in unionization. The chapter concludes
with an assessment of the evidence and a discussion of future directions for research.

2

The Law
“The law embodies the story of a nation’s development through many centuries, and it cannot
be dealt with as if it contained only the axioms and corollaries of a book of mathematics. In
order to know what it is, we must know what it has been, and what it tends to become.”
Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Common Law, 1881.

The purpose of this section is not to provide a comprehensive review of employment law. Rather, the goal
is to provide a sense of how the employment law has developed so that one might better understand its
impact on the employment relationship.6 In the United States, employment law is primarily the domain of
5

See Hart (1995) for a full discussion of this approach.
See Jolls (2007) for a survey of employment law, and Rothstein and Liebman (2003) for a more comprehensive review of US
law. Gould IV (2004) provides an accessible discussion of American labor law, and how it differs from European labor law.
6

5

the states. Section 4 reviews several empirical studies that have exploited the natural experiments resulting
from variations in state laws to measure the impact of various laws on economic performance. Overlaying
the state laws are a number of federal statutes affecting the employment relationship, including the National
Labor Relations Act of 1935 (allowing workers to organize collective bargaining units), Fair Standards
Act of 1938 (establishing minimum employment standards), Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1973 (ERISA) (ensuring that employee benefits meet national standards), Occupational Safety and Health
Act of 1970 (OSHA) (establishing minimum health and safety standards in the workplace), and Family and
Medical Leave Act (establishing protections for leave related to personal sickness or family emergencies).
These laws are enumerated in Table 1.
While the primary concern of the present chapter is the United States, studies of employment law in other
countries are also discussed. Blanpain (2003), for example, provides a comprehensive review of European
law. As in the United States, European law is complicated by the fact that both individual countries and
the European Parliament create rules that affect the employment relationship. More generally, all countries
in the world have some system of employment laws, created and adapted to the circumstances of each
jurisdiction.
One chapter cannot do justice to the dizzying complexity of the law across jurisdictions, even if attention
were restricted to a narrow area such as employee-dismissal law. As the quote from Holmes Jr. (1881)
illustrates, legal systems are complex systems that evolve over time to resolve the variegated disputes faced
by parties of commercial transactions. To make sense of this complexity, I follow the lead of the law-andeconomics movement as epitomized in the work of Richard Posner, who argues that the law, especially the
common law, has evolved over time to address the needs of individuals trading in a market economy.7 Posner
(2003) explicitly poses the rhetorical question: “How is it possible, the reader may ask, for the common
law—an ancient body of legal doctrine, which has changed only incrementally in the last century—to make
as much economic sense as it seems to?”8
The claim is not that the entire body of rules and norms governing economic activity can be viewed as
the solution to the problem of efficiently organizing economic activity. Rather, the claim is that individual rules have evolved to solve particular problems that appeared repeatedly before the courts. From this
perspective flow some observations that may help explain the theoretical and rhetorical gaps between legal
rule making, economic models of the labor market, and economic policy making. The advantage of the
economic approach is that it allows one to explore the empirical implications of a simplified representation
of the law. The disadvantage, particularly for purposes of economic policy analysis, is that the simplifying
assumptions may miss key characteristics of the law that are important in practice.
This gap between law and economics is particularly salient in laws protecting employees from discharge,
wrongful or otherwise. In economics, employment protections are typically modeled as a form of turnover
costs, leading to the view that such laws probably interfere with an economy’s efficient response to shocks.
As a consequence, organizations such as the OECD (see OECD (1994)) have advocated reducing or aban7
8

See Ehrlich and Posner (1974), and also Posner’s classic work, Economic Analysis of Law, now in its seventh edition.
See pg. 252.

6

Table 1: United States Employment Laws
Racial Discrimination

1866

Bars racial discrimination by employers.

Social Security Act

1935

Distributes social security benefits to those of retirement age.

Fair Labor Standards Act

1938

Establishes a minimum hourly wage.

Fair Labor Standards Act

1938

Requires that employers pay a higher wage for work exceeding 40

1964

Social Security
Minimum
Wage
Overtime
Rights

hours a week.

Child Labor
Gender

Dis-

crimination
Religious Discrimination
Age Discrimination

Fair Labor Standards Act

1938

Places limits on many forms of child labor.

Civil Rights Act of 1964

1964

Prohibits gender-based discrimination.

Civil Rights Act of 1964

1964

Prohibits discrimination against employees on the basis of religion.

Age Discrimination in Em-

1967

Prohibits discrimination against workers above the age of 40.

and

1970

Establishes minimum standards for workplace safety.

Fortune v. National Cash Reg-

1977

Provides for a wrongful discharge claim against employers violating

ployment Act

Workplace

Occupational

Safety

Safety

Health Act

Good Faith Exception
Public

Civil Rights Acts of 1866,

ister Co., 373 Mass. 96
Policy

Exception

Tameny v. Atlantic Richfield

the common-law contract duty of good faith and fair dealing.
1980

Co., 27 Cal.3rd 167

Provides for a wrongful discharge claim against employers when the
discharge would be a violation of public policy, for example, when the
employee is fired for refusing to commit a crime.

Implied

Con-

tract Exception
Sexual Harassment
Layoff Notice

Wooley v. Hoffmann-La Roch,

1985

99 N.J. 284
Meritor Savings Bank v. Vin-

employment contract is implied.
1986

son, 477 U.S. 57
Worker Adjustment and Retr-

Provides for a wrongful discharge claim against employers when an

Recognizes sexual harassment as a violation of the Civil Rights Act of
1964.

1988

Companies must give 60 days’ notice before large-scale layoffs.

1989

Prohibits retaliation against employees for reporting illegal acts against

raining Notification Act
Whistleblower
Protection
Disability Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Medical Leave
Protection

Whistleblower Protection Act
of 1989
Americans with Disabilities

the federal government.
1990

Prohibits discrimination based on disability.

Civil Rights Act of 1991

1991

Probits discrimination against employees because they are pregnant.

Family and Medical Leave

1993

Requires employers to allow workers 12 weeks of unpaid medical leave

Act

Act

for certain medical conditions of themselves or close relatives.

7

doning employment protections. Recent work by Blanchard and Tirole (2008) addressing how France and
other countries should design unemployment insurance and employment protection concludes that there is
no role for the law beyond enforcing employment contracts.
Nonetheless, as a matter of law, there are no jurisdictions where courts enforce all privately agreed-upon
contracts. Labor contracts with young children, for example, are almost universally prohibited. Generally
speaking, there is a substantial gap between the law in practice and the law as represented in many economic
models of employment. One reason for this gap is that legal practitioners rarely have any reason to use an
explicitly economic approach to understand the form of a particular contract. Lawyers typically represent
clients in cases after the fact; the question of why a legal rule exists is not important to them. The real issue
is to predict how a judge will rule and then present the case so that their client will do as well as possible in
what is essentially a negative-sum game between the plaintiff and defendant. In this game, the details of the
law are crucial, but the reasons why they have a particular form are not usually relevant.9
In consequence, the concerns of the legal scholar are quite different from those of the economist, which
in turn creates a gap between the law as it exists and the law as modeled in economics.10 The goal of the next
two sections is to narrow that gap ever so slightly, at least in the context of employment regulation. The next
subsection discusses the generic structure of the law. Even though legal rules vary greatly from jurisdiction
to jurisdiction, the notion of law and how it works has some universal features. More specifically, Subsection
2.1 examines three well-known employment-law cases in the United States and the United Kingdom. These
cases illustrate the complex problem faced by a judge in an employment dispute. Moreover, as these cases
demonstrate, the courts are not passive agents; they play an active role in resource allocation. Consistent with
the “Posnerian” perspective, the decisions in some cases can be viewed as enhancing economic performance.

2.1

What is Law?

The notion of a legal rule dates back at least as far as 2000 BC, with the Babylonians following Hammurabi’s
code and the Mesopotamians following the code of Urukagina. While some of these ancient edicts imply
curious beliefs about causality,11 it is clear that the purpose of many of these rules is to modify or constrain
human behavior. For as long as law has existed, its purpose has been to facilitate the efficient functioning of
civil society.
The aforementioned codes even had room for what we would now call labor law. Hammurabi’s code
includes, for example:
• Minimum wage rules: “If any one hire a day laborer, he shall pay him from the New Year until the
9
Furthermore, judges are often suspicious of economics arguments and statistical evidence—so economic arguments might even
be counterproductive. See the discussion by Posner (2008) and Breyer (2009).
10
See discussion in MacLeod (2007b).
11
Hammurabi’s code, Paragraph 2, decrees: “If any one bring an accusation against a man, and the accused go to the river and
leap into the river, if he sink in the river his accuser shall take possession of his house. But if the river prove that the accused is not
guilty, and he escape unhurt, then he who had brought the accusation shall be put to death, while he who leaped into the river shall
take possession of the house that had belonged to his accuser.”

8

fifth month (April to August, when days are long and the work hard) six gerahs in money per day;
from the sixth month to the end of the year he shall give him five gerahs per day.”
• Liability rule: “If a herdsman, to whom cattle or sheep have been entrusted for watching over, and
who has received his wages as agreed upon, and is satisfied, diminish the number of the cattle or
sheep, or make the increase by birth less, he shall make good the increase or profit that was lost in the
terms of settlement.”
These are remarkable examples of how legal rules are created to regulate the employment relationship. That
minimum wage rules persist to this day suggests that there are robust reasons for the existence of such rules.
Recognizing this possibility, the law-and-economics approach seeks to explain the rules as solutions to welldefined market imperfections. Ostrom (2000), for example, has shown that many societies have developed
efficient systems of rules and adjudication for regulating the use of common-pool resources, thereby avoiding the tragedy of the commons (Hardin (1968)). Ostrom observes that all successful commons-governance
regimes consist of a set of rules that have the following features:
1. The rules are commonly known;
2. There are penalties for breaking rules that increase in intensity with the severity and frequency of
violation;
3. There is an organization or an individual who is responsible for imposing penalties when informed;
and
4. There is a process of adjudication when there are disagreements regarding whether an offense has
occurred and what penalty should be imposed.
All organizations, including firms and families, have rule systems with these features. The economic analysis of such rule systems typically entails asking what set of rules would achieve an efficient allocation.12
In the common-pool-resource problem, for example, one seeks a set of rules ensuring that each person with
access does not overuse the resource. Organizational economics tries to determine which systems of rules
and compensation in firms or public entities ensure that agents reveal useful information and choose efficient
levels of effort.
What distinguishes the law’s rule system from a family’s or organization’s is not the existence of binding
rules, but the sources of enforcement and adjudication. When we speak of a legal system, we mean the set of
rules and associated penalties that are enforced by the state.13 As discussed above, however, the jurisdiction
12
Determining the optimal system for selecting a course of action given the preferences of individuals, the technology of the
environment, and the information available is the subject of mechanism design theory. See Jackson (2001).
13
It is worth highlighting the fact that a set of written rules is not a requirement, nor even a defining feature of a legal system.
In the Middle Ages, the subjects of a feudal lord faced a number of rules regulating their life on the manor, most of which were
not written (Bloch (1961)); nonetheless, the set of rules was widely understood. Written rules do have good social consequences,
however, by assisting with evidentiary issues and facilitating agreement among parties regarding the applicable rule. Inter-subjective
agreement on the law is an important issue in modern labor law, as we shall see in the case of employee handbooks.

9

associated with a dispute is often poorly defined. Even when the jurisdiction is well-defined, disputes can
often be decided by multiple judicial bodies (including private mediation and arbitration). Many countries,
such as Italy and the United Kingdom, maintain a separate system of courts for ruling on employment
disputes. In the United States, disputes regarding a collective-bargaining agreement may be brought before
the National Labor Relations Board, employment disputes before a state court, and Title VII discrimination
suits before a federal court.
To illustrate what we mean by a legal system (and employment law in particular), let us consider the
proverbial worker-firm relationship. In the standard neoclassical model of employment, the worker agrees
to supply L hours of labor for a wage w. This can be viewed as a supply contract where the hours are, say,
consulting time. In that case, the relationship would be governed by contract law. The worker must supply
L hours, and the employer must pay wL dollars.
Should the worker supply less than L hours, the worker has breached the contract. Suppose that the firm
has paid P0 in advance, a common practice if the worker is, for example, a lawyer. Some sort of binding
agreement is needed; otherwise, the worker would simply take the P0 and try to find employment elsewhere.
The question, then, is: What incentives does the worker have not to breach the agreement?
One possibility is the use of an informal enforcement mechanism. This would include firms’ telling
each other that the individual has breached, and hence should not be dealt with.14 Another alternative is to
use physical violence against the individual, a common technique in the illegal drug trade and other black
markets.15 While both enforcement systems are still widely used, societies have evolved more legalistic
systems of adjudication for the simple reason that parties sometimes fail to perform even if they act in good
faith. Enforcement systems that trigger punishment regardless of the reason for breach, such as violence
among drug dealers, are simply not always efficient.16
In contrast, if the contract is viewed as a legally binding agreement, then the breach of contract by the
worker gives the firm the right to seek damages in court. If the firm prevails, the court can order the worker
to pay damages to the firm; if the worker refuses to pay, the court can still enforce the decision by ordering
the seizure of the worker’s assets.
The fact that contract breach leads to the right to file suit—as opposed to an automatic penalty—is a
feature that distinguishes legal enforcement from other forms of rule systems, such as rewards within a firm.
In the economics literature, it is common to view any agreement between parties that links future rewards
to actions as a “contract.” Jensen and Meckling (1976), for example, famously proposed that one should
conceptualize a firm as a “nexus of contracts.” If all contracts are enforceable at negligible cost, a reward
system that promotes an employee for good performance and an agreement with an outside supplier to pay a
bonus for sufficient quality are assumed to be equally enforceable. If employment contracts are enforceable
at no cost, subject only to information constraints, then explaining contract form requires only that one
14

Greif (1989) has some nice examples from the Maghrebi traders, who did write letters to each other in this regard.
Naidu and Yuchtman (2009) document that criminal law, with punitive sanctions, was widely used to enforce employment
contracts in 19th century England.
16
See MacLeod (2007a) for discussion and proof of this point.
15

10

carefully specify the environment and then use principal-agent theory to work out the optimal contract.
The difficulty, as Williamson (1991) observes, is that the law uses forbearance for transactions within
a firm. Even if a firm promises a promotion, that does not confer a right upon the worker to sue the firm
should the promotion not be offered. All dispute resolutions of this sort occur strictly within the firm, with
no appeal to an outside legal authority available. A full discussion of the role of courts in such disputes
must wait until the next subsection, but for now the relevant point is that for any contract between two legal
persons (in our example, firm and consultant), both parties always have the right to seek damages in court
should there be a breach of contract.17
That the decision to sue is discretionary implies that the same rule may have different effects depending
on the characteristics of the parties of the contract. The characteristics of the parties might even be the most
important factor in whether a lawsuit is filed. For example, suppose that a company has illegal discriminatory
hiring practices. If the market is thick, with plenty of employment alternatives, potential employees may not
find it worthwhile to bring suit against the company. In a less friendly employment market, if an individual
believes he has been the victim of illegal discrimination and cannot find another job, he may bring suit. This
point is illustrative of the fact that we will always find differences between a legal rule on paper and the
same rule in practice.18
A second source of uncertainty is how the court will decide a case. In the case of the breaching consultant, the court has to make two decisions, each of which is prone to statistical error: 1) deciding whether a
breach has occurred, and 2) if so, the damages to be paid. For damages, the general rule is that courts order
expectations damages—namely, the losses associated with the worker’s breach. An example of a formula
that the court might use is:
damages = P0 + w1 L − wL,
= prepayment + cost of replacement − promised wages not paid.
Here w1 is the wage for the replacement worker. The worker has to pay the costs associated with finding
a replacement worker rather than the value of the work done, due to contract law’s requirement that injured parties make every effort to mitigate losses arising from breach. The mitigation rule is mandatory,
meaning that parties cannot contract around it. Employment law has many other mandatory rules; slavery is
prohibited, for example, as is discrimination on the basis of race, age, or sex.
Expectation is not the only way to calculate damages from contract breach. In a famous paper on
contract damages, Fuller, L. L. and Perdue, William R., Jr. (1936) identified restitution and reliance as other
possible measures of damages.19 Restitution damages, for one, are intended to put the firm into the same
17

See Kornhauser and MacLeod (2010) for a discussion of the concept of a legal person.
Dunford and Devin (1998) have a nice discussion of how employee perceptions affect the decision whether to file suit. For a
review of the literature on the decision to file a suit, see Kessler and Rubinfeld (2007).
19
This work has been influential in law and economics. Economists have used the three damages measures—expectations,
restitution, and reliance—as alternative legal rules that can be analyzed using the standard tools of economics. See, in particular,
Shavell (1984) and Rogerson (1984).
18

11

financial position—as if the contract had never been signed. In our consultant example, restitution damages
would only require the worker to repay P0 . Matters are less clear if P0 is paid to the worker so that he can
buy passage to the job site and secure accommodation. Suppose upon arriving, the worker is injured and
cannot perform his duties; the firm sues for breach. If the contract does not specify what happens in this
contingency, a court may be asked to fill in the gaps in the agreement. Some other issues that might not be
described in the contract (and which the court must adjudicate) include whether the injured worker may be
fired or whether he must take out a loan to repay P0 .
Alternatively, the firm, in the expectation of being able to rely upon performance, may have paid for passage and accommodation. In that case, if the worker does not perform, then she may be asked to compensate
the firm for these reliance expenditures.
Finally, the contract could have provided that a non-performing worker pay a fine P0 . In this case, nonperformance would not be a breach of contract, and a breach would occur only if the worker failed to pay
back P0 . Notice that in this case, the damages would simply be P0 , even under the expectation-damages
rule. This example illustrates that for the same exchange relationship there is no unique notion of contract
breach. Rather, the contract defines what constitutes breach, and then the courts must decide whether or not
to enforce the terms set out in the agreement.20
Defining the conditions for breach is not a clear-cut exercise. For example, the contract could have
specified liquidated damages in the amount P0 . In this case, breach would occur for non-performance, but
then the contract would direct the court to set damages at P0 . This contract seems to be equivalent to the
previous one (indeed, most economic theories of contract would see them as equivalent), but there is an
important distinction. In the previous case, if the worker pays P0 , no breach has occurred, and the firm has
no right to bring suit against the worker. In the liquidated-damages case, even if the worker offers to pay
P0 , the firm still has a right to sue the worker because technically a breach has still occurred. Admittedly,
the firm would face an uphill battle in court if the worker had offered to pay—and normally would have no
reason not to accept the offer as part of a settlement agreement—but the right exists nonetheless. The firm
might believe, for example, that the worker abused the liquidated-damages clause, accepting the consulting
job only as a contingency in case another opportunity did not work out. If the firm’s belief is true, the
worker has arguably violated the requirement of good faith and fair dealing—another mandatory rule in the
common law of contracts. Arguing that the liquidated-damages clause no longer applies, the firm might ask
for expectation damages larger than P0 .
Conversely, assume that the firm sets liquidated damages at three times P0 . Breach occurs, and the
worker declares these damages to be unconscionably high. The worker may have a valid claim under contract
law’s prohibition against penalty clauses. This doctrine—another mandatory rule—provides that liquidated
damages far exceeding the losses to the injured party will not be enforced by courts.
The prohibition on penalty clauses, along with the other examples of mandatory rules discussed above,
illustrate that the law allows for a significant degree of judicial intervention into private contracts. Among
20

See MacLeod (2007a) for a discussion of whose reputational concerns interact with the breach decision. In particular, the
theory predicts that the party whose reputation is the most valuable should be the one who is responsible for initiating breach.

12

other things, a court can fill in missing terms and refuse to enforce unreasonable terms. The decision whether
to intervene is often at the court’s discretion, but courts usually turn to the Uniform Commercial Code and
other statutes, as well as previous court decisions, to justify these interventions. Thus the legal system is
an adjudication process that modifies contracts in the face of a breach as a function of past experience and
practice.
The extent to which courts should intervene into freely entered agreements has proven to be controversial. Early scholars, such as MacNeil (1974), proposed that courts rely on many sources of information,
including industry custom and the history of the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant, when
making a decision. If parties have a longstanding relationship, Macneil argued, contract terms should be
enforced within the context of the relationship. Macneil and many others believed that this sort of contextsensitive adjudication could help repair the parties’ relationship and facilitate the continuation of mutually
beneficial exchange. Most economic theories of contract, in contrast, work from the assumption that parties
have well-defined interests and can draft agreements efficiently, implying that contracts should be enforced
as written. This presumption has led to a law-and-economics scholarship that mostly argues for the curtailment of judicial discretion, and for a more systematic dependence upon basic economic reasoning when
ruling on a case (see Goetz and Scott (1980) and more recently Schwartz and Scott (2003)).
Regardless of one’s theoretical commitments, it remains the case that the law does not simply enforce
a set of well-defined rules. The law does include a set of rules, but along with a system of adjudication
that results in a context-sensitive application of these rules to individual cases. This context sensitivity
includes, among other things, consideration for the idiosyncratic features of the parties. The basic principles
of contract law apply to all agreements between two parties, but more specialized bodies of law have evolved
to regulate specific classes of contracts. The insurance industry is regulated by a specialized area of contract
rules (for example, see Baker (2003)), as is employment law. It is to this latter body of law that we now turn.

2.2

Employment Law

Employment law evolved from contract law and master-servant law to deal with the unique problems characterizing the modern employment relationship. The first task is to determine the difference between 1) a
firm’s relationship with an outside contractor selling services, and 2) its relationship with an employee. The
difference not only affects the area of law that regulates the relationship, but it also affects the relevant tax
law. In the United States, the Internal Revenue Service will find that an employment relationships exists
when “the person for whom services are performed has the right to control and direct the individual who
performs the services, not only as to the result to be accomplished by the work but also as to the details and
means by which that result is accomplished.”21
As this tax regulation exemplifies, the obligation of the employee is to follow his employer’s directions,
not to produce a specific service with particular characteristics. Simon (1951)’s model nicely captures this
distinction between sales and employment. In a sales contract, says Simon, the seller agrees to supply a
21

Treas. Reg. § 31.3121(d)-1(c)(2).

13

particular good or service x from the set of all possible goods and services X, and in exchange the buyer
agrees to pay a sum P . An employment relationship, in contrast, is characterized by a subset of all possible
goods and services, A ⊂ X, that represents the set of duties that the employer might ask the employee
to carry out. A might include the service x defined in the aforementioned sales contract, but that single
task would normally be just one component in a broad complex of obligations defining an employment
relationship. In exchange for a promise to carry out these duties, the employer agrees to pay a wage w.
Simon’s simple model highlights an essential feature of the employment relationship, namely, the admissible scope of a person’s job as represented by the set A. The admissible set of tasks S ⊂ X—that is,
the set of acts that an employer is allowed by law to command—has been subject to a plethora of regulation
and litigation. For example, is it conscionable for a firm to require 50 hours a week? Can a manager ask her
assistant to commit crimes?
An employment relationship often begins with little formal agreement about the tasks the employee will
be asked to carry out. The longer the potential duration of the employment, the more incomplete the initial
employment agreement. Given the informal nature of such agreements, when disputes do arise the courts
will have little to rely upon when constructing the obligations of each party. With poorly defined obligations,
determining whether a breach occurred presents a difficult task, as does choosing an appropriate remedy.
The combination of extreme contract incompleteness and daunting litigation costs have convinced many
legal scholars that the appropriate default rule is at-will employment. The courts have converged to this
default rule partly because they now view employment law as an extension of contract law. That view
diverges significantly from the early case law on employment disputes, which was mostly governed by
“master-servant law.”22 That old body of law consisted of a set of legal default rules developed in England
and the United States to deal with cases involving domestic servants. In the master-servant relationship, the
customary period of employment lasted one year; courts held that neither party should sever the relationship
before then.
In a widely cited work, Wood (1877) argued for replacing this law with the rule of at-will employment,
where both parties can sever the relationship whenever they wish and face no liability beyond the requirement that the employer pay her employee the agreed-upon wage for work already completed. Wood’s
argument was a pragmatic one, based on the bad experiences of many employers and employees with the
inflexibility of master-servant law. As detailed in Feinman (1978), the new rule was quickly adopted by
the New York courts and remains the default rule today. In California, the legislature adopted what is now
Section 2922 of the California Labor code, which provides that “employment, having no specified term,
may be terminated at the will of either party on notice to the other.”
The at-will-employment rule figures prominently in most economic models of the labor market. As
these models have it, workers and firms enter into relationships that are preferred to the alternatives in the
marketplace. Should a firm mistreat a worker, or have high standards for performance or number of hours
worked, the firm will have to pay relatively high wages or else the worker will leave. Similarly, if a worker
22

See Feinman (1978) for a review of the development of this law.

14

demands a higher wage or better working conditions, the firm is free to search for another worker who will
abide by the current arrangements. In equilibrium, all firms and workers are satisfied with their lot relative
to the alternatives.
The hypothesis of a perfectly competitive market can explain many broad features of wages and employment over time, but it cannot explain the emergence of the at-will-employment rule. This is an example
of model’s inability to explain the emergence of laws that seem to constitute reasonable responses to real
economic issues. That failure indicates flaws in popular economic models—but not in economic reasoning
generally. Consider the case of child labor. As societies have become more wealthy, they have gradually
imposed stricter legal constraints on the minimum age and maximum hours for minors in the workplace.
By the perfectly-competitive-market hypothesis, these restrictions would be unjustified because only those
families for which child labor is efficient would put their children to work rather than in school. On the
other hand, a more realistic economic inquiry recognizes the market imperfection imposed by liquidity
constraints: children (and parents) cannot borrow against future income arising from education, so many
families send their children to work for a short-term gain in income rather than invest in a long-term gain
from education. Investing in education results in superior overall welfare, so the choice to put children to
work is inefficient. Laws that regulate child labor, like the Fair Labor Standards Act, are justified because,
by increasing the cost of child labor, they motivate families to substitute education for labor. By increasing
investments in education, these laws increase social welfare.
The analysis in the previous paragraph indicates the potential insight to be gained from an evolutionary
perspective when investigating the law and economics of employment law. Applying this perspective to
our law’s historical origins, we observe that employment law adapts to the changing macroeconomic environment. One of the earliest labor statutes on record, the Ordinance of Labourers, addressed the problems
of unharvested crops, rising wages, and poaching of workers faced by English landowners at the height of
the Black Death. Similarly, in 1630, the Massachusetts General Court placed a wage cap of 2 shillings a
day on skilled craftsmen, who were at that time taking advantage of limited supply. More recently, the Fair
Labor Standards Act became law in the midst of the Great Depression, when workers lacked market power
to ensure good working conditions. Mandatory overtime pay, meanwhile, incentivized firms to hire more
workers at fewer hours each, thereby serving as an income- and risk-sharing function.
These legal adaptations to changes in the labor-market environment can all be conceived as forms of
insurance, whether against the waste of unharvested crops, gouging by craftsmen, or unemployment. In the
next subsection, we discuss recent work based on the hypothesis that workers are risk-averse, which might
help explain some of the features of these laws. Certainly, both minimum-wage laws and unemployment
insurance can be viewed as forms of imperfect insurance.23
Once the issue of risk is put aside, the law-and-economics movement has tended to take the view that
employment at will is the optimal default rule (see, e.g., Epstein (1984)). Within economics, a tradition
including Friedman (1962) and Alchian and Demsetz (1972) has viewed labor services from the perspective
23

The reader is referred to Blau and Kahn (1999) and Rogerson et al. (2005) for excellent reviews of this literature.

15

of the buyer-seller contract—with no remedies for contract breach. Specifically, Friedman argued that a
competitive market with free entry and exit is the most efficient market form, even when contracts cannot
clearly specify quality. In his vision of the world, workers and firms trade freely within the context of the
sales contract (quality x in exchange for price p); should performance be inadequate, the worker would gain
a poor reputation and thereafter be excluded from the market.
There are two difficulties with this argument. The first, as MacLeod (2007a) discusses, is that the
literature on relational contracts shows that reputational concerns are neither necessary nor sufficient to
ensure efficient exchange. Second, the common law has developed many doctrines that limit the freedom
of contract in the context of the simple buyer-seller model. Posner (2003) suggests that these developments
tend to enhance contract performance. Chakravarty and MacLeod (2009) present evidence that this is indeed
the case for a large class of contracts that are common in the construction industry.
As the Simon model highlights, the employment relationship is different because performance obligation
is created ex post. If the worker accepts a contract with scope A ⊂ X, then the performance obligation is
created when the employer asks the employee to carry out x∗ ∈ A. If the relationship were governed
by standard contract law, then if the employee chooses xb 6= x∗ the employer-cum-buyer could sue for
damages B(x∗ ) − B(xb ), where B(x) is the benefit to the employer of action x. Under employment at will
the general rule would be that the employer has no right to sue, but she can freely dismiss the employee,
even if performance is satisfactory.
Correspondingly, the employee has the right to leave whenever he wishes. For example, if the employer
asks the employee to carry out an action outside the scope of his duties, then under at-will employment
the employee has the right to refuse to carry out the task and find another job. In contrast, in the case of a
construction contract, if the buyer were to ask for a modification to the building plan, then under U.S. law
the contractor would have an obligation to carry out the modification, but he would also have the right to
sue for the additional cost of the change if the buyer/builder does not adequately compensate him for the
changes.
The defining feature of at-will employment is that in each period parties are free to renegotiate the
contract, with the outside options defined by each parties’ market opportunities. Consistent with the Coase
theorem, we should expect at-will employment to give rise to arrangements that are ex post efficient. This
observation has led some legal scholars (e.g., Epstein (1984)) to suggest that exceptions to employment at
will are inefficient. Yet today in the United States, as in most other jurisdictions worldwide, the law of
wrongful discharge is alive and well. Indeed, there are clear exceptions to the rule of employment at will.
In the next section, we discuss three of the most important exceptions figuring in recent empirical work on
employment law.

2.3

Exceptions to Employment at Will

This section discusses three exceptions to employment at will that have found broad support in U.S. courts.
These exceptions are judge-made laws, created in response to difficult cases; hence, they are good examples
16

of how the common law evolves in response to the disputes that arise in practice. The three exceptions
we consider are 1) the public policy exception, protecting from employer retaliation those workers that act
in a way consistent with accepted state policy, 2) the implied contract exception, protecting workers who
can show that the implicit contract with the employer entails just-cause dismissal, and 3) the good-faith
exception, requiring employers and employers to behave in ways consistent with fair dealing.
U.S. courts rarely order specific performance—that is, the losing employer typically still has the right to
discharge the employee—and hence the issue is usually one of damages: How much should she have to pay
for this right? In other jurisdictions, however, reinstatement is sometimes considered an acceptable remedy.
One of the few U.S. cases in which specific performance was granted in an employment dispute was Silva
v. University of New Hampshire.24
The question of damage awards is not straightforward, but economics can assist in organizing our
thinking. If markets are perfectly competitive—and a worker’s compensation is equal to his best market
alternative—dismissal does not entail any harm. However, as Mincer (1962) has shown, the second assumption can break down when the worker’s training costs were significant. If the worker paid for some of the
training costs, he will be compensated for them through increased future compensation, and therefore his
income may be in excess of the best market alternatives. More often, dismissal entails a costly job search
and possibly relocation. When an employee has been wrongfully discharged, the court will award damages
that reflect these costs.
An additional complication is whether the wrongful-discharge action comes under tort or contract law.
The first exception to the at-will employment rule, a claim for wrongful discharge as violation of public
policy, is considered a tort claim.25 A tort claim, put briefly, is distinguished from contract disputes by there
being no requirement for a prior contractual relationship. Standard examples include traffic accidents and
medical malpractice. The practical implication of this distinction is that tort law allows for the recovery of
both consequential damages and punitive damages, which may far exceed the direct economic harm suffered
by the discharged employee. In contract law, consequential damages and punitive damages are in general
not recoverable.
2.3.1

Public Policy Exception

Under the public-policy exception, an employee may sue for wrongful discharge if he is dismissed for
conduct that is protected by law. Miles (2000) summarizes the four types of terminations that fit under this
class of exception.26 They are (1) "an employee’s refusal to commit an illegal act, such as perjury or pricefixing"; (2) "an employee’s missing work to perform a legal duty, such as jury duty or military service";
(3) "an employee’s exercise of a legal right, such as filing a workman’s compensation claim"; and (4) "an
employee’s ‘blowing the whistle,’ or disclosing wrongdoing by the employer or fellow employees."
24
888 F.Supp. 293 (D.N.H. 1994) (granting a preliminary injunction preventing a tenured professor’s suspension for comments
that offended some students).
25
See Rothstein and Liebman (2003), chapter 10.B.
26
See page 78.

17

A well-known example of the first type of public-policy exception is the 1980 case Tameny v. Atlantic
Richfield Co.27 Plaintiff Tameny, the dismissed employee, claimed that his discharge resulted from a refusal
to participate in the company’s unlawful price-fixing scheme. Defendant Atlantic Richfield argued that since
there was no employment contract, Tameny’s employment was at-will and could be terminated at any time.
The California Supreme Court ruled for Tameny, holding that an employer cannot discharge an employee
for refusing to perform an illegal act. The court further held that the employee can recover under tort law,
thereby allowing for potentially higher damages. On this last point, the moral distinction between tort and
contract—specifically, that a breach is blameless, but a tort is wrongful—is relevant. Atlantic Richfield
did not just breach a contract, it retaliated against an employee for refusing to do its criminal dirty work.
Consistent with our moral intuitions, the court considered the company’s conduct to be morally wrongful—
not just business as usual—and therefore established a legal mechanism for increased punishment of such
conduct.
Economic models of employment mostly ignore illegal activity on the part of employees, yet Tameny
and other cases involving the public-policy exception clearly demonstrate that some employers do ask employees to commit crimes. The economic implications of this rule are difficult to tease out. In Tameny,
at least, the employee was asked to engage in anti-competitive activity, so in this case the public-policy
exception probably enhanced economic efficiency. But economic evaluations of public-policy cases are
generally more difficult. If the illegal activity entails consumer goods, such as drugs or gambling, then the
public-policy exception likely decreases output, albeit in a direction that arguably enhances social welfare.
The prohibition against discharge for military service, meanwhile, reduces economic efficiency because it
prevents the employer from finding a more productive replacement. As with the illegal-consumer-goods
exception, the military-service exception to at-will employment arguably serves other social-welfare goals.
2.3.2

Implied Contract Exception

When a worker can verify that a permanent employment relationship is promised by his employer, such
employment can no longer be regarded as at-will and can be terminated only under just cause.28 Under
reigning court precedent in some states, if a personnel manual given to employees specifies that termination
is only with cause, a binding contract exists. Woolley v. Hoffmann-La Roch was the first opinion to hold that
employee handbooks can be part of a legally binding employment contract.29
The facts of Woolley are as follows. Plaintiff Richard Woolley was hired by defendant Hoffmann-La
Roche, Inc. in 1969 as section head in one of defendant’s engineering departments. The parties did not sign
a written employment contract, but plaintiff received a personnel manual which read, in part, that “[i]t is the
policy of Hoffmann-La Roche to retain to the extent consistent with company requirements, the services of
27

27 Cal.3rd 167 (Calif. 1980).
See, e.g., Toussaint v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield, 292 N.W.2d 880 (Mich. 1980) (“When a prospective employee inquires about
job security and the employer agrees that the employee shall be employed as long as he does his job, a fair construction is that the
employer has agreed to give up his right to discharge at will. . . and may only discharge for cause”).
29
Woolley v. Hoffmann-La Roch, Inc., 499 A.2d 515 (N.J. 1985).
28

18

all employees who perform their duties efficiently and effectively.” In 1978, after Woolley’s submission of
a report on piping problems at one of defendant’s buildings, defendant requested that he resign. Plaintiff
refused, and he was fired.
The trial court judge held for the defendant on summary judgment. On Woolley’s appeal, the New
Jersey Supreme Court reversed and remanded the case for trial, holding that an employee’s handbook could
be evidence of a binding contract. The court couched its ruling in notions of fairness:
All that this opinion requires of an employer is that it be fair. It would be unfair to allow an
employer to distribute a policy manual that makes the workforce believe that certain promises
have been made and then to allow the employer to renege on those promises. What is sought
here is basic honesty: if the employer, for whatever reason, does not want the manual to be
capable of being construed by the court as a binding contract, there are simple ways to attain
that goal. All that need be done is the inclusion in a very prominent position of an appropriate
statement that there is no promise of any kind by the employer contained in the manual. . .
In this case, as in many others, one party is not completely truthful with the other party. This possibility is
ignored by most economic models of contract. Economists typically assume that both parties do what they
say they will do, and if they do not, any malfeasance is anticipated by the other party. The Woolley opinion
can be seen as requiring employers to comply with previous agreements not to engage in malfeasance. The
judgment does not prohibit dismissal without cause; it simply requires that employers honor promises not
to dismiss without cause.
Employee handbooks are not the only example of an implied contract. For example, Pugh v. See’s
Candies held that a long employment with regular promotion can establish a long-term contract.30 In this
case, the plaintiff-worker Pugh reported to company higher-ups that his current supervisor was a convicted
embezzler, for which the supervisor subsequently fired him. Pugh filed suit, but the trial court dismissed the
case at summary judgment. On appeal from the dismissal, the appellate court agreed that Pugh’s reporting
his supervisor’s past conviction was not “whistle-blowing” under the public policy exception, but the long
duration of Pugh’s good service was sufficient to establish an implied contract. The court therefore reversed
and remanded the case for trial.31
This example illustrates a concrete case in which an employee is dismissed not because of an objective
failing (otherwise one could provide cause for dismissal) but because, essentially, he did not get along with
his new supervisor. If the contract were at-will, then dismissal would be immediate. This rule prohibits the
dismissal of long-term employees who may not fit in, or, if delinquent in their performance, the employers
are unable to provide sufficient evidence of this poor performance.
30

Pugh v. See’s Candies, 171 Cal. Rptr. 917 (Cal. Ct. App. 1981).
At trial, the jury rendered a verdict in favor of the company notwithstanding the appellate court’s holding on implied contracts.
Pugh v. See’s Candies, 250 Cal. Rptr. 195 (Cal. Ct. App. 1988).
31

19

2.3.3

Good Faith Exception

The requirement of good faith and fair dealing is a mandatory rule in contract law, and consequently in
employment law. The employment cases involving this exception typically turn on the use of at-will employment by the employer to deprive the employee of compensation. In Mitford v. Lasala,32 the discharged
employee, who was a party of a profit-sharing agreement with the defendant, was fired to ensure that he
would not share profits. The court held that “good faith and fair dealing. . . would prohibit firing [an employee] for the purpose of preventing him from sharing in future profits.”
Currently, courts typically find a rather narrow application of this rule to the timing of dismissal and
payment of compensation, rather than to other forms of bad behavior by employers.33 Typical examples of
wrongful terminations that fit under this class are: 1) a salesman being fired right before his commissions
should be paid to him, and 2) an employee being dismissed in order to avoid paying retirement benefits.
As we can see from Figure 1, there are many fewer states adopting this law than in the case of the implied
contract rule. Given the more narrow applicability of the rule, this may simply reflect the fact that courts in
these states have adhered more closely to the common-law principle of at-will employment, and hence there
was a need for statutory intervention to deal with cases where employers avoid paying compensation by a
preemptive dismissal. If so, then we might expect this rule to have a substantial impact.
This impact is not due to the effect upon firing costs, but rather because it corrects poorly drafted contracts. In the case of Mitford v. Lasala, the contract was quite clear, and it implied that the firm had no
obligation to pay the bonus. Most employees would expect to be paid in such a case, but at the time of
writing the agreement they simply would not expect the deception to occur. In such cases, the courts can
enhance productive efficiency by essentially completing an incomplete contract.
Consider now the case of Fortune v. National Cash Register Co.34 Plaintiff Orville E. Fortune, a
former salesman of National Cash Register Company (NCR), brought a suit to recover certain commissions
allegedly due from a sale of cash registers to First National Stores. Inc. Fortune had been employed by
NCR under a written contract that provided for at-will mutual terminable with notice. The contract also
specified that Fortune would receive an annual bonus computed as a percentage of sales that he performed
or supervised. In November 1968, Fortune was involved in a supervisory capacity in a sale of 2,008 cash
registers to First National, for which the bonus credit was recorded as $92,079.99. The next month, Fortune
was given notice of termination. NCR ended up keeping Fortune on staff in a demoted capacity and paid
him three-fourths of the First National bonus during the summer of 1969. Fortune requested the other 25
percent of the bonus, but his manager told him “to forget about it.” Fortune was finally asked to retire in
June 1970, and then fired upon his refusal.
At trial, the jury was asked to render two special verdicts: “1. Did the Defendant act in bad faith ... when
it decided to terminate the Plaintiff’s contract as a salesman by letter dated December 2, 1968, delivered on
32

666 P.2d 1000 (Alaska 1963).
See section 10.2 of Rothstein and Liebman (2003).
34
373 Mass. 96 (Mass. 1977).
33

20

January 6, 1969? 2. Did the Defendant act in bad faith ... when the Defendant let the Plaintiff go on June 5,
1970?” The jury answered both questions in the affirmative, and the judge ordered damages of $45,649.92.
The state supreme court affirmed the judgment.
What is interesting about this case is that NCR did not breach the written terms of the agreement, but
the court nevertheless allowed a jury to find that they had acted in bad faith in depriving Fortune of bonuses
from the transactions he helped procure. Fortune can be seen as an efficient outcome in that it reduces
employee uncertainty about whether they will be rewarded for their efforts and thereby incentivizes optimal
investment in the employment relationship.

2.4

Discussion

The economic model of contract tends to view legal rules as constraints upon individual decision-making,
either in terms of increasing transaction costs or imposing constraints upon the wages, hours, and other
conditions of employment. In practice, the law is a complex adjudication system that is difficult to describe
with an elegant model. Some of the distinctive features of a legal system that are not captured in the
economic model of the employment contract include:
1. Contract terms are not self-enforcing. Enforcement is a privately motivated activity that occurs when
a plaintiff brings a case before a court. Even rules that have bureaus dedicated to their enforcement—
such as the minimum wage and overtime requirements—rely on information provided by private
parties—as well as the volition of agency officials. This demonstrates that enforcement is heterogeneous and a function of employer, employee, and regulator characteristics.
2. When a case is brought to a court, parties cannot rely upon the courts to enforce the agreement as written. Excessive penalties for non-performance are not enforced, for example. Although employment
at will is the default rule in the United States, there are several exceptions.
3. Judges do not restrict themselves to contract terms, explicit or otherwise, as relevant legal factors.
Courts may collect a large body of evidence regarding the communications and actions of both parties
before reaching a decision. Thus, information regarding events not mentioned in the employment
contract may nevertheless play a role in adjudicating the dispute.
The fact that courts may overrule contract terms is well-recognized in the legal literature. One of the central
issues of this literature is the question of whether or not there is anything we can reasonably call “the law”
that allows one to consistently anticipate how courts will rule on a given dispute. There is a related debate
regarding how best to think about judicial behavior.35
Within economics, there is a small but growing literature that explores the role of the law in ensuring
performance. Johnson et al. (2002) find that even if enforcement is imperfect, the existence of courts can
help entrepreneurs enter into new supply contracts. Djankov et al. (2003) construct a database consisting of
35

See Stephenson (2009) for a nice summary of this debate.

21

how costly it is to evict a tenant and collect on a bounced check across a large sample of countries, finding
that the cost of collection in civil-law countries is significantly higher than in common-law countries. This
result is consistent with subsequent work reported in Djankov et al. (2008) for the problem of debt collection.
See La Porta et al. (2008) for a more comprehensive discussion of this literature.
For the most part, this work focuses on the costs of the legal system and assumes that variations in these
costs across jurisdictions affect economic performance. Botero et al. (2004), and more recently Djankov
and Ramalho (2009), explore the extent to which employment law and regulation affect labor market performance. This work uses cross-country variation in measures of employment-law flexibility to identify
the effects of the law upon labor-market performance. These papers suggest that the historical origin of
the country’s legal regime—whether common-law or civil-law—is often the decisive factor in the evolution
of the country’s employment rules. However, these papers do not explain this observation. One possible
interpretation, perhaps in need of further research, is that laws, like organisms, are adapted not just to the
environment but to other laws. The various laws in a legal system—of which employment law is a small
part— persist at a steady-state equilibrium unless an overwhelming shock—whether political or economic—
suffices to move enough laws to another equilibrium to pull the rest of the legal regime along with them. The
rarity of such events—Russia’s transition to capitalism is a plausible example—might explain the durable
influence of common-law and civil-law institutions on employment laws.
Regardless of this latter conjecture, what is clear from the analysis above is that the law is adaptive, yet
existing work does not adequately explain why there is variation in the law. The plausible view taken here is
that the law evolves in response to cases brought before the courts. New types of disputes breed new types
of law. To understand why these cases arise, we need to understand what exactly is the role of the law in
an employment contract. In the next section, we review the literature on the economics of the employment
relationship, placing legal rules in the context of the full relationship.

3

The Economics of the Employment Relationship

Economic theories of employment begin with a model of human behavior and choice. The standard assumption in economics models of employment is that the worker is a risk-averse individual who wishes to
maximize expected utility adjusted for the utility from doing specific tasks and the work environment.36 One
of the lessons of contract theory is that the optimal contract is often a complex function of the technology of
production, the characteristics of the prospective employer and employee, and the information available. In
order to highlight the empirical implications of the theory, we begin with a discussion of causality. We then
discuss economic models of the employment relationship, highlighting their empirical implications.
36

See Rebitzer and Taylor (2010) for a discussion of recent research in behavioral economics as applied to labor economics.

22

Table 3: Employment Law for a Selected Set of Countries
Country

Min. Work Age

Holidays

OT Prem.

Sev. Pay

Ret. Ben. Yrs.

Unemp. Wait

Matern. Leave

Switzerland

15

9

1.25

0.0

1

5

4.5

United States

16

0

1.5

0.0

20

3

1.35

Singapore

12

11

1.5

12.9

5

n.a.

3.0

Finland

16

11

2.0

0.0

0

7

4.2

Italy

15

11

1.1

0.0

19

7

1.35

New Zealand

16

11

1.0

0.0

0

70

1.5

Portugal

16

12

1.5

12.9

15

0

2.0

Uruguay

15

5

2.0

12.9

35

0

4.1

Malaysia

14

10

1.5

2.14

20

n.a.

4.05

Mexico

14

7

2.0

18.04

10

n.a.

3.0

Lebanon

13

13

1.5

12.9

20

n.a.

3.5

Russia

16

9

2.0

8.6

25

0

12.0

Lithuania

14

11

1.0

8.6

30

8

2.0

Jordan

16

12

1.25

12.9

10

7

2.0

Morocco

12

11

1.25

0.0

9

n.a.

3.0

Indonesia

12

12

1.5

25.8

20

n.a.

2.25

Zimbabwe

17

11

1.0

0.0

10

n.a.

3.0

Armenia

16

13

1.5

6.45

25

0

6.0

India

14

5

2.0

6.43

10

n.a.

4.0

Vietnam

18

5

1.5

12.9

20

n.a.

3.0

Madagascar

14

2

1.3

4.2

15

n.a.

3.0

Mozambique

18

9

1.5

25.8

10

n.a.

0.0

Employment Rules in Sample of OECD Countries. The 85 countries studied in Botero et al. (2004) were ranked
by per capita income, and every fourth country was selected. The table presents measurements for the following
employment rules. Min. Work Age. The minimum legal age for attaining full-time employment. Holidays. Number
of legally mandated paid holidays per year. OT Prem. The premium for working overtime, as a multiple of normaltime wages. Sev. Pay. Legally mandated severance payment for terminated workers, in week’s pay. Ret. Ben.
Yrs. Years of work required before a worker is eligible for retirement benefits through the country’s social security
program. Obtained by multiplying the relevant index by 45 (the maximum observation in years) and subtracting that
number from 45. Unemp. Wait. Waiting period in days before a worker becomes eligible for unemployment benefits.
Obtained by multiplying the relevant index by 70 (the maximum observation in days), and subtracting that number
from 70. “n.a.” indicates that the country does not offer unemployment benefits. Matern. Leave. Number of months
of legally mandated maternity leave.

23

3.1

Why do we need models?

The purpose of this section is to review the role that economic theory plays in understanding the significance
of the law. As discussed in Section 2, even though economic concerns shape the development of the law,
economic analysis as developed by the economics profession has played a relatively minor role in explicitly
guiding court decisions.37 While there may be no explicit accounting of economic effects, it is safe to say
that employment rules established by courts have measurable effects on the economy. Accordingly, the goal
of the theory discussed here is to structure empirical tests of the impact of employment policy on economic
performance.
The recent empirical work in labor economics has been greatly influenced by the potential-outcomes
framework, as beautifully exposited by Holland (1986).38 I shall briefly review this approach when using
economic theory to understand the effects of the law on labor-market performance. First, the framework
provides guidance on how to best organize and represent data. Second, it provides guidance on how to
estimate a causal effect. Holland emphasizes that it is impossible to establish a causal relationship without
some additional hypotheses that themselves can rarely be tested; they must rely on a model of how the world
works.
Formally, the model proceeds by supposing that we have a universe of units to be treated, denoted by
u ∈ U . For the purposes of our discussion, let U denote all potential workers in the economy. In addition,
we might also be interested in outcomes at a state or country level. In that case we let us ⊂ U be the subset
of individuals living in state s ∈ S, where s could denote a U.S. state among all states or one country among
all countries.
This chapter’s main concern is labor-market performance, so we restrict our attention to the question of
how policy might affect wages and employment. For individual u, let y E ∈ Y E = {0, 1} be employment
status (with 1 meaning employed), and let her wage per period be given by y w ∈ Y W = [0, ∞). Suppose
that these outcomes will be observed in the next period (t). Employment and wages are likely to be affected
by employment policies in the next period, denoted by lt .
Rubin’s model was developed in the context of a medical treatment where one asks if a particular drug
has an effect. This question is typically answered by randomly dividing a group of individuals into a treatment and a control group. The causal effect of the drug is measured by comparing the outcomes in the
two groups. The problem is that this procedure does not identify the effect of the treatment on a particular
individual. In some illnesses, individuals become well in the absence of treatment. For others, the illness
may be fatal regardless of the treatment. By chance, it is possible that all the former individuals (the false
positives) would be assigned to the treatment group, while the latter individuals (the false negatives) would
be assigned to the control group. In that case, the experiment would show that the drug had an effect, even
though it did not.
The first issue is how to define a causal effect. In the context of our simple model, let y(u, l0 , t) be the
37
38

For example, see Justice Breyer (2009)’s observation that economics plays a small role in U.S. Supreme Court decision-making.
See also Angrist et al. (1996) and particularly Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) for an up-to-date discussion.

24

outcome under the status-quo law in the next period, and let y(u, l1 , t) be the outcome under the new rule,
say an increase in the minimum wage. Let ∆ = l1 − l0 denote the policy change. Following Holland (1986),
we say that the policy change ∆ at date t causes the effect:
D(u, ∆, t) = y(u, l1 , t) − y(u, l0 , t).
This definition is concrete: It is the difference in potential outcomes. In order to measure this “effect,”
we would have to observe the same outcome for two different policies at the same time, something that is
clearly impossible without time travel. Holland (1986) calls the impossibility of observing a causal effect
the Fundamental Problem of Causal Inference. His analysis emphasizes the fact that measuring the causal
impact of a treatment entails additional hypotheses.
Most solutions to the problem of causal inference rely upon versions of unit homogeneity or time homogeneity. By unit homogeneity we mean that there is a set of units U 0 ⊂ U with the feature that the effect of
the change ∆ is the same for all u ∈ U 0 , in which case the effect can be estimated by policy change to unit
u1 ∈ U 0 but not to unit u0 ∈ U 0 , in which case for u ∈ U 0 we have:
D(u, ∆, t) = y(u1 , l1 , t) − y(u0 , l0 , t).
By time homogeneity, we mean that the effect of the treatment in different periods is the same. Hence, if we
can estimate the effect of a treatment on a unit u by comparing the effect over time:
D(u, ∆, t) = y(u, l1 , t + 1) − y(u, l0 , t).
The challenge then becomes finding the homogeneous group. Regression discontinuity is an example
of a recent popular technique that provides a way to create homogeneous groups that allow for the estimate
of the effect of a treatment.39 For example, DiNardo and Lee (2004) argue that firms in closely contested
unionization drives are almost identical in most respects. Because the outcomes of union certification votes
are very close, one can assume that for these firms union status is randomly assigned. Consequently, we can
compare the change in firm value for those firms that were unionized to the change for those that were not,
and thereby procure a robust measure of the effects of unionization on a firm’s productivity.
Lee and McCrary (2005) provide an example of time homogeneity. Specifically, they look at the effect on
behavior of sanctions against crime. Their study exploits the fact that when a person turns 18, they suddenly
become eligible to be tried in adult courts,where they will face more severe sanctions than a juvenile court
would impose. On the supposition that a person’s characteristics just before and after they turn 18 are the
same, observed changes in crime-related behavior can be ascribed to changes in criminal sanctions.
Notice that all the work is being done by the assumption of continuity over time with the same union, or
across units with very similar characteristics. The great benefit of this approach is that, beyond the continuity
39

See Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and Lee and Lemieux (2009) for a discussion of the technique.

25

assumption (which is a strong assumption), this approach is relatively model-free. The problem is that while
it may provide a credible measure of the effect of a policy change, the approach says little if one moves
away from the point at which the policy change or treatment is applied.
A formal model in this framework has two distinct goals. The first is that it may provide a concise
representation of a set of facts about the world. It describes the set of measured characteristics that one
needs to know in order to capture the effect of a treatment. For unit u ∈ U , let X(u, t) ∈ Θ be a set of
characteristics. In practice, one may not be able to measure all dimensions of Θ, but let us suppose for the
moment that we can. Suppose u is a worker and we are interested in explaining worker wages. Then, we
would say that a model that specifies a wage f (X, l, t) for a worker with characteristics X is an unbiased
representation of the data at date t if for all u ∈ U ,
φut = y(u, lu , t) − f (X(u, t), lu , t)
is an i.i.d set of random variables with zero mean.
If our model is linear, we can let β(t, l) = ∂f /∂X, in which case we can write our model in the familiar
regression form:
yut = β(t, lut )> Xut + φut .
If our model is unbiased, then this is a well-specified model that can be estimated by ordinary least squares.
However, even if the model is well-specified, as Holland (1986) emphasizes, the coefficients of the model
cannot be assumed to represent a causal relationship. For example, one of the parameters might be the
gender of a worker, say 0 is male and 1 is female. If yut is the wage, and the coefficient on gender is
negative, we cannot say that gender causes a wage drop. This is because gender is not a treatment or
something that one normally assumes can be varied within a person.
We can use the coefficient on gender to test various theories. For example, human capital theory predicts
that a person’s wage is a function only of their productive characteristics, such as schooling, ability, and
experience. One reason women might be paid less is that they spend more time out of the labor force in child
rearing. This reasoning implies that once the full set of characteristics reflecting productivity is included in
X, then the coefficient on gender should be zero. If it is not, then we can say there is discrimination in the
labor force.
A good theory specifies the set of parameters X that provide all the information necessary to describe
wages while preserving time independence:
yut = β(lut )> Xut + φut .
Any variation in wages that occurs over time is explained via either changes in the parameters Xut or by
changes in the environment lut . In practice, the econometrician may not have access to all the relevant
information Xut , which leads to the well-known omitted variable bias problem in econometrics. For the
present discussion, let us suppose that the relevant data are available and ask how the model can help in
26

measuring the causal impact of a change in law l.
In general, economic theories do not provide precise point predictions; more typically, they make predictions about the sign of an effect. In the context of measuring the effect of the law on outcomes, the
variation in treatment typically occurs either across jurisdictions—namely, the experiment assumes that all
individuals in a particular jurisdiction u ∈ Us face the same legal environment lst, , and it is the legal environment that varies across jurisdictions. For example, many countries can be characterized as civil-law or
common-law legal systems. We can let U1 be individuals in common-law countries and U0 be individuals
in civil-law countries, and set ls = s.
In the example of civil- and common-law countries, one could estimate βs = β(ls ) for each jurisdiction.
In this case, the causal impact of the legal system depends on the distribution of characteristics of individuals
in the economy. We would estimate the causal effect of changing from a civil-law system to a common-law
system for regions that are currently under civil law in period t by:
Ef f ect of common law =

1 X
(β1 − β0 )> Xut .
n0
u∈U0

In order to estimate the causal effect of a change in the legal system, one needs to use the characteristics
of the jurisdiction where the change is to occur. This adjustment is a version of the well-known Oaxaca
decomposition, which is widely used in studies of income inequality (see Altonji and Blank (1999)) and
union wage differentials. As we discuss in more detail in Section 4, this is not the literature’s usual technique.
The more common assumption is that the effect of a policy is linearly separable, where for u ∈ Us we have:
yut = β > Xut + βl> ls + φut .

(1)

Using data for a single period t, then, we can estimate the average effect of the legal system on the wages
and employment of individuals by:
βl =



1 X
1 X
yut − β > Xut −
yut − β > Xut .
n1
n0
u∈U1

u∈U0

The goal of the theory discussed in this section can be summarized as follows. The theory makes predictions regarding the characteristics X that are needed to represent individual outsources. In particular, it will
provide predictions regarding how variations in individual characteristics relate to variations in outcomes.
Theory has predictive power if we can safely assume that the relationship between the Xs and the ys is
stable over time.
A theory has more predictive power if one can represent outcomes using a smaller set of Xs. Given the
difficulty of obtaining good measures of individual characteristics, theories with fewer Xs are inherently
easier to test. On a related note, there is a line of inquiry in statistics that attempts to be model free. This
is achieved by supposing that one has a rich set of X variables and that the environment is inherently
continuous; as a result, good representations of the data can be used to make predictions on how changes in
27

an individual’s Xs will affect outcomes. Breiman (2001) suggests that such an approach is sometimes more
feasible given present computing resources and the large data sets we have in some domains.
However, representation is not causation. Many individual characteristics are not amenable to experimental treatment. Making causal statements requires that we assume we have a valid representation of the
data that allows one to compare outcomes either: 1) across units with similar characteristics but in different
treatments, or 2) the same units faced with different treatments over time. In these cases, the theory—in addition to specifying the relevant X variables—also specifies an explicit mechanism by which the law affects
the actions of individuals, and hence how one can obtain a valid measure of the causal impact of a change.

3.2

Economics of the Employment Contract

This section discusses the literature that seeks to explain the form and function of employment contracts.
Fundamentally, parties who enter into a contract have agreed to have their behavior constrained in the future.
The most basic reason for a contract is to support inter-temporal exchange, something that cannot be avoided
in the context of labor services. For example, a day laborer agrees to work eight hours in exchange for a
wage at the end of the day. When it comes to paying, the employer may have an incentive to renege or
attempt to reduce the agreed-upon wage. One role of the law is to enforce such agreements.
In economics, such simple exchanges are typically assumed to be enforceable. The literature has focused
on explaining the form of observed contracts that address one of three more subtle issues:
1. Risk. Demand for a worker’s services, and hence wages, is likely to change from period to period.
Risk-averse workers would like to enter into long-term contracts that would shield them from such
shocks.
2. Authority and Asymmetric Information. Decision-making and bargaining are costly under asymmetric
information. In this case, contract form can affect performance.
3. Reliance. Once a worker-firm match has been formed, a contract is needed to ensure that each party
makes the appropriate investments into the relationship.
What makes the study of employment contracts difficult is that every relationship has elements of these
three ingredients. In particular, teasing out the empirical implications of these models has proven difficult.
Nonetheless, much of the structure of the legal rules governing employment can be understood as an attempt
to address risk, information asymmetries, or hold-up.
3.2.1

Insurance

We shall illustrate these ideas using a simple three-period employment model. Suppose that in period 0 the
firm offers the worker a long-term employment contract C, which the worker can either accept or reject. If
the worker does not accept the contract, then in period 1 she will earn w10 and in period 2 she will earn ω20 ,
28

which is a random variable with mean m02 and variance σ 2 . We will let the realized value of ω20 be w20 . The
utility of the worker in this outside market is given by:
U 0 = u(w10 ) + δE{u(ω20 )}.
The expected lifetime income of the worker is:
W 0 = w10 + δm02 .
Given that the worker is risk-averse, a risk-neutral firm who wished to hire this worker for two periods could do so by paying a fixed wage w∗ per period at an expect cost of W 0 − δ 2r σ 2 , where r =
−u00 (m)/u0 (m) is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion for the worker.40 Let us consider the case in
which the owner of the firm is assumed to be able to fully diversify market risk, and hence is able to offer
the worker a perfect risk-sharing contract. The firm would be willing to do this because she can offer a wage
contract to a risk-averse worker that has a lower expected cost than the worker’s market alternative.
Azariadis (1975) introduced the term implicit contract to describe the idea that firms voluntarily smooth
workers’ income over time in order to lower expected labor costs. Azariadis (1975) and Baily (1974) both
observe that the enforceability of these contracts depends upon the existence of turnover costs, otherwise
under at-will employment wages would necessarily equal the market alternative. Recently, Blanchard and
Tirole (2008) have revisited this issue and suggested that mandated severance pay may enhance the risksharing properties of labor contracts. They explore the question of how to optimally design minimum wages
and severance pay to insure risk-averse workers. There is little role for the law in their model beyond
enforcing the agreed-upon severance payments.
We consider a two-period extension of their model that will allow for a substantive role for the courts.
Rather than supposing that the employment contract is implicit, I follow Blanchard and Tirole (2008) and
consider the problem of implementing the optimal allocation. Suppose that in period 0 it is efficient for the
worker to contract with a firm with the following profit function:
Π = y1 − w1 + E {ψ2 − ω2 } ,
where y1 and ψ2 is firm output in periods 1 and 2, while w1 and ω2 is the wage paid to the worker in each
period. Again, Greek letters refer to random variables.
We begin with a case that entails no enforcement problems, and characterize the empirical implications
of the optimal allocation. In this case, we do not have any explicit treatments—rather, we wish to describe
the wage and employment profile of the worker (the y’s of the model) in relation to the worker’s outside options, the worker’s risk preferences, and the firm’s productivity in each period (the explanatory X variables
of the model).
40

The wage is w∗ =

1
1+δ

`

´
W 0 − δrσ 2 /2 .

29

The optimal allocation is the solution to:
max w1 ,ω2 ,e2 y1 − w1 + δE {e2 ψ2 − ω2 } ,

(2)

u(w10 ) + δE{u(e2 ω2 + (1 − e2 )ω20 )} ≥ u(w10 ) + δE{u(ω20 )}.

(3)

subject to:

In addition to wage payment each period, the optimal allocation must also determine the worker’s employment status in period 2, where e2 = 1 if employed at the firm and 0 otherwise. If the worker is not employed,
the she earns ω20 in the market, which is assumed to be paid to the worker. The next proposition characterizes
the first best:
Proposition 1. The optimal risk sharing allocation has the following properties:
1. Employment is ex-post efficient: e∗2 = 1 if and only if ψ1 ≥ ω20 (and zero otherwise).
2. The worker is fully insured: w1∗ = ω2∗ = w∗ .
3. Expected labor cost is equal to the worker’s expected future income less a risk premium that increases
with worker’s aversion to risk (r): (1 + δ)w∗ ' W 0 − δ 2r σ 2 .
Observe that this result provides an institution-free description of the optimal allocation that links the
characteristics of the optimal contract with potentially observable features of the worker, firm, and labormarket alternatives. In practice, there are a large number of institutions that have been created to insure
workers, including workman’s compensations, unemployment insurance, transfers within the household,
and so on. Rather than delve into the details of these institutions, one may ask the question whether or not
institutions are sufficiently rich that something approaching efficient risk-sharing occurs in practice.
Cochrane (1991) works out the implications of the complete risk-sharing model for consumption growth.
In our simple model, notice that the wage of a worker (here consumption is assumed equal to wage for
simplicity) is independent of whether she works for the current firm or takes up a market alternative (which
might mean unemployment). More generally, Cochrane (1991) observes that consumption growth should be
independent of idiosyncratic shocks. He finds that full insurance is not rejected for spells of unemployment,
loss of work due to strikes, and involuntary moves. However, insurance appears to be incomplete for long
illnesses and involuntary job loss. In recent work, von Wachter (2007) finds with German data that the
effect of job loss is temporary, with workers returning to their previous earnings in 5 years. Taking a similar
approach with data from India, Townsend (1994) rejects the perfect insurance model but does find evidence
of significant, albeit imperfect, risk sharing.
This work illustrates the usefulness of the insurance model in organizing consumption data. The work
does not test a causal relationship, nor does it describe a mechanism that would generate a relationship
between wages and risk attitudes. That mechanism could involve, for example, firms setting wage contracts
in advance and workers selecting into contracts that are most appropriate for their risk preferences. Alternatively, firms might negotiate contracts directly with the workers and use worker-specific information, such
as marital status, to set the wage contract. In addition, the implicit contract model does not explain wage
30

rigidity per se—and certainly not nominal wage rigidity (see Card and Hyslop (1997))—-only consumption
smoothing. If a worker has access to other insurance opportunities, say via their family, then their actions
might appear less risk-averse, implying that there may not be a stable relationship between an individual’s
risk preference and the wage contract.
Consider the question that Blanchard and Tirole (2008) ask, namely: How can one implement the efficient allocation using available legal instruments? The answer to this question can generate some predictions
about the effects of changes in the law or in the parameters of social programs such as unemployment insurance. These predictions are causal statements because the choice of law is a treatment; we can ask explicitly
what the causal impact of a policy change will be.
Insurance contracts require some form of enforcement when employment with the firm in period 2 is
efficient. Whenever ψ2 < w∗ the firm would like to dismiss the worker, while the worker would like to
quit whenever ω20 > w∗ . Given that it is always efficient to perform, the parties would never voluntarily
renegotiate the contract price. If the contract were between commercial parties for services, termination of
the relationship by either party could be followed by a suit for damages. Under the rule of common law the
standard remedy is expectation damages—harm caused by the contract breach. Let us suppose that there is
a cost k in pursuing a court case. If the employment contract is adjudicated under standard common-law
rules, we would have the following outcomes for contract termination41 :
State of the World

Breach Decision

Remedy

ψ2 < w∗ − k

Firm lays off worker

Worker paid D = w∗ − ω20

ω20 − k > w∗

Worker quits

Firm paid D = ψ2 − w∗

Observe that under this rule, if it is efficient for parties to stay together (it is always the case that ψ2 −
ω20

> 0), then there would never be breach. For example, suppose that the worker’s outside option is so

great that it is worthwhile to quit even while paying legal fees, namely ω22 − k > w∗ . Once she pays the
damages to the firm, her income would be:
w∗ − k − (ψ2 − ω20 ) < w∗ .
Hence, under the standard legal rule of expectation damages, an employment contract that fully insures
workers would be enforceable and would implement the efficient contract when turnover is not efficient. In
practice, however, these rules are rarely used in employment cases. The common-law rule is employment at
will, not expectation damages.
Parties might try to achieve a binding contract by stipulating that each party would pay a large fine F if
there is breach. In practice, requiring workers to pay large penalties to leave employment are not enforceable
in most legal jurisdictions—this would be akin to a slavery contract. One exception is requiring a worker to
41
I assume that the terms of the wage payment are enforceable, so it is only the decision to quit or layoff that is liable to legal
recourse. There is a well-known U.K. case, Rigby v. Ferodo [1988] ICR 29, House of Lords, that establishes the enforceability of
the wage payment.

31

pay for training she has received. In the case of professional sports, this goal is achieved by requiring teams
to pay a fee to acquire a player. This rule has become controversial, though, and was recently overturned by
the European Court of Justice.42
The case of sports teams is the exception. For most employment contracts, employees can leave at will.
There is literature, beginning with Harris and Holmström (1982), that explores the optimal wage contract
under the assumption that the firm cannot fire the worker, but the worker can leave at will. Under such a rule,
the optimal contract is downward rigid. It is fixed in real terms and readjusted upwards each time a worker
gets an outside offer. Beaudry and DiNardo (1991) suggest that this model can explain why individuals who
are hired during recessions are worse off in the long run than workers hired in boom periods. Chiappori
et al. (1999) point out, that there may be other reasons for this result, including holdup (which we discuss
below).

3.2.2

Asymmetric Information and The Employment Relationship

Consider the following extension of Simon (1951) employment model, allowing for task allocation ex post
in the presence of asymmetric information. Suppose that in period 2 the worker can be assigned to one of
two tasks, x ∈ {a, b}, and that the productivity of task x is ψ2x , which is assumed to be observed only by the
firm. In addition, there is a private cost of carrying out task x to the worker given by cx2 > 0, and which is
observed only by the worker. If we let x = 0 denote the outside option, with ψ20 = 0 and c02 = −ω, then the
respective payoffs to the firm and worker under task x are:
Πx = y1 − w1 + δIx {ψ2x − ω2x } ,
U x = u(w1 ) + δu(ω2x − cx2 ),
where Ix = 1 if x ∈ {a, b} and 0 otherwise.
Note that regardless of the contract, the optimal task allocation is given by:
x∗ (θ2 ) = arg max x∈{0,a,b} {ω20 , ψ2a − ca2 , ψ2b − cb2 }.
Let us first suppose that it is efficient for the worker and the firm to stay together both periods. Also
suppose that there is no variation in task productivity, but that the worker’s cost, cx2 , can vary. In this case,
the efficient solution is to allocate the choice of task to the worker, who will always choose the efficient
allocation. More generally, as Milgrom (1988) argues, this effect leads to an organizational structure that
limits the authority of the firm, so that within certain task groups individuals are given autonomy.
Given that the worker is risk-averse, the optimal solution entails a fixed wage and an allocation of
decision rights to the worker. If w∗ > ψ2a , ψ2b > ω20 + ca,b
2 , it is efficient for the worker to stay matched
with the firm, but the firm would prefer to lay the worker off rather than pay wage w∗ . Enforcing the
42

This is the so-called Boseman case. See Feess and Muehlheusser (2002) for a discussion.

32

efficient contract requires a stipulated severance pay that is sufficiently large but conditional upon worker’s
performance. Similarly, the efficient contract should ensure that the worker does not threaten to renegotiate
the wage contract in period 2. These points are summarized in the following proposition:
Proposition 2. If the firm is indifferent over task assignment (ψ2a = ψ2b ), then the optimal contract has the
following conditions:
1. The worker has the right to choose her preferred task.
2. The contract wage each period is decreasing with the worker’s risk aversion, increasing with minimum cost of effort and expected lifetime market income (w1∗ = w2∗ − min{ca2 , cb2 } ' (W 0 − δ 2r σ 2 −
δ min{ca2 , cb2 })/(1 + δ)).
3. If the worker leaves in period 2, then she pays a penalty P > ω20 − w2∗ + c. If the firm dismisses the
worker, it pays f > max{ψ2a , ψ2b } − w2∗ in severance.
This contract is very much like the contract for a tenured academic. The contract asks the professor to
carry out teaching duties but typically allows a great deal of discretion over how she teaches and the material
she will use. Second, the demand for the services of an academic is stable, and hence there is little benefit
from turnover. As a consequence, the academic cannot be fired. The optimal contract also precludes the
worker from leaving without paying a penalty, but this sort of provision is not typically observed (aside from
the sports contracts mentioned earlier). For academics, the resignation penalty is implicit, consisting in large
moving costs, lowering the incentives to leave. Note that a consequence of removing the penalty clause for
leaving is that the period 2 wage would be more responsive to the outside market, and as a consequence
the first-period wage would fall. Conversely, sometimes it is suggested that tenure be abolished. The
consequence of abolition would be to lower expected income in period 2, which in turn would raise period
1 wages.
In terms of empirical predictions, this result merely links X variables—the risk aversion of the worker
and job characteristics—to predicted contract choice. Hence, this proposition does not make any causal
claims, but predicts that there should be an association between measured risk aversion of the worker, job
characteristics, and turnover. It predicts that certain jobs, such as academic jobs, combine substantial job
protection with the freedom to control activities on the job.
In order to introduce a notion of just cause for dismissal, there needs to be a substantive role for the
firm in task allocation. The next case supposes that effort costs do not vary with the task, c2 = ca2 = cb2 ,
but the productivity of the tasks vary, ψ2a 6= ψ2b . Let us continue to suppose that it is always efficient to be
employed at the same firm for two periods. In this case, it is efficient to provide the worker with a fixed
wage contract, w1∗ = w2∗ − c2 . It is crucial that the worker and firm not negotiate the task allocation. If the
wage paid for each task is the same, and the firm has the right to make the task allocation x ∈ {a, b}, then it
will choose the most productive task. Hence, this contract is incentive-compatible in the sense that the firm
will make the most efficient choice even though she holds private information. In order to provide the firm
with authority over the worker, there must be a penalty associated with not following the firm’s instructions.
More formally, we have:
33

Proposition 3. Suppose that employment with the firm is always efficient. Then the optimal contract consists
of a fixed wage each period along with the following conditions:
1. The contract wage each period is decreasing with her risk aversion and increasing with cost of effort
(w1∗ = w2∗ − c2 ' (W 0 − δ 2r σ 2 − δc2 )/(1 + δ)).
2. Should the firm dismiss the worker without cause, the worker is paid f > max{ψ2a , ψ2b }−w2∗ in severance.
3. If the worker is indifferent over task assignment (c2 = ca2 = cb2 ), then she agrees to carry out the task
assigned by the firm; otherwise she is dismissed and pays a penalty .
This proposition describes the features of an optimal contract when the worker is risk-averse and separation is not efficient. It is useful because it captures some features of observed default rules in employment
law. Notice that the firm has authority because it has the information regarding the best task to carry out.
More generally, Aghion and Tirole (1997) have shown that authority should be allocated to the best-informed
individual.43 Dessein (2002) extends this point to look at the trade-off between communication and delegation, finding that delegation can be more efficient than communication when there is little conflict between
the preferences of the worker and firm.
The provision of insurance via wages does create potential conflict. The firm must have the right to
penalize workers who do not carry out their assigned tasks. But this power cannot be unchecked. For
example, the firm might try to renege upon the wage contract by assigning a worker very unpleasant tasks—
formally, those with a high cost of effort c2 —that would effectively cause the worker to quit. Such a case
might lead to litigation where the worker would claim constructive dismissal.44 Hence, in practice, such a
contract may still face significant litigation.
The results above suggest that if labor contracts are incomplete, with parties relying upon the courts
to set the default terms, then both propositions predict that a change from at-will to just-cause dismissal
will lead to lower wages and higher employment. Higher employment occurs because just-cause dismissal
is more efficient in these cases, and hence should increase employment.45 Wages are lower because the
worker faces less risk.
Note that the employment result does not fundamentally depend on worker’s risk aversion. The employment law we have discussed builds upon contract law, where the key issue is ensuring that parties deliver the
promised quality. Disputes arise when firms feel that workers have not performed as promised, or workers
believe they have performed as promised but the firm has not compensated or continued employment as
promised. This set of issues is legally distinct from the body of law that has developed to enforce insurance contracts, and accordingly the doctrines regarding damages in employment law rarely entail an explicit
discussion of risk.
Finally, there is literature, beginning with Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), that views the right of dismissal
43

See also Chakravarty and MacLeod (2009), who discuss the allocation of authority in the context of contract law. They show
that construction contracts carefully allocate authority between the buyer and seller to ensure efficient production.
44
This is a legal term of art in English law defined by the U.K. Employment Rights Act of 1996, § 95(1)(c). Even if an employee
resigned from her post, she can claim that she was forced to quit due to the employer’s action.
45
See MacLeod (2005) and MacLeod and Nakavachara (2007) for more details on how employment law may enhance efficiency.

34

as a necessary ingredient for effort provision. In their model, the firm offers a high wage and threatens to
dismiss the worker should she shirk. In this model, this results in an inefficient allocation due to the high
wages offered by the firm. However, as MacLeod and Malcomson (1989) show, the threat of firing is not
necessary for effort provision. The firm can use bonus pay, in which cost enforcement depends upon the firm
facing a cost should it renege upon a promised payment. MacLeod (2003) extends this result to the case
of a risk-averse worker employed with an imperfect performance measure.46 He shows that a necessary
condition for the implementation of an efficient contract is the ability to impose a cost upon firms that
renege on bonus pay. The good-faith exception to employment at will is one mechanism that may achieve
this condition.
3.2.3

The Reliance Interest

In a famous paper, Fuller, L. L. and Perdue, William R., Jr. (1936) introduced a conceptual framework that
has formed the basis of the modern law-and-economics treatment of contract law. The goal of their paper
was to provide a framework for the setting of damages for contract breach. They introduced three ways
to measure damages. The first of these, as discussed earlier, is expectation damages. This is the rule that
one would use if one wished to enforce an insurance contract because it ensures that each party obtains the
desired outcome while ensuring that matching is efficient.
The notion of expectations is not always well defined, particularly in the case where the value of the
worker’s performance is private information. Another way of measuring damages is the notion of restitution. This damages rule strives to restore the harmed party to the state she was in before the contract was
agreed upon. For example, suppose a worker sells her house and moves to a new city in order to take up
employment. If the potential employer reneges on the contract, restitution damages would entail paying the
harmed worker the costs of relocation so that she may return to her previous state.
A third measure of damages is the reliance interest. Take, for example, an employer that spends a
significant amount of money training a worker, as in the military providing pilot training. In that case, if
the worker were to leave employment early, the employer may ask the worker to repay part of the training
expenses.
The early literature on the economics of contract law, notably Rogerson (1984) and Shavell (1984),
consider the case in which parties make a sunk investment into a relationship, and then ask, which of
this damage rules leads to the most efficient level of investment. This work illustrates an important third
motivation for an employment contract: namely, to provide incentives for efficient relationship-specific
investments. The early literature assumed that the investment was observable by the courts, and hence
could be used to set damages. In an influential paper, Grout (1984) showed that if parties could not write a
binding contract, then there would be inefficient investment into the relationship. This model has become
the paradigm for the holdup problem, a term coined by Victor Goldberg (1976) to describe situations in
which the buyer or seller attempts to change the terms of an agreement after have there been significant sunk
46

See Levin (2003) and Fuchs (2006) for a more detailed analysis of the risk-neutral case in a repeated-game setting.

35

investments. Williamson et al. (1975) similarly make the point that relationship-specific investments imply
that the employment relationship must be carefully governed to avoid opportunistic behavior by the worker.
These points can be formally illustrated in our model by supposing that the employer makes an investment into capital k in period 1, while the risk-neutral worker makes a similar investment i. In this case, the
worker’s investment can be any activity that lowers the cost of supplying labor, which might include making
friends, investing in a new home, or acquiring skills on the job. Formally, the payoffs of the firm and the
worker would be:
Π = y1 − w1 − k + δE {e2 (ψ2 + y(k)) − ω2 } ,
U

= w1 − i + δE{ω2 + e2 v(i) + (1 − e2 )ω20 )},

where the notation is as above, except now worker productivity depends on investment k via y(k), and
worker utility depends upon her investment i via the v(i). It is assumed that y(0) = v(0) = 0, y 0 , v 0 > 0,
and y 00 , v 00 < 0, and that the efficient levels of investment are characterized by:
v 0 (i∗ ) = y 0 (k ∗ ) = 1/δρ∗2
where ρ∗2 is the probability that the worker and firm trade in period 2 under efficient matching (namely
ρ∗2 = P r[ψ2 ≥ ω20 ]).
Observe that the level of investment into a relationship depends upon both the discount rate and the
expectation that the relationship will continue. This implies that if a worker, for example, overestimates the
likelihood that an employment relationship will continue in period 2, this can lead to over-investment, and
an increased incentive to litigate discharge should she believe it to be unjustified.
The holdup problem arises when the worker and firm have no binding labor contract but instead negotiate
the wage in period 2 after the value of their outside options have been realized. Grout (1984) supposes that
period 2 wage is given by the Nash bargaining solution, which entails parties dividing evenly the gains from
trade to yield a wage:
w2 (ψ2 , ω2 , k, i) = (ψ2 + y(k) − v(i) − ω20 )/2.
When this wage is negative, parties will choose the outside option rather than trade. This rule ensures
efficient matching in period 2, but the returns from the specific investments are divided equally between the
worker and the firm. In consequence, we have underinvestment:
Proposition 4. In the absence of a binding employment contract, the worker and the firm choose investments
to satisfy:
y 0 (k nc ) = v 0 (inc ) = 1/δρnc
2 ,
∗
where the probability of employment in period 2, ρnc
2 < ρ2 , is less than the efficient level, and hence

investments are less than the first best (k nc < k ∗ and inc < i∗ ).
The motivation for Grout’s model is the legal rule in the United Kingdom that makes it impossible for
36

unions to enter into binding contracts with employers. The substance of the Trade Disputes Act of 1906
made it impossible for employers to sue unions, and hence to recover damages should a union strike.
To predict the causal impact of such a policy, one needs to work out what would happen if contracts
were enforceable. The holdup model supposes that investments are observable by the two parties but cannot
be used to set contract terms. Under this assumption, Hart and Moore (1988) show that parties would agree
to a contract with a stipulated wage w2 and severance payment s2 that would improve upon no contract. In
general, however, the contract will not implement the first best. This can only occur in this model if it is
always efficient to trade, and there is a contract that, with probability 1:
ψ2 + y(k ∗ ) − w2 ≥ −s2 ,

w2 + v(i∗ ) ≥ ω20 + s2 .
For this contract to work, one does need legal enforcement. If either the worker or the firm attempts to
modify the contract terms, the other party should be able to seek relief in court. This is not to say that parties
cannot, if they wish, renegotiate the contract by mutual consent. Given that both parties are better off under
the contract than on the outside market, however, the threat not to trade is not credible. Hence, the wage
would not be renegotiated in period 2, and both parties receive the full return from any specific investment.
Hart and Moore (1988)’s result that contracts can always improve matters holds only for the case of
specific self-investments: the investments that affect one’s own payoff but not the other party’s payoff. Che
and Hausch (1999) show that in the case of cooperative investments—that is, when one party’s investments
affect the payoffs of both parties—and when contract renegotiation cannot be precluded, then there is no
benefit from writing any contract. This result depends on the hypothesis that the courts cannot observe the
investments. Given the level of litigation in employment, one must conclude that parties do indeed find it
useful to write contracts. The issue is how the courts should enforce these contracts.
An interesting feature of the holdup model is that the efficiency of the relationship can be enhanced
in some cases with the appropriate allocation of bargaining power. This idea begins with the so-called
property-rights approach of Grossman and Hart (1986). They observe that even though contract may not be
explicitly conditioned upon certain events, the law can allocate residual decision rights. The example they
explore in detail is property, which in effect is a contract that gives the owner of property the right to carry
out any action that is not constrained by other contracts.
We have a similar issue in employment law. That is, under what conditions does the worker or the firm
have the right to leave a relationship based on information that may not be observable by the courts? Aghion
et al. (1994) show that if one can design contracts to allocate the bargaining power of parties, then one can
achieve an efficient allocation in the models of Gout (1984) and Hart and Moore (1988).47
These are useful abstract results that delineate conditions under which efficient allocations can be
47

These results build upon the implementation results of Moore and Repullo (1988).

37

achieved, but they do not specify the legal institutions that would achieve these allocations. MacLeod and
Malcomson (1993) explicitly explore the implications of the holdup model on wages over time when the
market alternatives are viewed as an outside option in the sense of Shaked and Sutton (1984). The outside
option principle has two parts.
First, if at the current, enforceable wage both parties are better off than at their next best alternative, then
threats to leave/layoff are not credible and hence the wage is insensitive to current market conditions. As
Howitt (2002) observes, this observation has the potential to provide a theory of rigid wages. Second, when
the current wage is worse than, say, the worker’s best alternative, then either the wage will be renegotiated
to be equal to this alternative, or the worker will leave.
Given these rules, MacLeod and Malcomson (1993) show the following:
1. When investments are general and there is a fixed cost to changing jobs or employees, then a fixed
wage contract that is renegotiated to match outside offers implements the first best.
2. In the case of two-sided self-investments, if it is possible to index wages so that the outside options
are binding only when separation is efficient, then such an indexed wage contract implements the first
best.
3. In the case of cooperative relationship-specific investments by the firm, an efficient allocation is implemented with a contract that leaves the worker indifferent between employment and taking up the
outside option. Conversely, if the worker is making the investment, then the efficient rule leaves the
firm indifferent between hiring the worker and taking up the outside option.
These three cases are not comprehensive, however. For example, Rogerson (1992) shows in a more general,
asymmetric-information setup that there is a wide variety of situations where there exist efficient contracts
when both parties are risk-neutral. The holdup model is attractive because it provides some predictions on
contract form when parties approximately satisfy these contracts.
What is particularly interesting about these results is that they are broadly consistent with the doctrine of
employment at will. The first case merely requires that the worker and the firm agree to some wage contract
that can be periodically renegotiated. In particular, the wage can be in real or nominal terms, and hence, as
Howitt (2002) points out, can explain nominal wage rigidity. Though the model also predicts that nominal
wages may be renegotiated up or down by arbitrary amounts, depending upon the outside market, a behavior
that is consistent with the evidence of Blinder and Choi (1990), McLaughlin (1994), and Card and Hyslop
(1997), but not consistent either with menu-cost models or the model with risk-averse agents.
These models do rely upon the legal enforcement of a contract wage that cannot be unilaterally changed
by one party, a principle that was affirmed in the United Kingdom by Rigby v. Ferodo (1987).48 We also
observe the use of indexed contracts, particularly union contracts: Cousineau et al. (1983) document the use
of indexed contracts by Canadian unions. Notice that the risk-sharing model would predict fixed real wages,
48

[1988] ICR 29, [1987] IRLR 516.

38

with corresponding penalty clauses to enforce the risk-sharing agreement. The fact that penalty clauses
are typically not enforceable, especially in the case of employment contracts, leads to the prediction that if
parties are going to index, then the indexed contract should approximately follow the market wage, which is
what we observe in Canada (and also in the case of long-term supply contracts, as documented by Joskow
(1988)).
Crawford (1988) shows that the holdup problem can also be solved when parties sign a series of shortterm contracts. Essentially, parties anticipate their future holdup and mitigate its effect by agreeing in the
current period to lower wages combined with higher investment. Card et al. (2010) find some evidence in
support of this prediction using Italian data. Given that these are unionized firms, this suggests that the firms
are able to reach efficient bargains.
The final case is implemented in the absence of any contract, and can help explain the puzzling fact
that contracts do not consistently have index terms. As Cousineau et al. (1983) have shown, about 50% of
unionized firms in Canada did not index their employment contracts during a period of high inflation. This
would imply that unions would have to constantly renegotiate their contracts to match market conditions.
Result 3 implies that this contract form provides first-best incentives for the firm to invest in capital and into
relationship-specific worker training. Acemoglu and Pischke (1998) also show that if there are significant
turnover costs, then firms may also invest into general human capital.

3.3

Implementing the Efficient Employment Contract in a Market

The literature on the employment contract has identified three broad economic motivations for an employment contract: insuring risk-averse employees, ensuring the revelation of relevant information for decisionmaking, and encouraging relationship-specific investments. Given these transaction costs, the next issue is:
What sort of labor-market institutions ensure efficient matching and trade?
In principle, one could construct a model that includes all the ingredients that have been identified as relevant for understanding employment. At a purely abstract level, Rogerson (1992) and Aghion et al. (1994)
have shown that under the appropriate conditions, one can construct an abstract mechanism that implements
the efficient allocation in a variety of cases, some of which combine risk aversion and asymmetric information. However, as Tirole (1999) discusses, we still do not know how to relate these abstract results to
observed institutions and contract forms. The literature on employment typically explores the implications
of regulation for a simple model that has one or at most two transaction costs. The literature on employment
protection has for the most part followed the lead of Bentolila and Bertola (1990) and Lazear (1990) in
supposing that an increase in labor protection is parsimoniously modeled as an increase in turnover costs.
Lazear (1990) observes that if complete contracts are possible, mandated severance payments can always
be undone via the labor contract. In that case, a law mandating severance payments would have no effect on
employment but would lower starting wages. Lazear carries out a study of 22 countries over a 29-year period
and concludes that increasing severance pay to 3 months’ salary for workers with 10 years’ experience leads
to a 1-percent reduction of the employment-to-population ratio. This is a reduced-form analysis that does
39

not take into account the complex inter-temporal optimization problem faced by firms. This is the goal
of Bentolila and Bertola (1990). They find that firing costs create complex inter-temporal incentives that
depend upon the state of the business cycle. Specifically, firing costs reduce labor demand in good times but
increase demand in bad times. Lower starting wages translate into lower firing costs, and hence firms have
greater incentives to hire workers during downturns.
The literature has mostly followed the lead of this work and modeled employment protection as a
turnover cost. The theoretical contributions have begun with one of the transaction costs (risk, asymmetric
information, or holdup) and then explored the implications of employment protection modeled as a turnover
cost. This allows one to explore the implications of treating a relationship with a particular policy choice.
If we suppose that in different relationships one of the three transaction costs is more important, then this
approach generates testable predictions of the effect of a law change for different relationships, which hopefully can be measured and hence form right-hand-side X variables.
I complete the section with a brief discussion of unions. From the perspective of transaction costs,
one can view unions as an alternative to employment law. This provides a system for the implementation,
enforcement, and arbitration of employment disputes between the firm and unionized employees.
Risk
Since the work of Azariadis (1975) and Baily (1974), the assumption of risk-averse workers has played an
important role in the development of labor policy. I showed above that if the main role of the labor contract
is to insure workers, then such a contract can be enforced with the use of expectation damages. Moreover,
the contract will have the feature that if a relationship is no longer efficient, then the firm has the obligation
to “sell” the worker’s contract to another firm. In the absence of bankruptcy constraints and asymmetric
information, such an institution would implement the first best.49
In practice, we observe contracts with features similar to this in the area of sports, but rarely elsewhere.
In the case of athletes, the quality of the player and hence the value of a trade is information that is easily
available to the teams in a league. Such conditions are not likely to be satisfied in general, however. There
is an active literature in macro-economics that explores the role of turnover taxes and mandated severance
pay when complete contracts are not possible. A seminal contribution in this literature is Hopenhayn and
Rogerson (1993). They assume that workers have access to complete financial markets and hence can
diversify firm risk. Under these assumptions they show that a turnover tax (or severance pay) is equal to one
year of wages leads to a 2.5% reduction in employment.
Their model assumes away market incompleteness. Hopenhayn and Nicolini (1997) consider the case
in which the firm provides the insurance services for the worker, but the worker is responsible for finding a
new job. The point is that the matching process is both costly, and is an important element in labor market
performance. They show that there should be a mandated unemployment insurance that is financed out of a
re-employment tax. Moreover, the level of insurance (or replacement rate, that is, the fraction of one’s wages
49

See Dye (1985), who uses this point to build a theory of contract length.

40

that are paid when unemployed) should fall with time. They show that this rule can result in a significant
increase in market performance. The result also illustrates one role for government intervention that arises
when there is a combination of risk aversion and moral hazard (worker’s search effort is not observed).
Notice that in the presence of fixed unemployment insurance payments, mandated severance pay provides an approximation to such a rule because it provides a high income to the worker early in her unemployment that is lost once the severance pay is spent. In the event of an employment dispute, even if the
worker wins the case, in most jurisdictions there is a mandatory rule that parties should mitigate their losses
from contract breach. In the case of an employee, this means that the employee should make a reasonable
effort to find alternative employment. Any damages due to the worker would be based upon lost income
given the new job.
Acemoglu and Shimer (1999) introduce a careful model of the matching process that generalizes many
of the previous matching process, and then derive the optimal unemployment insurance. If the agent is
risk-neutral, then there should be no unemployment insurance. This is equivalent to saying that employment
at will is efficient when workers are risk-neutral. However, when workers are risk-averse, the provision
of unemployment insurance increases wages, employment, and the capital-labor ratio. Pissarides (2001)
explicitly discusses the role of employment protection. He also shows that with search frictions it is optimal
to have unemployment insurance, and observes that employment legislation is an (imperfect) substitute for
employment protection.
Finally, the recent paper Blanchard and Tirole (2008) builds upon these themes to explore the implementation of an efficient severance pay—unemployment insurance system in the face of a variety of market
imperfections. There are cases in which there are limits on insurance and layoff taxes, ex post wage bargaining, and ex ante heterogeneity of firms or workers. The key insight is that not only do these various cases
affect the design of insurance system, but that a third party such as the government is needed in order to
implement the second-best optimum. In particular, if the state merely provided a set of courts that enforce
private agreements, this would not achieve the first best.
This body of work is carried out using relatively conventional assumptions regarding the operation of
the labor market. Together they suggest that arguments by legal scholars—such as Epstein (1984) or Morriss
(1995-1996)—that the efficiency of free markets implies that there is no role for government intervention
into labor markets are not correct as rhetorical statements. However, there are many issues that this literature
does not address.
First, these results depend upon workers having stable risk-averse preferences. There is a large body of
work that finds that the fine-grained predictions from a model with risk-averse preferences are not consistent
with the data. See Rosen (1985) and Hart and Holmström (1987) for important early evaluations of the
literature. More recently, Gibbons (1997) has argued that the standard agency model does not adequately
explain many features of observed contracts.
Some recent exciting research on the preferences of individuals may provide a way forward. ? show
that previous research measuring risk and time preferences do not adequately control for the risk inherent
41

in future rewards. In a follow-up paper, Andreoni and Sprenger (2010) explicitly measure risk and time
preferences. They find that individuals cognitively view choices as risky or not, but among risky choices
they have relatively flat attitudes toward risk. This is consistent with the fact that individuals want to avoid
risk but that there is no stable empirical relationship between attitudes toward risk and the form of the
optimal contract. This research is very new, and this latter point is yet a conjecture. If these results hold,
they may allow for much better models of contract and optimal unemployment insurance.
Asymmetric Information
Asymmetric information is ubiquitous in the employment relationship, which leads naturally to the question
of how employment law and other labor market-institutions should be designed to handle this problem.
Section 3.2.2 provided some examples of situations where asymmetric information can help explain both
contract form and the allocation of authority within a relationship. The difficulty is how best to mediate the
information problems that arise both within the relationship and between different potential matches.
The early literature focuses on the question of how contracts should be designed to ensure optimal matching when the firm has private information on worker productivity and the worker has private information
on alternative opportunities. In a classic paper, Diamond and Maskin (1979) compare expectation damages
(they call them compensatory damages) to privately negotiated liquidated damages in a buyer-search model.
When parties match, they obtain a gain from trade that is split evenly. The issue is how much they should
pay should they find a better match—this will affect the incentives to search and whether or not separations
are efficient. They find whether or not one damage rule is better than another depends upon the technology
of search; hence, in general, it illustrates that in a world with costly search it is difficult to obtain a clear
general prediction on the optimal default rule.
In the employment context, workers are rarely asked to pay for damages should they find a better match.
Hall and Lazear (1984) begins with this observation and compares three contract forms:
1. Fixed wage w is set in advance. Trade occurs only if both parties prefer trade to no trade at this price.
This contract leads to inefficient quits and layoffs.
2. Firm sets wage knowing worker’s productivity. This is essentially the monopsony solution: The firm
has an incentive to set wages above the marginal product of labor, so there are inefficient separations
whenever the worker’s outside option is between the wage and the worker’s marginal product.
3. Workers set wages (monopoly union model). In this case, the worker sets his wage above his outside
option, resulting in the firm inefficiently not employing worker when marginal product of worker is
greater than his outside option, but below wage demanded.
If information is symmetric, then in case 1 we should observe renegotiation and efficient trade. However,
as Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) have shown in a general mechanism-design framework, when there is
two-sided asymmetric information, efficient trade is impossible. Hence, as Hall and Lazear (1984) observe,
42

there is no simple contract that implements efficient trade ex post. Even in the absence of risk aversion or
relation-specific investments, there are limits to efficient trade that no legal rule or contract can overcome.
There are, however, situations under which efficient trade is possible. If a worker’s outside option is
known, then giving the firm all the bargaining power results in efficient separations, just as it resulted in
efficient task assignment in section 3.2. This is a reasonable assumption when the labor market is thick,
as would be the case for, say, casual day labor. In that case, at-will employment is an efficient rule. If
variations in outside options are due to variations in worker’s ability, then efficiency can still be achieved
with the use of piece-rate contracts, as Kanemoto and MacLeod (1992) show. Such a result is consistent
with the good-faith exception to employment at will that requires firms to follow through upon promised
performance pay.
If it is possible to measure firm productivity, then the efficient rule is to give the worker all the bargaining
power. In that case, the worker would offer a wage contract that would make the firm indifferent between
acceptance and rejection, with the result that trade would occur if and only if it is efficient. Gibbons (1987),
in a paper that complements Kanemoto and MacLeod (1992), shows that if the firm has bargaining power
and the workers have information regarding the difficulty of the job, then the resulting contract is inefficient.
If the workers were given all the bargaining power in this case, then the first best would be restored.
Though this point follows naturally from the question of how to implement efficient exchange under
asymmetric information, it is oddly missing from the literature on unions. Freeman and Medoff (1984)
made the point that unions can enhance efficiency via the “voice” mechanism, which can be interpreted as
solving the problem of asymmetric information. Beginning with McDonald and Solow (1981), there is a
literature that wonders why unions cannot bargain over both wages and employment to achieve an efficient
outcome.
One reason is that, in practice, we are typically in a situation with two-sided asymmetric information.
In that case, one cannot in general achieve the first best. However, if there are choices whose marginal
costs vary with the hidden information, then optimal contracts should incorporate this information. This
observation has lead several contributions that explain observed contracts as a solution to this problem. The
early work of Grossman and Hart (1981) shows that employment-wage policies of a firm are designed to
reveal underlying productivity, which can result in observed wages that are different from the true marginal
product of labor. Moore (1985) has refined this analysis, to show that when there is two-sided asymmetric
information with risk-averse workers, the extent to which the optimal employment contract exhibits over- or
under-employment depends upon the preferences of the workers, as well as the nature of uncertainty.
Aghion and Hermalin (1990) introduce a contracting model with asymmetric information and signaling.
They show that laws mandating employer-provided benefits can enhance efficiency. There are also papers
illustrating that several features of union contracts can be viewed as solving an information problem. Kuhn
and Robert (1989) show that seniority rules are a form of efficient price discrimination against the firm.
Laing (1994) provides a more general analysis of employment contracts with asymmetrically informed
agents, finding that a seniority layoff rule may improve efficiency. Levine (1991) suggests that requiring just
43

cause for dismissal risks attracting low-quality workers. Hence, it is argued that mandated just cause rules
may enhance efficiency. Kuhn (1992) observes that requiring mandatory notice of plant closings enhances
labor-market performance by ensuring that the firms inform workers in a timely fashion and allow them to
make more efficient separation decisions.
There is a recent literature that takes a reduced-form approach to employment protection based on the
idea that employment protection acts as a turnover tax that interacts with asymmetric information. Kugler
(2004b) observes that in the presence of turnover costs, firms favor more skilled employees, and hence try to
fill vacancies from currently employed workers. Hence, she finds that increases in employment protection
reduces the flow from unemployment. Pries and Rogerson (2005) introduce more structure to the process
regarding worker quality. They suppose that the formation of a match is both an inspection and experience
good. The former requires firms and workers to engage in explicit search to form matches, while the latter
implies that the signal of match quality becomes more precise with tenure. They explore several labormarket policies, including unemployment insurance, a minimum wage, and dismissal costs. They find that
dismissal costs lead to higher unemployment, lower turnover, and higher-quality matches. In contrast, Burguet and Caminal (2008) show that if there is contract renegotiation and uncertainty regarding match, then
turnover costs can enhance market performance. Guerrieri (2008) introduces a dynamic general equilibrium
model with asymmetric information regarding match quality. She shows that in a dynamic economy the first
best cannot be achieved with out government intervention in the form of a lump sum tax upon all workers.
Finally, Matouschek et al. (2009) formally consider the implications of contract renegotiation when there is
asymmetric information regarding outside options.
The extent to which asymmetric information might “explain” observed contracts, and justify the existence of unions or additional taxation depends upon the magnitude of the asymmetric information. Using
evidence from layoffs, Gibbons and Katz (1991) find that workers who lose jobs from a plant closing have
higher subsequent wages than those who are laid off. This is consistent with later work by Gibbons et al.
(2005), where high-skilled workers earn greater returns to their skill. This evidence supports the hypothesis
that labor market wages are a first-best approximation for worker ability. If it is true, then this would suggest
that ex post efficiency is best achieved with as little market intervention as possible.
This policy choice is no longer ideal if the labor contract must also ensure ex ante efficient investment.
We turn to this issue next.

Holdup
When worker’s productivity is common knowledge, but the cost of labor supply is private to the worker, then
it is optimal to allocate all ex post bargaining power to the worker. However, this is not in general ex ante
efficient. When unions and firms are in a long-term relationship, the firm will make investment decisions
a function of their expected return from these investments. Grout (1984) has shown that if the union (or
worker) has ex post bargaining power during contract renegotiation, then there is underinvestment.
44

Becker (1962), Mincer (1962), and Williamson et al. (1975) have emphasized that the employment
relationship typically entails relationship-specific investments. This raises two issues. First, can the employment relationship be governed in such a way that one has efficient investment combined with efficient
matching? Second, what are the implications for wages over time? Hashimoto (1981) introduces a model of
incomplete wage contracting with relationship-specific investment into worker skill. He shows that if parties
cannot condition the wage contract upon the worker’s or the firm’s alternative opportunities, then there will
be inefficient quits (as in Hall and Lazear (1984) discussed above). The result is a wage contract at which
the worker and the firm share the rents from firm-specific investments, as hypothesized by Becker (1962)
and Mincer (1962).
This result assumes that the worker and the firm can commit to a fixed wage contract. If that is not
possible, then the current wage is always set by ex post renegotiation, which can be expected to lead to an
ex post efficient allocation when information is symmetric. Grout (1984) has shown that this leads to the
worker’s capturing a positive fraction of the rent created by the firm’s investments, which in turn leads to
lower investment by the firm and slower employment growth. Grout’s goal is to model the implications
of a U.K. law making it impossible to enforce wage agreements between a union and a firm. Even when
such commitment is possible, Hart and Moore (1988) show that the fact that the worker and the firm can
voluntarily renegotiate a contract in the face of new information implies that in general the first best cannot
be achieved with a binding agreement.
However, Carmichael and MacLeod (2003) show that if parties can agree upon a fair division rule that
divides the gains to trade in proportion to the investments made by each party, then the first best can be
achieved even in the absence of a binding complete contract. Such a rule requires one party to penalize the
other should the agreement be perceived as unfair. In the context of union-firm bargaining, there is some
recent evidence that unions do retaliate when it is perceived that the wage bargain is unfair. Krueger and
Mas (2004) show that a dispute between Firestone and their union led to lower-quality tires. Mas (2006)
finds that the resale value of Caterpillar products fell for equipment built during a labor dispute, suggesting
again that labor unrest resulted in lower product quality. Finally, Mas (2008) finds that when police unions
in New Jersey got adverse rulings in arbitration that led to lower wages, the police reduced their effort as
measured by arrest rates.
These results fit in with an extensive literature, beginning with Akerlof (1982), that the extent to which
a worker believes that treatment is fair affects productivity (see in particular the work by Bewley (1999)
and Fehr and Schmidt (1999)). The holdup model provides an elegant explanation of why fairness is so
important. The economic model predicts that investment into a relationship is a function of the return from
such an investment. Note that after an investment has been made, however, it is a sunk cost, and hence
rational choice theory would predict that any agreement made after investments have been made should be
independent of these investments. Consequently, the only way compensation can be linked to investments
ex post is for parties to follow a social norm that links them—in other words, parties should believe and
enforce a norm of fairness that results in parties who invest more receiving more compensation. Carmichael
45

and MacLeod (2003) provide a general proof of the existence of such norms. See also the work of Hart and
Moore (2004), who argue that contracts can act as efficiency-enhancing focal points.
Such models have a potential to provide an efficiency-based explanation of why unions with bargaining
power can enhance firm productivity. The next section discusses some of the empirical evidence in this
regard. This perspective may also provide some insights into the decline in unionization that has occurred
in the private sector in the United States (see Farber and Western (2001)). The issue is whether or not there
exist alternatives to unions that enhance the productivity of the employment relationship. First, there is
the possibility that employment law is a substitute for union protection. At the moment, we simply do not
have any studies that explore this idea. Acemoglu and Pischke (1998) show that firm-sponsored investment
into training can be enhanced by the fact that firms have superior knowledge regarding worker productivity.
In Acemoglu and Pischke (1999), they also argue that increased employment protection enhances firmsponsored training. They suggest that firm-sponsored training is higher in Europe than in the United States
due to higher employment protection in Europe. We do know if the increase in employment protection in
the US has lead to more training. MacLeod and Nakavachara (2007) introduce a model with investment and
asymmetric information, and show that increased employment regulation in the US would lead to a more
productive relationship for highly skilled workers.
For lower-skilled workers, Autor (2003) has documented the fact that there has been an increase in
temporary help agencies in the United States. He finds that this is in part explained by the increase in
employment protection. However, Autor (2001) also documents that as an organizational form, temporary
help agencies play a significant role in screening and training of workers.

3.4

Summary

In this section, we have reviewed the literature on the theory of the employment relationship from the perspective of transaction-costs economics and contract theory. From this research, we learn that an optimal
employment contract is shaped by many factors in addition to the demand and supply of factors of production. The need to provide insurance to workers underlies many of the contributions, in part because this
model is quite elegant and can in many situations deliver clear predictions. One prediction that it does not
deliver is a theory of why employment relations can entail conflict, and why the allocation of bargaining
power has important efficiency consequences.
Models of asymmetric information naturally deliver a theory of conflict, and can explain why parties
for whom trade is efficient may fail to reach an agreement (see Crawford (1982)). The vast majority of
work on employment focuses on the case in which the asymmetric information concerns the outside options
for the worker and firm. Many of the employment disputes discussed in the previous section deal with
disagreements concerning what happened within the relationship. The model in Simon (1951) is a useful
starting point for thinking about these issues, but currently there is little work on the role of the courts in
finding facts in employment cases.50 The main message here, consistent with the work of Milgrom (1988),
50

See MacLeod and Nakavachara (2007) and Stahler (2008) for a start.

46

is that the efficient contract for task assignments is to give the informed party decision rights. Chakravarty
and MacLeod (2009) discuss how the law can achieve this goal in the context of construction contracts.
The way the law achieves the formal allocation of authority within an employment relationship has not been
explored in detail, however. Williamson (1991) makes the point that for the most part courts do not intervene
in the day-to-day management of employees. The question of how various employment law doctrines affect
this authority relationship is still an open question.
The provision of incentives to make relationship-specific investments gives the third motivation for
entering into a binding contract. What is interesting is that the contractual instruments here—specifically,
the allocation of authority and bargaining power—also play a central role in achieving efficient investment.
There is a need for work that helps us understand which, if any, of these theories provide the most useful
way to think about the employment contract. The theories by themselves are not typically framed in terms of
making causal inferences. Rather, they make predictions regarding how variations in match characteristics
(X variables) are related to observed features of the relationship (wages, employment, bonus or severance
pay).
There is some recent work by Cahuc et al. (2006) and Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) that uses the
holdup model of wage determination developed in MacLeod and Malcomson (1993) to empirically estimate
models of wage and employment determination. Cahuc et al. (2006) find that only highly skilled workers
have significant bargaining power, while low-skilled workers have none. Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002)
find in a panel with French data that personal characteristics tend to be more important for highly skilled
workers. These are not causal exercises, but they do suggest that employment law is more likely to be
important for highly skilled workers.

4

The Evidence

The theory of transaction costs provides an economic rationale for intervention into labor markets. Each of
the models we have discussed capture some features of the employment relationship that seem empirically
plausible. The next step is to see whether changes in employment law do improve matters. We discuss
two sets of empirical results that illustrate a range of approaches. First, we review the literature on the
employment contract suggesting that there are likely to be mechanisms by which employment law and
unions affect the efficiency of labor markets. Second, we review the literature that asks to what extent
unions enhance productivity.

4.1

Employment Law

In terms of Rubin’s model, the unit of analysis for employment laws are typically governments. The most
common outcome variables are employment per unit of population, wages, the unemployment rate, and GDP
growth. The issue then is, how does a change in employment law change these outcome variables? This
is a very difficult question because many events occur along with changes in the law that make it difficult
47

to identify a causal effect. Surprisingly, the results tend to be relatively consistent. The majority of studies
find either no effect or a negative effect of increasing employment protection. The results of this work are
summarized in Table 2. We do not discuss all of these papers, but note that they can be divided into three
broad classes: cross-sectional country studies, cross-sectional country studies with time, and the studies
from the United States and India that use within-country state variation.
A good starting point are the cross-country studies. Botero et al. (2004) gather data from a several
sources to construct measures of various types of employment regulation, including hours restrictions and
dismissal procedures. They find that stricter employment protection is associated with countries whose law
originated in the civil law tradition. For these countries, it is found that labor force participation is lower
and unemployment is higher. Of course, these statements are not causal, but rather say that there is a covariation between legal origins and employment performance. Djankov et al. (2003) show that civil codes
make it more costly to use the courts for contract enforcement, but even this evidence is not necessarily
causal. For example, if judges in civil law countries are more corrupt, then the more bureaucratic rules may
be a response to this corruption. These basic results have recently be replicated by Djankov and Ramalho
(2009), and hence there appears to be a relationship. The question is, why?
A natural way to control for cross-country variations is to use variation over time in laws. Early studies
along these lines include the influential work of OECD (1993). They found that employment protection
increased jobless duration. In subsequent work, the OECD (2003) finds that employment protection is
often insignificant, but is associated with increased unemployment for prime-age males. These, like the
cross-section studies, must construct measures of employment protection that are meaningful in different
countries. The difficulty, as we see in Table 3, is that there are a large number of possible laws, each of
which get implemented in an idiosyncratic fashion. One way to deal with this complexity is to have a more
narrow study of a law change. A series of studies by Kugler (1999), Kugler (2004a), and Kugler (2005) uses
the 1990 market-based reforms in Columbia. Kugler finds that these reforms generally lead to more flexible
labor markets and lower unemployment.
Given that these changes occurred at a single point in time, this implies a true causal effect under
the hypothesis that other secular changes would not have produced this effect. One way to satisfy this
assumption is to narrow the analysis to a set of units that are more similar, but face changes at different
times. Besley and Burgess (2004) pioneered this approach using variations in employment law across states
in India. Given that all the units (states) are in the same country, this controls for legal origin. Using data
from 1958-1992 on employment law legislation, Besley and Burgess (2004) find that pro-worker legislation
lowers economic growth. Similar results have been replicated by Aghion (2008) and Ahsan and Pages
(2009). However, given the large cultural diversity in India, one might question the extent to which the law
is exogenous to other events in society.
Possibly, the most convincing studies on the effect of the law exploit the fact that in the United States
employment law is under state jurisdiction. One can then estimate the effect that state level changes in
exceptions to employment at will have on the labor market. These law changes for the 1983-95 period are
48

illustrated in Figure 1. As we can see, a large number of states adopted the implied-contract and publicpolicy exceptions during this time period. In this case, the identifying assumption is that U.S. states are
sufficiently similar that one can assume that the impact of the law in each state is similar. One then uses a
generalization of model 1:

yut = β > Xut + βl> lst + φut ,
where u denotes state. In most papers, the Current Population Survey (CPS) is used to measure employment
and wages by state. Bertrand et al. (2004) show that one cannot assume that the error term φut is i.i.d, and
one must allow for correlation over time. In practice this is achieved by adding state-specific time trends
and computing standards errors with clustering of the errors at the state level (in effect allowing arbitrary
covariance over time within states, but assuming independent errors across states).

49

Figure 1: Pattern of Employment Law Adoption during 1983-1994
Implied Contract Exception
February 1983

Implied Contract Exception
December 1994

Public Policy Exception
February 1983

Public Policy Exception
December 1994

Good Faith Exception
February 1983

Good Faith Exception
December 1994

50

Miles (2000) is an early study by a legal scholar who carefully ensured that employment law is correctly
coded. This can be difficult in the United States because law is created by both the courts and the states.
He finds very little effect on employment from any of the law variables, but finds that the implied contract
exception leads to an increase in temporary employment, consistent with the later work of Autor (2003).
Autor et al. (2004) and Autor et al. (2006) further refine the law variables used by Miles (2000), finding that
the implied-contract exception leads to a robust reduction in state employment, but that the public-policy
and good-faith exceptions have no effect.
The theory discussed above predicts that the effect of the law depends upon the characteristics of the
employment relationship. In particular, if hold-up is the transaction cost most responsible for the creation
of employment law, then we would expect the law to have more effect on matches with higher levels of
relationship-specific investment. This idea motivates the work of MacLeod and Nakavachara (2007). They
match the CPS job training supplement that measures the amount of skill in a job with occupation code to
divide occupations in the low, middle, and high skill. They then use the data created by Autor et al. (2004)
to explore the effect of relating skill requirement with the law. They find that the negative effects of the
implied contract and good faith exceptions tend to be concentrated in low-skill (high-turnover) jobs. In fact,
the good faith exception has a positive effect on employment for high-skill workers.
Though this appears to be at odds with the previous literature, it should be noted that the earlier literature
focuses on the average effects, which obscures the effect on different subgroups. One of the messages from
the recent research on contract theory is that optimal contract form should be sensitive to characteristics of
the job, particularly for high-performance jobs. Consequently, we cannot obtain a complete understanding
of how the law works without taking into account its impact on different types of relationships. Both the
theory and the early work of Freeman and Medoff (1984) predict that if transaction costs are a significant
source of inefficiency in employment relationships, then there is a role for unions to enhance performance.

4.2

The Effect of Unions

Table 4 provides a list of studies that explore the effect of unions upon firm productivity. The early studies
by Brown and Medoff (1978) and Clark (1980b) explicitly recognize that unions may enhance performance
by increasing investments in firm-specific human capital, improving worker morale and other organizational
parameters. Clark (1980b) also observes that union contracts have many terms that address issues in the
workplace other than compensation. Brown and Medoff (1978) estimate a Cobb-Douglas production function using data from the May CPS merged with the 1972 Census of Manufacturers (COM). They find that
labor productivity is consistently higher at unionized firms. They are careful to point out that this result can
be explained by several factors, and while consistent with the hypothesis that unions enhance productivity,
they do not establish a causal link.
Clark (1980b) refines this approach by using a time series on U.S. cement plants, which allows one to
explore the effect of unions upon plants in the same industry, with precise control on capital equipment. Like
Brown and Medoff (1978), Clark finds that unions enhance productivity. One of the interesting findings is
51

that if one compares only new plants, then unionized firms have 3.6% higher productivity, but a lower
capital/labor ratio. This is consistent with the holdup model of Grout (1984), which predicts that firms will
invest less in physical capital in response to union bargaining power. Abowd (1989) uses stock market data
to conclude that unions and firms maximize total wealth.
Recently, developments have begun to focus on workplace organization.51 Black and Lynch (2001) find
that there is an interaction between workplace practice and unionization. When firms have more consensual decision-making in the workplace, then unionization is associated with higher productivity. Conversely,
unions are associated with lower productivity in firms that use “traditional” management practices. Doucouliagos and Laroche (2003) carry out a meta-analysis of a large number of studies on the productivity impact
of unions. They find that the evidence is broadly consistent with a positive-productivity effect in the United
States and a negative effect in the United Kingdom. This is an interesting observation given that the law is
quite different in the two jurisdictions. In the United Kingdom, unions cannot commit to a binding agreement, whereas this is possible in the United States. This difference in productivities is consistent with the
evidence, though we are far from having convincing causal evidence.
Even if unions enhance firm productivity, this does not necessarily translate into an increase in profits.
This depends on the bargaining power of unions, and the extent to which firms earn rents52 A common
strategy is to merge National Labor Relations Data on union certification with firm stock-market data to look
at the impact of certification on profits. Ruback and Zimmerman (1984) find that unionization causes a 3.8%
fall in equity value. Abowd (1989) finds that unionization can also reduce profits, but that this is an efficient
redistribution from firms to workers. These and similar studies must deal with the fact that unionization
is endogenous, and hence it is very difficult to estimate the causal impact of a union, independent from
other factors. DiNardo and Lee (2004) use a regression discontinuity design in which they compare the
outcomes in firms where the unions barely won certification, to ones where there was a close lost. Under
the hypothesis that the groups have similar characteristics, then differences can be attributed to union status.
Their finding is that the effect is essentially zero.
Lee and Mas (2009) use a similar approach, but obtain a better measure of abnormal stock-market returns. They find that unionization causes a 10% decline in abnormal returns. What is particularly interesting
(especially in the light of the efficient-markets hypothesis) is that the negative effect is largest a year after the
vote for unionization. This result is consistent with the body of research that looks at the impact of unions
on firm productivity (see Doucouliagos and Laroche (2009)). Even if unions truly enhance productivity, if
they lower profitability then we should expect firms to reallocate resources to jurisdictions with less union
penetration. Kuhn (1998) suggests that there seems to be little evidence of this in Canada, while Machin
(2000) finds that new firms in the United Kingdom tend not be unionized.
As Farber and Western (2001) documents for the United States, and Machin (2000) for the United
Kingdom, there has a been a large decline in unionization that is consistent with the hypothesis of excessive
rent extract by unions in the face of alternative, non-union, investment opportunities for firms. Yet, there
51
52

See Ichinowski and Shaw (2003), and the Handbook chapters by Bloom and Van Reenan (2010) and Oyer and Schaefer (2010).
See Ashenfelter and Johnson (1969) for a classic discussion of union-firm bargaining and associated empirical implications.

52

are still some areas with significant union presence. For example, workers in the entertainment industry
are unionized. This is an industry where highly skilled actors, writers, and musicians must move from job
to job, and where for each job there is a large number of potential candidates. In the absence of a union
contract, the wage would be set at the talent’s opportunity cost, which is likely to be far below the return
necessary to make it profitable to invest in his or her particular skill. In this case, a union has the potential
to increase the talent pool, though this is a hypothesis that has not been carefully tested.
The other area with significant union presence is the public sector. Ehrenberg et al. (1983) find that
unions do not significantly affect productivity for municipal librarians. Byrne et al. (1996) find that unionized police are less effective in dealing with crime. Eberts and Stone (1987) explore the effect of unions upon
teacher productivity, finding that on average unionized teachers increase test scores by about 3%. However,
their impact is more homogeneous, and they do not do as well with students with above- or below-average
ability. In a recent study, Lovenheim (2009) finds that teacher unions raise costs by about 15% while having
no impact on school performance.53
In summary, the evidence on unions is consistent with the hypothesis that they do have some bargaining
power with respect to the firm. As we discussed in the previous section, bargaining power may allow parties
to implement more efficient arrangements. The extent to which this is possible in practice is controversial.
It is clear that over the past century we have witnessed a large rise and fall in unionization rates in the
United States. The transaction-cost perspective suggests that unions can be viewed as substitutes for legal
enforcement of contracts and other forms of labor-market regulation. The fact that employment law in
the United States has become stronger in the last 30 years—in the sense of providing more protection for
disadvantaged groups54 and stronger employment protection—suggests that private law may be providing a
substitute for unionization.
In the case of the public sector, the skills acquired by workers are likely to be job-specific, and moreover
the demand for these skills are stable. This suggests that the optimal contract is of a long duration, which
may explain why public-sector unions are so prevalent. However, it is extremely difficult to measure publicsector productivity, and hence to evaluate properly the available labor institutions for these relationships.
Moreover, it is difficult to argue that public-sector unions are purely rent-seeking organizations. As Blank
(1994) documents, the public/private sector wage ratio has been falling in the United States, even while
private-sector unionization has been falling. If unions were the main source of wage growth for workers,
then we should observe the opposite. We do not have definite answers to any of these questions, and hence
there is much room for further research.

53

See Eberts (2007) for a general discussion of the role of teacher unions in education.
See Chay (1998), Oyer and Schaefer (2002), and Jolls and Prescott (2004) for studies of the labor-market impact of legislation
to protect civil rights and disabled individuals.
54

53

5

Discussion

There is a remarkable consensus that increased employment protection law tends to reduce employment
for individuals with less attachment to the labor market. Increases in employment protection law tend to
adversely affect matches at the margin. That being said, the economics research uses a relatively crude
representation of the law. We know virtually nothing about how specific legal rules interact with different
types of worker-firm matches.
At a policy level, employment protection entails changes to specific rules, such as the number of days’
notice for a dismissal, mandatory dismissal payments, and specification of the conditions under which a
protected employee may be dismissed. At the moment, policymakers have little guidance on how to set
these parameters, aside from the blanket recommendation to reduce them all.
Our discussion of the law illustrates that rules evolve in response to specific issues that need to be
addressed in the labor market. In the case of common law rules, as in the United States or United Kingdom,
a judge may create law in response to a specific set of facts, yet this new law affects all matches. This
process is not well understood. The benefit of common-law rule making is that it usually restricts itself
to the bounds of particular cases, and therefore is not speculative. However, though judges are aware and
are certainly concerned with the broad impact that a decision may have, there is no systematic feedback
mechanism for evaluating the consequences of these rule changes.55
In a global context, we see a great deal of competition between different legal systems. Firms may
opt out of the courts completely by relying upon mandatory arbitration. However, arbitration courts are
increasingly looking like public courts, where there is a long process of deposing witnesses and presentation
of volumes of evidence before a decision is reached. More generally, all adjudication systems consist of
evidence-collection and decision-making that complement the employment practices used by a firm. We
need to better understand the substantive role that these courts play in the complex problem of managing
human resources.56 The literature on employment law has focused on turnover costs. Yet, the discussions of
both the law and the literature on transaction costs suggest that information costs are key to understanding
the role that the courts play in handling disputes.
In addition, the focus on turnover costs fails to deal with the selective nature of court decisions. The
courts are a venue of last resort for a party who feels that another party has breached a duty. This implies
that the law is not applied equally to all individuals. All contracts in the United States are subject to the
rule of good faith and fair dealing, which is meant to protect individuals from others, such as managers who
blatantly breach their obligations. An issue that is rarely addressed in the economics literature is the extent
to which we need courts to protect individuals who face poor treatment from bad managers.57 The law, and
employment law in particular, exists to deal with specific extreme cases, and not the average employment
relationship. In contrast, empirical research on employment law is focused on the average effect.
55

See Krueger (1991), who suggests that the most important feature of the law for private parties is predictability.
See the chapters by Rebitzer and Taylor (2010) and Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) on human resource management.
57
For example, Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) show that job loss leads to measurable declines in health; hence, there are real
costs for workers who invest in a long-term match with a poor employer.
56

54

In this chapter, unions and labor law are discussed as alternative governance structures that may enhance the management of the employment relationship. In theory, allocating more power to workers can
be efficiency-enhancing when they have private information that can impact match quality. The difficulty is
that such power also results in more rent extraction by workers. The existing evidence is consistent with the
hypothesis that union power leads to lower profits for firms. There is also mixed evidence regarding whether
or not unions enhance match quality. Unions, like managers, are likely to vary in their ability to strike efficient agreements. Hence, we should not be surprised that there is mixed evidence regarding their effects
on match quality. The theory suggests that the rise and fall of unions in the private sector can be explained
by the extent to which unions enhance the productive efficiency of firms. At the moment we simply do not
have any evidence that explains the observed pattern.58
Finally, I have characterized elsewhere the literature on employment law as consisting of three solitudes
(see MacLeod (2007b)), namely, that the law, the economic theory of contract, and empirical labor economics each has its own aesthetic and group of scholars that have developed for the most part independently
of each other. One reason for this is that the law evolved to deal with the pragmatic issue of how to govern
the exchange relationship before the analytic tools were in place to study these phenomena. We can view
the existing structure of the law as evidence that the central ingredients of contract theory - the insurance
motive, asymmetric information and incomplete contracts - are empirically relevant concepts, though we do
not know to what extent they provide the best unifying framework.
Ensuring that the economic theory of contract is empirically relevant is not helped by the fact that the
theory evolved out of the need to extend the reach of general equilibrium theory, which itself developed from
the mathematically sophisticated models of Arrow (1951) and Debreu (1959). The important work of Hart
(1975) illustrates a fundamental shortcoming of this approach and shows that when markets are incomplete
we cannot expect competitive equilibria to achieve an efficient outcome. This work illustrates that simply
extending the model of general equilibrium to deal with incomplete markets is not likely to be a fruitful
path.
As discussed in section 3, the subsequent literature on game theory and mechanism design developed a
theory that is much more specific to the nature of individual transactions, and allows one to link transactions
costs to the observed structure of employment contracts.59 The fact that the law has a long and rich history
with its own mode of thought and language has made it difficult to link these abstract models of contract
theory to legal practice. The work of Oliver Williamson (1975) appeared before much of modern contract
theory was developed, and hence his analysis has roots in the legal tradition. As a consequence, his work
develops a language that has been influential in introducing the notion of a transaction cost to law and
economics, though at the cost of making it very difficult for the scholar schooled in modern theory to tease
out the empirical implications of the theory.
In contrast, the third solitude of empirical labor economics uses the model of a competitive market as
developed by Marshall (1948) and Samuelson (1947) to successfully organize vast quantities of data on
58
59

See Farber and Western (2001) for an explanation for the decline.
See in particular the recent books by Laffont and Maritmort (2002) and Bolton and Dewatripont (2005).

55

employment and wages, as we can see in the first three volumes of the Handbook of Labor Economics. The
goal of the empirical literature reviewed in section 4 is to establish a causal link between changes in law and
the union status of workers and the change in employment and wages. Such identification is more credible
the closer it is to approximating the treatment-control paradigm that is widely used in science. Hence, there
is a bias in this literature towards studying changes that occur over fairly short time periods.60 Yet the
economic theory of contract highlights the fact that individuals enter into agreements because they expect
that these relationships will be rewarding in the future, sometimes the distant future. The temporal distance
between cause and effect makes it very difficult to explore the implications of these models.
The essence of a contract is that we voluntarily give up freedom of action in the expectation that this
reduction will make us better off. It is a fact of life that these great expectations are often dashed, requiring
changes to our plans. The history of employment and labor law can be viewed as a sequence of changes that
were brought about in the expectation of improving the lives of workers in the long run. We certainly need
better ways to measure and evaluate these expectations, so that we may find the optimal trade-off between
opportunities of the moment and those that require durable investment and commitment. There is a growing
literature that is beginning to explore these issues and the interplay between law and long term outcomes.
Harrison and Scorse (2010) explore the effect of anti-sweatshop campaigns and find that they lead to higher
wages, with little employment lost. Fiess et al. (2010) explore the impact of informal labor markets upon
growth.
Finally, Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) show that job lost leads to higher worker mortality. This
research is very important because it illustrates why the pecuniary costs and benefits of job lost cannot fully
capture the effect of job lost upon individual well being. This can help explain why employment and labor
law have for centuries played such an important role in civil society, and why we need more research on the
interplay between law, employment contracts, and labor market performance.

References
A BOWD , J. M. (1989): “The Effect of Wage Bargains On the Stock-market Value of the Firm,” American
Economic Review, 79, 774–800.
ACEMOGLU , D.

AND

J.-S. P ISCHKE (1998): “Why do firms train? Theory and evidence,” Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 113, 79–119.
——— (1999): “The Structure of Wages and Investment in General Training,” Journal of Political Economy,
107, 539–572.
ACEMOGLU , D. AND R. S HIMER (1999): “Efficient Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 893–928.
60
See Lemieux and MacLeod (2000) for a study where we show that previous studies could not properly identify the effect
of unemployment insurance parameters because they ignore learning effects that take many years to work their way through the
system.

56

A DDISON , T EIXEIRA ,

AND

G ROSSO (2000): “The Effect of Dismissals Protection on Employment: More

on a Vexed Theme,” Southern Economic Journal, 67, 105–122.
AGHION , E . A . (2008): “The Unequal Effects of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License
Raj in India,” American Economic Review, 98, 1397–1412.
AGHION , P., M. D EWATRIPONT,

AND

P. R EY (1994): “Renegotiation Design with Unverifiable Informa-

tion„” Econometrica, 62, 257–282.
AGHION , P. AND B. H ERMALIN (1990): “Legal Restrictions on Private Contracts Can Enhance Efficiency,”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 6, 381–409.
AGHION , P.

AND

J. T IROLE (1997): “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,” Journal of Political

Economy, 105, 1–29.
A HSAN

AND

PAGES (2009): “Are All Labor Regulations Equal? Evidence from Indian Manufacturing,”

Journal of Comparative Economics, 37, 62–75.
A KERLOF, G. A. (1982): “Labor Exchange as Partial Gift Exchange,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97,
543–69.
A LCHIAN , A.

AND

H. D EMSETZ (1972): “Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization„”

American Economic Review, 62, 777–795.
A LLEN (1984): “Unionized Construction Workers are More Productive,” QJE, 99, 251–274.
A LLEN , S. G. (1986): “The Effect of Unionism On Productivity In Privately and Publicly Owned Hospitals
and Nursing-homes,” Journal of Labor Research, 7, 59–68.
A LTONJI , J. G. AND R. M. B LANK (1999): “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in Handbook of Labor
Economics Volume 3C, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 3143–3260.
A MIN (2009): “Labor Regulation and Employment in India’s Retail Stores,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 37, 47–61.
A NDREONI , J.

AND

C. S PRENGER (2010): “Risk Preferences are Not Time Preferences,” Tech. rep., Uni-

versity of California, San Diego, February.
A NGRIST, J. D., G. W. I MBENS ,

AND

D. B. RUBIN (1996): “Identification of causal effects using instru-

mental variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 444–455.
AOKI , M. (2001): Towards a Comparative Institutional Analysis, CAmbridge, MA: MIT Press.
A RROW, K. J. (1951): “An Extension of the Basic Welfare Theorems of Classical Welfare Economics,”
in Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, ed. by
J. Neyman, Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 507–532.
57

A SHENFELTER , O.

AND

G. E. J OHNSON (1969): “Bargaining Theory, Trade Unions, and Industrial Strike

Activity,” American Economic Review, 59, 35–49.
AUTOR , D. H. (2001): “Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills Training?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116, 1409–48.
——— (2003): “Outsourcing at Will: the Contribution of Unjust Dismissal Doctrine to the Growth of
Employment Outsourcing,” Journal of Labor Economics, 21, 1–42.
AUTOR , D. H., J. J. D ONOHUE , AND S. J. S CHWAB (2004): “The employment consequences of wrongfuldischarge laws: Large, small, or none at all?” American Economic Review, 94, 440–446.
——— (2006): “The Costs of Wrongful-Discharge Laws,” Forthcoming Review of Economics and Statistcs,
88, 211–231.
AUTOR , D. H., W. R. K ERR , AND A. D. K UGLER (2007): “Does Employment Protection Reduce Productivity? Evidence from US States,” The Economic Journal, 117, F189–F213.
A ZARIADIS , C. (1975): “Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,” Journal of Political Economy, 83, 1183–1202.
BAILY, M. N. (1974): “Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand,” Review of Economic Studies,
41, 37–50.
BAKER , T. (2003): Insurance Law and Policy, Aspen Publishers.
B EAUDRY, P. AND J. D I NARDO (1991): “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages over
the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 665–688.
B ECKER

AND

O LSON (1990): “The Effects of the NLRA on Stockholder Wealth in the 1930s,” ILRR, 44,

116–129.
——— (1992): “Unions and Firm Profits,” Industrial Relations, 31, 395–416.
B ECKER , G. (1962): “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy,
70, 9–49.
B EMMELS , B. (1987): “How Unions Affect Productivity In Manufacturing Plant,” Industrial & Labor
Relations Review, 40, 241–253.
B ENTOLILA , S. AND G. B ERTOLA (1990): “Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How Bad is Eurosclerosis?”
Review of Economic Studies, 57, 381–402.
B ERTRAND , M., E. D UFLO , AND S. M ULLAINATHAN (2004): “How much should we trust differences-indifferences estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 249–275.
58

B ESLEY, T.

AND

R. B URGESS (2004): “Can labor regulation hinder economic performance? Evidence

from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 91–134.
B EWLEY, T. F. (1999): Why wages don’t fall during a recession, Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
B IRD , R. C. AND J. D. K NOPF (2009): “Do Wrongful-Discharge Laws Impair Firm Performance?” Journal
of Law & Economics, 52, 197–222.
B LACK , S. E.

AND

L. M. LYNCH (2001): “How to compete: the impact of workplace practices and infor-

mation technology on productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 434–445.
B LANCHARD AND W OLFERS (2000): “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of European Unemployment: the Aggregate Evidence,” Economic Journal, 119, 1339–1382.
B LANCHARD , O. J. AND J. T IROLE (2008): “The joint design of unemployment insurance and employment
protection: A first pass,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 45–77.
B LANK , R. M. (1994): “Public Sector Growth and Labor Market Flexibility: the United States vs. the
United Kingdom,” in Social Protection Versus Economic Flexibiolity: is there a Trade-off?, University of
Chicago Press.
B LANPAIN , R. (2003): European labour law, The Hague ; Boston: Kluwer Law International, 9th and rev.
ed.
B LAU , F.

AND

L. K AHN (1999): “Institutions and Laws in the Labor Market,” in Handbook of Labor

Economics Volume 3A, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1399–1461.
B LINDER , A. S.

AND

D. H. C HOI (1990): “A Shred of Evidence on Theories of Wage Stickiness,” Quar-

terly Journal of Economics, 105, 1003–1015.
B LOCH , M. (1961): Feudal Society, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
B LOOM , N.

AND

J. VAN R EENEN (2010): “Human Resource Managment and Productivity,” in Handbook

of Labor Economics, Volume 4, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier, vol. 4, chap. 19.
B OLTON , P.

AND

M. D EWATRIPONT (2005): Contract Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

B OTERO , J. C., S. D JANKOV, R. L A P ORTA , F. L OPEZ - DE S ILANES ,

AND

A. S HLEIFER (2004): “The

regulation of labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1339–1382.
B REIMAN , L. (2001): “Statistical modeling: the two cultures,” Statistical Science, 16, 199–215.
B REYER , S. (2009): “Economic Reasoning and Judicial Review,” Economic Journal, 119, F215–F135.
59

B RONARS , S.

AND

D. D EERE (1994): “Unionization and Profitability - Evidence of Spillover Effects,”

Journal of Political Economy, 102, 1281–1287.
B RONARS , S. G.

AND

D. R. D EERE (1990): “Union Representation Elections and Firm Profitability,”

Industrial Relations, 29, 15–37.
B ROWN , C.

AND

J. L. M EDOFF (1978): “Trade Unions in the Production Process,” Journal of Political

Economy, 86, 355–378.
B URGUET, R.

AND

R. C AMINAL (2008): “Does the market provide sufficient employment protection?”

Labour Economics, 15, 406–422.
B YRNE , D., H. D EZHBAKHSH ,

AND

R. K ING (1996): “Unions and police productivity: An econometric

investigation,” Industrial Relations, 35, 566–584.
C ABALLERO , R. J., K. N. C OWAN , E. M. E NGEL ,

AND

A. M ICCO (2004): “Effective Labor Regulation

and Microeconomic Flexibility,” NBER Working Paper No. 10744.
C AHUC , P., F. P OSTEL -V INAY,

AND

J. ROBIN (2006): “Wage bargaining with on-the-job search: Theory

and evidence,” Econometrica, 74, 323–364.
C ARD , D. (1986): “Efficient Contracts with Costly Adjustment: Short-Run Employment Determination for
Airline Mechanics,” American Economic Review, 76, 1045–1071.
C ARD , D., F. D EVICIENTI ,

AND

A. M AIDA (2010): “Rent-sharing, holdup, and wages: evidence from

matched panel data,” Tech. Rep. 16192, NBER.
C ARD , D.

AND

D. H YSLOP (1997): “Does Inflation ‘Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market’?” in Reduc-

ing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, ed. by C. D. Romer and D. H. Romer, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
C ARMICHAEL , H. L.

AND

W. B. M AC L EOD (2003): “Caring About Sunk Costs: A Behavioral Solution

to Hold-Up Problems with Small Stakes,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 19, 106–118.
C HAKRAVARTY, S.

AND

W. B. M AC L EOD (2009): “Contracting in the shadow of the law,” Rand Journal

of Economics, 40, 533–557.
C HAY, K. Y. (1998): “The Impact of Federal Civil Rights policy on Black Economic Progress: Evidence
from the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 51, 608–
632.
C HE , Y.-K.

AND

D. B. H AUSCH (1999): “Cooperative Investments and the Value of Contracting,” Ameri-

can Economic Review, 89, 125–47.
60

C HIAPPORI , P.-A., B. S ALANIÉ , AND J. VALENTIN (1999): “Early Starters Versus Late Beginners,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 731–60.
C LARK , K. B. (1980a): “The Impact of Unionization On Productivity - A Case-study,” Industrial & Labor
Relations Review, 33, 451–469.
——— (1980b): “Unionization and Productivity - Micro-econometric Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 95, 613–639.
——— (1984): “Unionization and Firm Performance - the Impact On Profits, Growth, and Productivity,”
American Economic Review, 74, 893–919.
C OASE , R. (1937): “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, 4, 386–405.
C OCHRANE , J. H. (1991): “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,” The Journal of Political Economy,
99, 957–976.
C OOKE , W. N. (1994): “Employee Participation Programs, Group-based Incentives,Company Performance
- A Union-nonunion Comparison,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 47, 594–609.
C OUSINEAU , J.-M., R. L ACROIX ,

AND

D. B ILODEAU (1983): “The Determination of Escalator Clauses

in Collective Agreements,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 65, 196–202.
C RAWFORD , V. P. (1982): “A Theory of Disagreement in Bargaining,” Econometrica, 50, 607–637.
——— (1988): “Long-Term Relationships Governed by Short-Term Contracts,” The American Economic
Review, 78, 485–499.
DE

BARROS , P.

AND

C ORSEUIL (2004): “The Impact of Regulations on Brazilian Labor Market Perfor-

mance,” in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, The University of
Chicago Press.
D EBREU , G. (1959): Theory of Value, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
D ESSEIN , W. (2002): “Authority and communication in organizations,” Review of Economic Studies, 69,
811–838.
D I T ELLA , R.

AND

R. M AC C ULLOCH (2005): “The Consequences of Labor Market Flexibility: Panel

Evidence Based on Survey Data,” European Economic Review, 49, 1225–1259.
D IAMOND , P. A.

AND

E. M ASKIN (1979): “An Equilibrium Analysis of Search and Breach of Contract, I:

Steady States,” Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 282–316.
D I NARDO , J. AND D. S. L EE (2004): “Economic impacts of new unionization on private sector employers:
1984-2001,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1383–1441.
61

D JANKOV, S., O. H ART, C. M C L IESH , AND A. S HLEIFER (2008): “Debt Enforcement around the World,”
Journal of Political Economy, 116, 1105–1150.
D JANKOV, S., R. L A P ORTA , F. L OPEZ - DE S ILANES ,

AND

A. S HLEIFER (2003): “Courts,” Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 118, 453–517.
D JANKOV, S.

AND

R. R AMALHO (2009): “Employment Laws in Developing Countries,” Journal of Com-

parative Economics, 37, 3–13.
D OUCOULIAGOS , C.

AND

P. L AROCHE (2003): “What do unions do to productivity? A meta-analysis,”

Industrial Relations, 42, 650–691.
D OUCOULIAGOS , H.

AND

P. L AROCHE (2009): “Unions and Profits: A Meta-Regression Analysis,” In-

dustrial Relations, 48, 146–184.
D OWNES , E . A . (2004): “Labor Market Regulation and Employment in the Caribbean,” in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, The Unviersity of Chicago Press.
D UNFORD , B. B.

AND

D. J. D EVIN (1998): “Employment At-Will and Employee Discharge: A Justive

Perspective on Legal Action Following Termination,” Personnel Psychology, 51, 903–934.
DYE , R. A. (1985): “Optimal Length of Labor Contracts,” International Economic Review, 26, 251–270.
E BERTS , R. AND J. A. S TONE (1987): “Teacher Unions and the Productivity of Public Schools,” Industrial
& Labor Relations Review, 40, 354–363.
E BERTS , R. W. (2007): “Teachers unions and student performance: Help or hindrance?” Future Of Children, 17, 175–200.
E HRENBERG , R. G., D. S HERMAN ,

AND

J. S CHWARTZ (1983): “Unions and Productivity in the Public

Sector: A Study of Municipal Libraries,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 36, 199–213.
E HRLICH , I.

AND

R. A. P OSNER (1974): “An Economic Analysis of Legal Rulemaking,” The Journal of

Legal Studies, 3, 257–286.
E LMESKOV, M ARTIN , S. (1998): “Key Lessons For Labour Market Reforms: Evidence From OECD Countries’ Experience,” Swedish Economic Policy Review, 5.
E PSTEIN , R. A. (1984): “In Defense of the Contract at Will,” The University of Chicago Law Review, 51,
947–982.
E SLAVA , E .

A.

(2004): “The Effects of Structural Reforms on Productivity- and Profitability-Enhancing

Reallocation: Evidence from Colombia,” Journal of Development Economics, 75, 333–371.
62

FARBER , H. S.

B. W ESTERN (2001): “Accounting for the Decline of Unions in the Private Sector,

AND

1973-98,” Journal of Labor Research, 22, 459–85.
F EESS , E.

AND

G. M UEHLHEUSSER (2002): “Economic Consequences of Transfer Fee Regulations in

European Football,” European Journal of Law and Economics, 13, 221–37.
F EHR , E. AND K. M. S CHMIDT (1999): “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114, 817–68.
F EINMAN , J. M. (1978): “The Development of the Employment at Will Rule,” American Journal of Legal
History, 20, 118–135.
F ELDMANN , H. (2008): “Business regulation and labor market performance around the world,” Journal of
Regulatory Economics, 33, 201–235.
——— (2009): “The unemployment effects of labor regulation around the world,” Journal of Comparative
Economics, 37, 76–90.
F IESS , N. M., M. F UGAZZA ,

AND

W. F. M ALONEY (2010): “Informal self-employment and macroeco-

nomic fluctuations,” Journal of Development Economics, 91, 211–226.
F REEMAN (2002): “Institutional Differences and Economic Performance Among OECD Countries,” CEP
Discussion Papers.
F REEMAN , R. D. AND J. L. M EDOFF (1984): What do unions do?, New York, NY: Basic Books.
F RIEDMAN , M. (1962): Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, with the assistance
of Rose D. Friedman. 23 cm.
F UCHS , W. (2006): “Contracting with Repeated Moral Hazard and Private Evaluations,” Tech. rep., University of Chicago, Chicago.
F ULLER , L. L.

AND

P ERDUE , W ILLIAM R., J R . (1936): “The Reliance Interest in Contract Damages: 1,”

The Yale Law Journal, 46, 52–96.
G ARIBALDI , M. (1999): “Deconstructing Job Creation,” IMF Working Paper No. 99/109.
G IBBONS , R. (1987): “Piece Rate Incentive Schemes,” Journal of Labor Economics, 5, 413–29.
——— (1997): “Incentives and Careers in Organizations,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics:
Theory and Applications, ed. by D. M. Kreps and K. F. Wallis, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1–37.
G IBBONS , R.

AND

L. F. K ATZ (1991): “Layoffs and Lemons,” Journal of Labor Economics, 9, 351–80.
63

G IBBONS , R., L. F. K ATZ , T. L EMIEUX ,

AND

D. PARENT (2005): “Comparative Advantage, Learning,

and Sectoral Wage Determination,” Journal of Labor Economics, 23, 681–723.
G OETZ , C. J.

AND

R. E. S COTT (1980): “Enforcing Promises: An Examination of the Basis of Contract,”

Yale Law Journal, 89, 1261–1322.
G OLDBERG , V. P. (1976): “Regulation and Administered Contracts,” Bell Journal of Economics, 7, 426–48.
G OULD IV, W. B. (2004): A Primer on American Labor Law, MIT Press.
G REIF, A. (1989): “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade - Evidence on the Maghribi Traders,”
Journal of Economic History, 49, 857–882, times Cited: 79.
G ROSSMAN , S. J. AND O. D. H ART (1981): “Implicit Contracts, Moral Hazard,Unemployment,” American
Economic Review, 71, 301–307.
——— (1986): “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,”
Journal of Political Economy, 94, 691–719.
G ROUT, P. (1984): “Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash Bargaining Approach,” Econometrica, 52, 449–460.
G RUBB

AND

W ELLS (1993): “Employment Regulation and Patterns of Work in EC Countries,” OECD

Economic Studies, 21.
G UERRIERI , V. (2008): “Inefficient unemployment dynamics under asymmetric information,” Journal of
Political Economy, 116, 667–708.
H ALL , R. E. AND E. P. L AZEAR (1984): “The Excess Sensitivity of Layoffs and Quits to Demand,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 2, 233–257.
H ARDIN , G. (1968): “Tragedy of Commons,” Science, 162, 1243–1248.
H ARRIS , M.

AND

B. H OLMSTRÖM (1982): “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies,

49, 315–333.
H ARRISON , A.

AND

J. S CORSE (2010): “Multinationals and Anti-Sweatshop Activism,” American Eco-

nomic Review.
H ART, O. (1975): “On the Optimality of Equilibrium When the Market Structure is Incomplete,” Journal
of Economics Theory, 11, 418–43.
H ART, O. D. (1995): Firms, Contracts and Financial Structure, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
H ART, O. D. AND B. H OLMSTRÖM (1987): “The Theory of Contracts,” in Advances in Economic Theory:
Fifth World Congress., ed. by T. Bewley, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 71–155.
64

H ART, O. D.

AND

J. M OORE (1988): “Incomplete Contracts and Renegotiation,” Econometrica,, 56, 755–

785.
——— (2004): “Agreeing Now to Agree Later: Contracts that Rule Out but do not Rule In,” Tech. Rep.
10397, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
H ASHIMOTO , M. (1981): “Firm Specific Capital as a Shared Investment,” American Economic Review, 71,
475–482.
H ECKMAN , J. J.

AND

C. PAGÉS (2000): “The Cost of Job Security Regulation: Evidence from Latin

American Labor Markets,” Economia, 1, 109–154.
H IRSCH , B. T. (1991): “Union Coverage and Profitability Among U.S. Firms,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 73, 69–77.
H IRSCH , B. T.

AND

R. C ONNOLLY (1987): “Do Unions Capture Monopoly Profits?” Industrial & Labor

Relations Review, 41, 118–136.
H OLLAND , P. W. (1986): “Statistics and Causal Inference,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
81, 945–960.
H OLMES J R ., O. W. (1881): The Common Law, Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
H OPENHAYN , H. AND J. N ICOLINI (1997): “Optimal unemployment insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 412–438.
H OPENHAYN , H.

AND

R. ROGERSON (1993): “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General Equilib-

rium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 915–38.
H OWITT, P. (2002): “Looking Inside the Labor Market: A Review Article,” Journal of Economic Literature,
40, 125–38, tY - JOUR Accession Number: 0603937 . Geographic Descriptors: U.S.. Publication Type:
Journal Article. Update Code: 200205.
I CHINOWSKI , C.

AND

K. S HAW (2003): “Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders’ Estimates of the Value of Com-

plementary Human Resource Management Practices,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17, 155–180.
I MBENS , G. W. AND T. L EMIEUX (2008): “Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice,” Journal
of Econometrics, 142, 615–635.
I MBENS , G. W. AND J. M. W OOLDRIDGE (2009): “Recent Developments in the Econometrics of Program
Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47, 5–86.
JACKSON , M. O. (2001): “Mechanism Theory,” in The Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems.
65

J ENSEN , M.

AND

W. M ECKLING (1976): “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and

Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305–60.
J OHNSON , S., J. M C M ILLAN ,

AND

C. W OODRUFF (2002): “Courts and Relational Contracts,” Journal of

Law, Economics, and Organization, 18, 221–77.
J OLLS , C. (2007): “Employment Law,” in Handbook of Law and Economics, ed. by A. M. Polinsky and
S. Shavell, Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, vol. 2, chap. 17.
J OLLS , C.

AND

J. J. P RESCOTT (2004): “Disaggregating Employment Protection: the Case of Disability

Discrimination,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
J OSKOW, P. L. (1988): “Price Adjustment In Long-Term-Contracts - the Case of Coal,” Journal of Law &
Economics, 31, 47–83.
K AHN , L. M. (2010): “Employment protection reforms, employment and the incidence of temporary jobs
in Europe: 1996-2001,” Labour Economics, 17, 1–15.
K ANEMOTO , Y.

AND

W. B. M AC L EOD (1992): “The Ratchet Effect and the Market for Second Hand

Workers,” Journal of Labor Economics, 10, 85–92.
K APLAN , D. (2009): “Job creation and labor reform in Latin America,” Journal of Comparative Economics,
37, 91–105.
K ESSLER , D. P.

AND

D. L. RUBINFELD (2007): “Empirical Study of the Civil Justice System,” in Hand-

book of Law and Economics, ed. by A. M. Polinsky and S. Shavell, Oxford, U.K.: Elsevier B. V., vol. I.
KORNHAUSER , L.

AND

W. B. M AC L EOD (2010): “Contracts between Legal Persons,” in Handbook of

Organizational Economics, ed. by R. Gibbons and J. Roberts, Princeton University Press.
K RUEGER , A. AND A. M AS (2004): “Strikes, scabs, and tread separations: Labor strife and the production
of defective Bridgestone/Firestone tires,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 253–289.
K RUEGER , A. B. (1991): “The Evolution of Unjust-Dismissal Legislation in the United States,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 44, 644–60.
K UGLER , A. (2004a): “The Effect of Job Security Regulations on Labor Market Flexibility: Evidence from
the Colombian Labor Market Reform,” in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin American and the
Caribbean, ed. by J. J. Heckman and C. Pags, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
——— (2005): “Wage-shifting effects of severance payments savings accounts in Colombia,” Journal of
Public Economics, 89, 487–500.
K UGLER , A. D. (1999): “The impact of firing costs on turnover and unemployment: Evidence from the
Colombian labour market reform,” International Tax and Public Finance, 6, 389–410.
66

——— (2004b): “How do firing costs affect worker flows in a world with adverse selection?” Journal of
Labor Economics, 22, 553–584.
K UHN , P. (1992): “Mandatory Notice,” Journal of Labor Economics, 10, 117–137.
——— (1998): “Unions and the economy: what we know; what we should know,” Canadian Journal of
Economics-Revue Canadienne D’Economique, 31, 1033–1056.
K UHN , P.

AND

J. ROBERT (1989): “Seniority And Distribution in a 2-worker Trade Union,” Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 104, 485–505.
L A P ORTA , R., F. L OPEZ - DE S ILANES ,

AND

A. S HLEIFER (2008): “The Economic Consequences of

Legal Origins,” Journal of Economics Literature, 46, 285–332.
L AFFONT, J.-J. AND D. M ARITMORT (2002): The Theory of Incentives, Pinceton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
L AING , D. (1994): “Involuntary Layoffs In A Model With Asymmetric Information Concerning Worker
Ability,” Review Of Economic Studies, 61, 375–392.
L AZEAR , E. P. (1990): “Job Security Provisions and Employment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105,
699–726.
L EE , D. S. AND T. L EMIEUX (2009): “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” Tech. Rep. 14723,
NBER, Cambridge, MA.
L EE , D. S.

AND

A. M AS (2009): “Long-Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New Evidence from Financial

Markets, 1961-19991,” Tech. Rep. 14709, Princeton University, Cambridge, MA.
L EE , D. S.

AND

J. M C C RARY (2005): “Crime, Punishment, and Myopia,” Tech. Rep. 11491, NBER,

Cambridge, MA.
L EMIEUX , T.

AND

W. B. M AC L EOD (2000): “Supply Side Hysteresis: the Case of the Canadian Unem-

ployment Insurance System,” Journal of Public Economics, 78, 139–170.
L EVIN , J. (2003): “Relational Incentive Contacts,” American Economic Review, 93, 835–857.
L EVINE , D. I. (1991): “Just-Cause Employment Policies in the Presence of Worker Adverse Selection,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 9, 294–305.
L OVELL , S ICKLES ,

AND

WARREN (1988): “The Effect of Unionization on Labor Productivity: Some

Additional Evidence,” Journal of Labor Research, 9, 55–63.
L OVENHEIM , M. F. (2009): “The Effect of Teachers’ Unions on Education Production: Evidence from
Union Election Certifications in Three Midwestern States,” Journal of Labor Economics, 27, 525–587.
67

M ACHIN , S. (1991): “The Productivity Effects Of Unionization And Firm Size In British Engineering
Firms,” Economica, 58, 479–490.
——— (2000): “Union decline in Britain,” British Journal of Industrial Relations, 38, 631–645.
M AC L EOD , W. B. (2003): “Optimal Contracting with Subjective Evaluation,” American Economic Review,
93, 216–240.
——— (2005): “Regulation or markets? The case of employment contracts,” Cesifo Economic Studies, 51,
1–46.
——— (2007a): “Reputations, Relationships and Contract Enforcement,” Journal of Economics Literature,
XLV, 597–630.
——— (2007b): “Three solitudes in contract: Law, data, and theory,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy,
54, 606–616.
M AC L EOD , W. B.

AND

J. M. M ALCOMSON (1989): “Implicit Contracts, Incentive Compatibility, and

Involuntary Unemployment,” Econometrica, 57, 447–480.
——— (1993): “Investments, Holdup, and the Form of Market Contracts,” American Economic Review, 83,
811–837.
M AC L EOD , W. B. AND V. NAKAVACHARA (2007): “Legal Default Rules: the Case of Wrongful Discharge
Laws,” Economic Journal, 117, F1–F62.
M AC N EIL , I. R. (1974): “The Many Futures of Contracts,” Southern California Law Review, 47, 691–816.
M ARSHALL , A. (1948): The Principles of Economics, New York, NY: Macmillan.
M AS , A. (2006): “Pay, reference points, and police performance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121,
783–821.
——— (2008): “Labour unrest and the quality of production: Evidence from the construction equipment
resale market,” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 229–258.
M ATOUSCHEK , N., P. R AMEZZANA , AND F. ROBERT-N ICOUD (2009): “Labor market reforms, job instability, and the flexibility of the employment relationship,” European Economic Review, 53, 19–36.
M C D ONALD , I. M. AND R. M. S OLOW (1981): “Wage Bargaining and Employment,” American Economic
Review, 71, 896–908.
M C L AUGHLIN , K. (1994): “Rigid Wages,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 34, 383–414.
M ILES , T. J. (2000): “Common law exceptions to employment at will and US labor markets,” Journal of
Law Economics & Organization, 16, 74–101.
68

M ILGROM , P. (1988): “Employment Contracts, Influence Actitivities, and Efficient Organizational Design,”
Journal of Political Economy, 96, 42–60.
M INCER , J. (1962): “On-the-job Training: Cost, Returns and Some Implications,” Journal of Political
Economy, 70, 50–79.
M ITCHELL , M. W.

AND

J. A. S TONE (1992): “Union Effects On Productivity - Evidence From Western

United-states Sawmills,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 46, 135–145.
M ONDINO

AND

M ONTOYA (2004): “The Effects of Labor Market Regulations on Employment Decisions

by Firms: Empirical Evidence for Argentina,” in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and
the Caribbean, The University of Chicago Press.
M ONTENEGRO , C. E. AND C. PAGÉS (2004): “Who Benefits from Labor Market Regulations? Chile 19601998,” in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, ed. by J. J. Heckman
and C. Pagés, Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, chap. 7, 401–434.
M OORE , J.

AND

R. R EPULLO (1988): “Subgame Perfect Implementation,” Econometrica, 56, 1191–1220.

M OORE , J. H. (1985): “Optimal Labour Contracts When Workers Have A Variety of Privately Observed
Reservation Wages,” Review of Economic Studies, 52, 37–67.
M ORRISS , A. P. (1995-1996): “Bad Data, Bad Economics, and Bad Policy: Time to Fire Wrongful Discharge Law,” University of Texas Law Review, 74, 1901.
M YERSON , R. B.

AND

M. A. S ATTERTHWAITE (1983): “Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral Trading,”

Journal of Economic Theory, 29, 265–281.
NAIDU , S.

AND

N. Y UCHTMAN (2009): “How Green Was My Valley? Coercive Contract Enforcement in

19th Century Industrial Britain,” Tech. rep., Havard University.
N ICKELL , S. (1997): “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North America,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 55–74.
N ICOLETTI , G., S. S CARPETTA ,

AND

P. L ANE (2003): “Regulation, productivity and growth - OECD

evidence,” Economic Policy, 39, 9–72.
OECD (1993): Employment Outlook, OECD.
——— (1994): The Jobs Study: Evidence and Explanations, Paris, France: OECD.
——— (1996): Employment Outlook, Paris, France: OECD.
——— (2003): Employment Outlook, Paris, France: OECD.
69

O STROM , E. (2000): “Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 137–158.
OYER , P.

AND

S. S CHAEFER (2002): “Litigation costs and returns to experience,” American Economic

Review, 92, 683–705.
PAGÉS , C.

AND

C. E. M ONTENEGRO (2007): “Job Security and the Age-Composition of Employment:

Evidence from Chile,” Estudios de Economia, 34, 109–139.
PAULY, M. V. (1968): “The Economics of Moral Hazard,” American Economics Review, 58, 531–537.
P EIERLS , R. E. (1960): “Wolfgang Ernst Pauli. 1900-1958,” Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal
Society, 5, 175–192.
P ISSARIDES , C. A. (2001): “Employment Protection,” Labour Economics, 8, 131–59.
P OSNER , R. (2008): How Judges Think, Harvard University Press.
P OSNER , R. A. (1974): “Theories of Economic Regulation,” The Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, 5, 335–358, fLA 00058556 American Telephone and Telegraph Company Copyright 1970
American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
——— (2003): Economic Analysis of Law, 6th Edition, Boston, USA: Little, Brown and Company, 6th
edition ed.
P OSTEL -V INAY, F.

AND

J. ROBIN (2002): “Equilibrium wage dispersion with worker and employer het-

erogeneity,” Econometrica, 70, 2295–2350.
P RIES , M. AND R. ROGERSON (2005): “Hiring policies, labor market institutions, and labor market flows,”
Journal of Political Economy, 113, 811–839.
R EBITZER , J. B.

AND

L. J. TAYLOR (2010): “Extrinsic Rewards and Intrinsic Motives: Standard and

Behavioral Approaches to Agency and Labor Markets,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4, ed.
by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier, vol. 4, chap. 8.
ROGERSON , R., R. S HIMER ,

AND

R. W RIGHT (2005): “Search-theoretic models of the labor market: A

survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 959–988.
ROGERSON , W. P. (1984): “Efficient Reliance and Damage Measures for Breach of Contract,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 15, 39–53.
——— (1992): “Contractual Solutions to the Hold-up Problem,” Review of Economic Studies, 59, 777–793.
ROSEN , S. (1985): “Implicit Contracts: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 23, 1144–75.
70

ROTHSTEIN , M. A.
RUBACK , R. S.

AND

AND

L. L IEBMAN (2003): Employment Law, New York, NY: Thomson West.

M. B. Z IMMERMAN (1984): “Unionization and Profitability: Evidence from the

Capital Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 92, 1134–1157.
S AAVEDRA , J.

AND

M. T ORERO (2004): “Labor Market Reforms and Their Impact on Formal Labor

Demand and Job Market Turnover: the Case of Peruaa,” in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin
America and the Caribbean, The University of Chicago Press.
S ALINGER (1984): “Tobin’s Q, Unionization, and the Concentration-Profits Relationship,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 15, 159–170.
S AMUELSON , P. (1947): Foundations of Economic Analysis, Harvard University Press.
S CARPETTA , S. (1996): “Assessing the Role of Labour Market Policies and Institutional Settings on Unemployment: A Cross-Country Study,” OECD Economic Studies.
S CHWARTZ , A.

AND

R. E. S COTT (2003): “Contract Theory and the Limits of Contract Law,” The Yale

Law Journal, 113, 541–619.
S HAKED , A. AND J. S UTTON (1984): “Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining
Model,” Econometrica, 52, 1351–1364.
S HAPIRO , C.

AND

J. E. S TIGLITZ (1984): “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device,”

American Economic Review, 74, 433–444.
S HAVELL , S. (1984): “The Design of Contracts and Remedies for Breach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
99, 121–48.
S IMON , H. (1957): Administrative Behavior, New York: The MacMillan Company.
S IMON , H. A. (1951): “A Formal Theory of the Employment Relationship,” Econometrica, 19, 293–305.
S TAHLER , N. (2008): “Firing costs, severance payments, judicial mistakes and unemployment,” Labour
Economics, 15, 1162–1178.
S TEPHENSON , M. C. (2009): “Legal Realism for Economists,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23,
191–211.
S ULLIVAN , D.

AND

T.

VON

WACHTER (2009): “Job Displacement And Mortality: An Analysis Using

Administrative Data,” Quarterly Journal Of Economics, 124, 1265–1306.
T IROLE , J. (1999): “Incomplete Contracts: Where do we Stand?” Econometrica, 67, 741–782.
T OWNSEND , R. M. (1994): “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62, 539–591.
71

VON

WACHTER , T. (2007): “In the Right Place at the Wrong Time: the Role of Firms and Luck in Young

Workers’ Careers,” American Economic Review.
VOOS

AND

M ISHEL (1986): “The Union Impact on Profits: Evidence from Industry Price-Cost Margin

Data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 4, 105–133.
W ILLIAMSON , O. E. (1975): Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications, New York:
The Free Press.
——— (1991): “Comparative Economic Organization: the Analysis of Discrete Structural Alternatives,”
Administrative Science Quarterly, 36, 269–96.
W ILLIAMSON , O. E., M. L. WACHTER ,

AND

J. E. H ARRIS (1975): “Understanding the Employment

Relation: the Analysis of Idiosyncratic Exchange,” Bell Journal of Economics, 6, 250–278.
W OOD , H. G. (1877): A treatise on the law of master and servant, Albany, N.Y.: J.D. Parsons.

72

Autor et al. (2007)

Autor et al. (2006)

Amin (2009)

(2009)

Ahsan and Pages

Aghion (2008)

Addison et al. (2000)

journal

Author, year and

Costs

Census Bureau

1970 to 1999.

US states

the

data

tivity? Evidence from

from

tection by state courts in the US from

establishment-level

tection reduce produc-

the findings as suggestive but tentative.

growth in employment, however, leads us to view

techniques. Evidence of strong contemporaneous

factor productivity, indicative of altered production

in capital deepening and experience a decline in total

flows and firm entry rates. Moreover, plants engage

Wrongful-discharge protection reduces employment

Adoption of wrongful-discharge pro-

States,

No effect for public-policy and

United

ployment rates.

Implied-contract: 0.8-1.7% reduction in state em-

Does employment pro-

good-faith exceptions.

Implied-contract, public-policy, and

22% for the average stores.

good-faith.

United States

severity of labor laws.

dex based on stores’ perceptions about

Burgess (2004) and Regulation in-

Flexible labor regulations increase employment by

6.5% reduction in employment.

delicensing.

growth relative to pro-employer states following

Pro-worker states experience less employment

Employment protection is statistically insignificant.

Finding on employment

Laws

Wrongful-Discharge

The

of

dia

Employment in India’s

Retail Stores

Retail stores in In-

Labor Regulation and

Regulation index from Besley and

methodology.

from Indian Manufac-

turing

cording to Besley and Burgess (2004)

tions Equal? Evidence

Are All Labor Regula-

Employment Protection Legislation ac-

neutral, pro-worker, or pro-employer.

tling the License Raj in

Indian states

to Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 is

idence from Disman-

India

indicator of whether state amendment

Following, Besley and Burgess (2004),

As Lazear (1990).

EP Measure

of Liberalization: Ev-

The Unequal Effects

a Vexed Theme

Employment: More on
Indian states

As Lazear (1990)

The Effect of Dis-

missals Protection on

Sample

Title

Table 2: Employment Law Summary.

Wolfers (2000)

Blanchard and

(2009)

Bird and Knopf

(2004)

Besley and Burgess

Corseuil (2004)

de Barros and

journal

Author, year and

proximately 18,000
commercial banks

Laws

Impair Firm Perfor-

tries; 1960-1999; 8
five-year averages
of data

and Institutions in the

Rise of European Un-

employment: The Ag-

gregate Evidence

20 OECD coun-

The Role of Shocks

mance?

Discharge

US data from ap-

Evidence

Wrongful-

Do

from India

formance?

Hinder Economic Per-

Can Labor Regulation

Indian states

including increasing compensation for

data; 1985-1998

Labor Market Perfor-

time-varying
updated.

measure taken from Lazear (1990) and

from Nickell (1997);

Static and time-varying measures taken

Wrongful-discharge protections

neutral, pro-worker, or pro-employer.

Indicator of whether amendment is

dismissals without just cause fourfold.

caused many changes in labor codes,

establishment-level

ulations on Brazilian

mance

New constitution of 1988, which

EP Measure

Brazilian

Sample

The Impact of Reg-

Title

varying counterparts.

static EP (and UI) measures replaced by their time-

much weaker interaction effects and poorer fit when

ameliorate the effects of adverse shocks. In general,

bargaining and active labor market policies, which

tions. The exceptions are coordination of collective

the remaining institutional variables with two excep-

of adverse shocks. Essentially the same is true for

interaction terms point to amplification of the effects

Looking at unemployment, they find that shock-EP

creased costs on employers.

ous findings that wrongful-discharge laws place in-

overall profitability. The study corroborates previ-

is found to have a significant and negative effect on

addition, adoption of the implied contract exception

tract exception and the increase in labor expenses. In

lationship between the adoption of the implied con-

nomic conditions, the authors find evidence of a re-

during 1977-99. After controlling for local state eco-

discharge protections adopted by U.S. state courts

The authors estimate the effects of wrongful-

in daily employment in registered manufacturing.

istered manufacturing employment; 28.5% decrease

rienced lowered employment. 7.2% decrease in reg-

States that amended in a pro-worker direction expe-

ployment is statistically insignificant.

Effect of 1988 constitutional change on lagged em-

Finding on employment

MacCulloch (2005)

Di Tella and

Caballero et al. (2004)

Botero et al. (2004)

journal

Author, year and
85 countries

The Regulation of La-

for 60 countries

lation and microeco-

Based on Survey Data

Panel Evidence

tries: 1984-1990

Labor Market Flexibil-

ity:

21 OECD coun-

The Consequences of

nomic flexibility

New sectoral panel

Effective labor regu-

bor

Sample

Title

alternative

employment

varying measure with five data points.

indicator of flexibility (see text); Time-

World Competitiveness Report data;

Job security regulation.

dismissal procedures.

worked, cost of firing workers, and

contracts, cost of increasing hours

measuring

Employment laws index composed

EP Measure

less precisely estimated.

icant. The results for long-term unemployment are

ative throughout but not always statistically signif-

tween flexibility and the unemployment rate is neg-

creases average hours worked. The association be-

ticipation rate. Some evidence that flexibility in-

for males. Parallel results are obtained for the par-

group this effect is much stronger for females than

tion ratio across all specifications. By demographic

flexibility indicator and overall employment popula-

Statistically significant positive association between

in countries with weak rule of law.

growth. The same movement has negligible effects

ing off about one percent from annual productivity

speed of adjustment to shocks by a third while shav-

in countries with strong rule of law, cuts the annual

from the 20th to the 80th percentile in job security,

where regulations are likely to be enforced. Moving

creative-destruction process, especially in countries

The job security regulation clearly hampers the

effect on UE rate.

cial economy, negative effect on male LFP, positive

No significant effect on employment in the unoffi-

Finding on employment

Feldmann (2008)

Eslava (2004)

Elmeskov (1998)

Downes (2004)

(2009)

Djankov and Ramalho

journal

Author, year and

Trinidad,
Jamaica aggregate

tion and Employment

in the Caribbean

period 1982-1998

itability

Labor

Market

Regulation

the World

Performance Around

and

Business

2003

Economic Freedom of the World index.

forms. The increase in aggregate productivity post-

from Colombia

and reduce employment.

Labor market regulations increase unemployment

location of activity.

reform is entirely accounted for by the improved al-

businesses is less driven by demand factors after re-

nesses. In addition, the allocation of activity across

away from low- and towards high-productivity busi-

productivity that is largely driven by reallocation

Market reforms are associated with rising overall

gaining regimes.

highly centralized/coordinated or decentralized bar-

ment protection not statistically significant in either

ment but interaction effects are important. Employ-

Employment protection raises structural unemploy-

Statistically insignificant effect.

insights on the benefits of labor regulation.

developed countries and their study can produce new

reallocation: evidence

enhancing

Labor market regulations ratings from

Colombia for the

productivity and prof-

74 countries; 2000-

tudinal dataset for

on

tural

reforms

Market reforms in 1990s

Plant-level

The effects of struc-

longi-

observations, time-varying indicator.

Countries’ Experience

2) ranking, but modified to take account of changes since late 1980s; two

tries; 1983-1995

bor Market Reforms:

OECD (1994, Table 6.7, panel B, col.

Evidence from OECD

19 OECD coun-

Key Lessons from La-

data

Barbados,

Labor Market Regulament regime.

ica have made employment laws more rigid. These

Report

and

ible. Conversely, several countries in Latin Amer-

Competitiveness

reforms are larger in magnitude than any reforms in

cant reforms to make employment laws more flex-

from the Global

number of countries, especially in Eastern Europe

employment, especially among young workers. A

tend to have larger informal sectors and higher un-

Developing countries with rigid employment laws

Finding on employment

and West Africa, have recently undergone signifi-

Categorical measure of severance pay-

lished by Doing Business

Rigidity of employment index pub-

EP Measure

data

Indicators,

ment
informality

Develop-

ness database, the

developing countries
World

The Doing Busi-

Sample

Employment laws in

Title

(1993)

Grubb and Wells

Garibaldi (1999)

Freeman (2002)

Feldmann (2009)

journal

Author, year and

the

Work in EC Countries

1989

tion and Patterns of

ranking; Moment-in-time measure.

tries; 1980-1998

increases self(RFTC) increases (decreases) temporary work.
RTWA but not RDSM reduces temporary agency
work.

fixed-term contracts (RFTC), and temporary work agencies (RTWA).

employment, and reduces part-time work. RDSM

ORDW reduces employment,

cally significant in one of five specifications only.

association is less precisely estimated and is statisti-

(for 24 out of 27 cases), but in panel regressions the

measure and employment growth in cross section

There is a strong negative association between EP

sion of country fixed effects.

for unemployment do the results survive the inclu-

low unemployment–at least in terms of levels. Only

dom have high employment-population rates and

Countries with a high degree of economic free-

employment.

Stricter regulation generally appears to increase un-

Finding on employment

dismissal of regular workers (RDSM),

on overall employee work (ORDW),

Authors’ own indicators of restrictions

OECD (1994, table 6.5 panel B, col. 5)

with 6 data points.

dom (see text); time-varying measure

Fraser Institute index of economic free-

indicators.

EFW index as well as the component

Labor market regulations from the

EP Measure

21 OECD coun-

11 EU countries;

Job

countries;

1970-1990

23+

2003

Employment Regula-

Creation

Deconstructing

OECD Countries

Performance Among

ences and Economic

Differ-

Around

Institutional

World

ulation

Effects of Labor Reg-

73 countries; 2000-

The

Unemployment

Sample

Title

Kaplan (2009)

Kahn (2010)

(2000)

Heckman and Pagés

journal

Author, year and

from

American

bor Reform in Latin

America

tries

Firm

Job Creation and La-

14

level

coun-

Latin

data

market rigidity.

the World report as indicator of labor

1996-2001.

1996-2001

Kingdom,

Index from the Economic Freedom of

United

rary jobs in Europe:

ment of 4.27%.

benefit the most, with average gains in net employ-

ment. Firms with fewer than 20 employees would

erage net increase of 2.08 percent in total employ-

More flexible labor regulations would lead to an av-

temporary for permanent work.

market, appear rather to encourage a substitution of

way of jump-starting individuals’ careers in the job

ployment. Thus, these reforms, while touted as a

ever, there is no evidence that such reforms raise em-

regional unemployment rate is relatively high. How-

porary jobs. This effect is felt primarily when the

Portugal,

incidence of tempo-

Spain,

hood that wage and salary workers will be in tem-

create temporary jobs on average raise the likeli-

A robust finding is that policies making it easier to

Italy, Netherlands,

Household

for the OECD grouping.

employment are nearly always positive and stronger

Latin -American grouping. The effects of EP on un-

tistically significant. The exception is females in the

by demographic group are negative and mostly sta-

grouping reveals that the employment effects of EP

unemployment. Disaggregation by broad national

statistically significant effect of EP on longer-term

ployment depend on methodology and there is no

across estimating procedure. The results for unem-

fects for females and self employment vary widely

effect is almost double the average effect. EP ef-

ing half the total employment effect and the youth

females, the impact of EP on male employment be-

Similar results obtained for males and youth, but not

total employment for each estimating procedure.

EP effect is negative and statistically significant for

Finding on employment

employment and the

German,
Panel (ECHP)

reforms,

France,

tection

Community

European

Belgium, Finland,

pro-

Employment

text). Two period time-varying measure.

Labor

compensation for unfair dismissal (see

on severance pay, notice interval, and

Authors’ own cardinal measure based

EP Measure

Markets

American

Evidence from Latin

1980-1997 (max)

LAC and OECD;

curity

Regulation:

41 countries from

Sample

The Cost of Job Se-

Title

Lazear (1990)

Kugler (2004b)

Kugler (2004a)

Kugler (1999)

journal

Author, year and

Household

employment; 1988,
1992, 1996

bility: Evidence from

Unjust-dismissal provisions in U. S.

National
tudinal Survey of
Youth

How do firing costs af-

fect worker flows in a

world with adverse se-

20 countries; 19561984

Job Security Provi-

sions and Employment

lection?

missals.

Market Reform

measure.

with 10 years of service; time-varying

Severance pay due blue-collar workers

states.

and sped up the process of mass dis-

tended the use of temporary contracts,

the definition of “just” dismissals, ex-

reduced severance payments, widened

Colombia labor market reform of 1990

missal costs.

1990, which substantially reduced dis-

Colombian Labour Market Reform of

EP Measure

the Colombian Labor
Longi-

on

Labor Market Flexi-

data

hold

curity Regulations on

Survey (NHS)

tional

Na-

Colombian house-

labor

the

Colombian

The Effect of Job Se-

market reform

Colombian

from

unemployment:

Evidence

and

sections from the

turnover

costs

on

Repeated

The impact of firing

cross-

Sample

Title

reduces employment participation and hours.

Employment protection raises unemployment and

of a contract.

and those who lost their previous jobs due to the end

unemployed are generally smaller for union workers

relative effects of unjust-dismissal provisions on the

ployed workers relative to employed workers. The

reduce the re-employment probabilities of unem-

lemons. Unjust-dismissal provisions in U. S. states

hiring employed workers, who are less likely to be

As firing costs increase, firms increasingly prefer

reform periods.

in the unemployment rate between the pre and post

Reform contributed to about 10% of the reduction

period of study.

one quarter of the fall in unemployment during the

third of a percentage point, which accounts for about

ards implies a net decrease in unemployment of a

mal workers (uncovered). The increase of the haz-

workers (covered by the legislation) relative to infor-

increased after the reform by over 1% for formal

The exit hazard rates into and out of unemployment

Finding on employment

Montoya (2004)

Mondino and

Miles (2000)

Nakavachara (2007)

MacLeod and

journal

Author, year and

by

Firms:
Evidence

for Argentina

Empirical

cisions

on Employment De-

Regulations
firms

manufacturing

of

1994

kets

Market

gates from 1965 to

will and US labor mar-

Argentinian panel

labor market aggre-

tions to employment at

The Effects of Labor

US panel of state

Common law excep-

taxes and expected severance payment.

Measure of regulation, composed of

dismissal.

that limit the circumstances of worker

The exceptions to employment at will

ment.

Negative effect of rigid labor regulation on employ-

for this increase.

exception, in particular, appears to be responsible

the adoption of an exception. The implied contract

crease by a statistically significant 15% following

However, temporary employment is observed to in-

effect on aggregate employment nor unemployment.

The exceptions to employment are seen to have no

significant effects under informal-training criterion.

ing, school training, and formal training criteria. No

ployment of high-investment group under any train-

investment group, and 6.5-14.5% increase in em-

group, 0-3.4% increase in employment of medium-

9.6% reduction in employment of low-investment

across all criteria of investment. Good-faith: 7.1-

employment of low and high investment groups

training (0.0% level). Pubic-policy: No effect on

icant for any training (11.7% level) and school

hypothesis that all adoption variables are insignif-

other results are insignificant, but can reject null

investment group under informal training criteria;

teria; 3.0% reduction in employment of medium-

Implied-contract: 3.6% reduction in employment of

Finding on employment

Employment?

Implied-contract exception.

EP Measure

medium-investment group under school training cri-

United States

Sample

charge Law Enhance

Can Wrongful Dis-

Title

Nickell (1997)

Pagés (2004)

Montenegro and

journal

Author, year and

and 1989-1994

North America

Europe versus

ties:

1983-1988

20 OECD countries;

and

Labor Market Rigidi-

Unemployment

tection reduces short-term unemployment and increases long-term unemployment. Coefficient estimate for worker labor standards variable is statisti-

minimum wages, and employee representation rights (OECD, 1994, table
4.8, col. 6).

cally insignificant in unemployment regression.

tive but statistically insignificant. Employment pro-

ployment, employment protection effect is nega-

rate but not that of prime-age males. For unem-

Employment protection reduces overall employment

workers.

ers, and higher employment for older and skilled

rates for young workers, female and unskilled work-

Job security is associated with lower employment

Finding on employment

employment protection working time,

dards measure covering in addition to

5) ranking; also use of labor stan-

OECD (1996)(table 6.7, panel B, col.

future.

is hired, of dismissing the worker in the

the expected cost, at the time a worker

1998

ulations?

1960-1998

and Montenegro (1999) which captures

survey data; 1960-

Labor Market RegChile,

Job security measure derived in Pages

EP Measure

Chilean household

Sample

Who Benefits from

Title

OECD (1993)

Nicoletti et al. (2003)

journal

Author, year and

They

Affect

Unemployment?

Do

Regulations:

Market

Labor

and

Product

on employment is stronger in countries with an intermediate degree of coordination. The effect of the
static product market regulation variable is statisti-

authors’ evaluation of regulation and
market conditions in 7 energy and service industries, 1970-1998).

workers; moment-in-time indicator.

bined across blue- and white-collar

stage regressions. In each case, the negative effect

1999) and time varying (based on the

tries; 1979-1991

results obtain for the random effects and second

is both static (based on Nicoletti et al.,

Severance pay and notice periods com-

both intermediate and high coordination. The same

gree of product model regulation and

less duration, especially in southern Europe.

Employment protection has positive effects on job-

dination.

tistically significant for low and intermediate coor-

regulation variable is negative throughout, but is sta-

with the coordination measure, the product market

intermediate coordination measure. In interaction

mate for EP is only statistically significant for the

active form, however, the negative coefficient esti-

cally significant in the basic specification. In inter-

effect panel regressions, EP is negative and statisti-

cally significant and negative. Finally, for the fixed

effects are negative and statistically significant for

coordination of collective bargaining dummies, its

ployment. When EP enters in interaction with the

ated with a statistically significant reduction in em-

In initial fixed effects specification, EP is associ-

Finding on employment

The second is a measure of the de-

ing OECD (1999, Table 2.5) measure.

per se, and is based on the timevary-

regulatory apparatus. The first is EP

Two indicators of the stringency of the

EP Measure

19 OECD coun-

tries; 1982-1998

20 OECD coun-

Interactions

between

Sample

Title

Montenegro (2007)

Pagés and

?

journal

Author, year and
19 OECD countries;
1992-1997

Economic Protection

and Labour Market

Performance

Evidence from Chile

or in the wage employment rates of older workers.
Adverse effect of job security on youth employment
is driven by the link between severance payments
and tenure. Job security does not have a significant
impact on overall aggregate employment, participation or unemployment rates.

missal, and severance pay due to that
This index measures the ex-

event.

pected cost, at the time the worker is
hired, of dismissing a worker in the future.

workers. No decline in young self-employment rates

in the wage employment-to-population rate of young

Job security is associated with a substantial decline

are observed.

ment, some statistically significant negative effects

employment and the share of temporary employ-

ployment and for all demographic groups. For self-

have statistically insignificant effects for overall em-

ular employment variant). Further, changes in EP

tistically significant (overall EP measure and its reg-

are positive and in the case of selfemployment sta-

youth, and temporary employment. Otherwise they

tically insignificant for overall, prime-age female,

coefficient estimates for EP are negative but statis-

spect to regular employment). For employment, the

be considered as justified cause of dis-

the likelihood that a firms’ difficulties

1960-1998

of

Employment:

periods, compensation for dismissal,

household surveys;

than prime-age females, where the effect is negative

rary employment.

Age-Composition

EP do not affect changes in unemployment for other

disaggregations for regular and tempo-

Index combining information on notice

EP is statistically insignificant. Further, changes in

missals; in some specifications further

annual

indicator only). For all other demographic groups

rary employment and collective dis-

Chilean

nificant for prime-age male unemployment (overall

tors for regular employment, tempo-

and statistically significant (strictness of EP with re-

unemployment. It is positive and statistically sig-

cient estimate is statistically insignificant for overall

Irrespective of the form of the indicator, EP coeffi-

Finding on employment

all indicator and also separate indica-

late 1980s and late 1990s; single over-

OECD (1999, table 2.5) measures for

EP Measure

Job Security and the

1985-1990,

Sample

Title

Scarpetta (1996)

(2004)

Saavedra and Torero

journal

Author, year and

and

forms

Their

Re-

tries; 1983-1993

and

InstiA

Cross-Country Study

Unemployment:

tutional Settings on

Policies

Market

of

Labour

17 OECD coun-

1986-1997.

sector level data;

Peruvian firm and

Sample

Assessing the Role

The Case of Peru

Job Market Turnover:

Labor Demand and

Impact over Formal

Market

Labor

Title

(1994), Table 6.7, panel B, col. 2).

ular and fixed-term contracts (OECD

tion of dismissal averaged over reg-

OECD strictness ranking for regula-

Expected severance payment

EP Measure

nonemployment rate.

unemployment. Employment protection increases

ment, with stronger effects for youth and long-term

Employment protection raises structural unemploy-

ment level.

severance payment) has positive effect on employ-

Reduction in firing costs (as measured by expected

Finding on employment

Allen (1986)

Allen (1984)

(1989)

Abowd

journal

year and

Author,

Effect

of

Con-

settle-

added,

Union

dummy,

productivity in construction. The linkages are distinct from

This paper presents evidence on the effect of unionism on

of shareholders’ and union members’ wealth.

for the hypothesis that collective bargains maximize the sum

cisions (Hotelling’s lemma). The analysis provides support

valuations based on present value maximizing managerial de-

between these variables. This result is consistent with stock

returns, it is shown that there is a dollar-for-dollar tradeoff

timated. Using bargaining unit wage data and NYSE stock

unexpected change in collectively bargained labor costs is es-

The change in the value of common stock resulting from an

Owned

and

Publicly

Hospitals

Nursing-homes

and

Privately

In

Productivity

of

On

Effect

Unionism

The

homes, 1976

pitals and nursing

vately owned hos-

square feet

public ownership

union dummy *

positive but very imprecise.

of the union-nonunion productivity difference are generally

projects. Within the sample of private projects, the estimates

of union contractors is much greater in private than in public

ences union behavior. The results show that the productivity

nursing homes to determine whether public ownership influ-

within a sample of publicly and privately owned hospitals and

This paper examines the effect of unions on productivity

15 to 27 percent of this difference.

differences and, possibly, apprenticeship training account for

ferences are used to deflate value added. Occupational mix

22 percent when estimates of interarea construction price dif-

percent higher than nonunion. The estimate declines to 17 to

ductivity, measured by value added per employee, is 45 to 52

lower it. Using Brown and Medoffs methodology, union pro-

tivity, while jurisdictional disputes and restrictive work rules

ship training and hiring halls probably raise union produc-

Value

Fraction unionized

gained labor costs

in collectively bar-

Unexpected change

Finding on productivity

tive

Publicly and pri-

Value added

common stock

Change in value of

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

those studied previously in industrial settings. Apprentice-

industries, 1972

U.S. manufacturing

ments, 1976-1982

Contract

Sample

Are More Produc-

struction Workers

Unionized

Value of the Firm

the Stock Market

Wage Bargains on

The

Title

Table 4: Unions and Productivity

School

ing

ing unionized in the
1930s

NLRA on Stock-

holder Wealth in

(1990)

the 1930s

Firms at risk of beage excess return

events

ondary schools completed in 1972. An analysis that includes

completed in 1972

NLRA not been enacted.

firms was 15.9% lower than would have been expected had the

firms. Specifically, by April 1937, stockholder wealth in the

cally significant decline in shareholder wealth for the sampled

the passage of the NLRA caused a statistically and economi-

balance of power caused by the NLRA, the authors find that

changes in shareholder wealth as a measure of the shift in the

that were at great risk of being unionized in the 1930s. Taking

estimate of the impact of the passage of the NLRA on 75 firms

pact of specific provisions of the law, this study provides an

NLRA on labor-management relations has focused on the im-

Whereas most recent research examining the effects of the

sured in physical units and value added, respectively.

and from zero to 20 percent higher in school projects, mea-

terms of square feet of floor space completed per hour worked;

30 percent higher than nonunion productivity, measured in

union productivity in the office building projects was at least

bor quality, region, and building characteristics shows that

controls for differences in capital-labor ratios, observable la-

completed in 1973-74 and the other of 68 elementary and sec-

union and nonunion contractors in the construction industry

This study examines the difference in productivity between

elementary schools

NLRA and related

Union dummy

within two samples, one of 83 commercial office buildings

aver-

added,

Finding on productivity

pleted in 1973-74,

Cumulative

square feet

buildings

com-

Value

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

Commercial office

Sample

The Effects of the

Construction

and

Build-

in

Productivity

Office

and

Unionization

Title

Olson

Becker and

Allen (1986)

journal

year and

Author,

(1987)

unions reduce the effectiveness of some managerial practices undertaken to increase productivity, and that a poor
labor-management relations climate also reduces productivity.
These two factors account for almost 50 percent of the nega-

participative manfraction

agement,

unionized * performance

* incentive pay

fraction unionized

tive union impact.

on productivity. The author finds evidence suggesting that

tion unionized *

Plant

appraisal,

facturing plants for 1982 indicates a negative union impact

In
frac-

This study investigates several hypotheses as to how unions

squared,

Fraction unionized,

coverage, suggesting spillover effects on nonunion employees.

union profit effects occur largely in the first 10 percent of firm

union profit effects than product market concentration and that

vestments in intangible assets are a relatively greater source of

several profit measures, we find that quasi-rents from firm in-

industry-level and firm-level measures of unionization. Using

turing firm profits, extending earlier research by combining

This study examines the effect of unionization on manufac-

Manufacturing

Value added

Fraction unionized

Finding on productivity

may affect productivity. Analysis of data from 46 manu-

plants, 1982

Productivity

value,

price-cost margin

Excess

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

fraction unionized

Manufacturing

How Unions Affect

firms, 1977

Profits

(1992)

Bemmels

U.S. manufacturing

Sample

Unions and Firm

Title

Olson

Becker and

journal

year and

Author,

data covering the period of 1987-1993, using both within and
GMM estimators. It is found that it is not whether an employer adopts a particular work practice but rather how that
work practice is actually implemented within the establish-

union dummy *
profit sharing for
nonmanagerial
workers

nonmanagerial employees.

with more-educated workers or greater computer usage by

productivity. Finally, plant productivity is higher in businesses

tain more traditional labor management relations have lower

lar nonunion plants, whereas unionized businesses that main-

based compensation have higher productivity than other simi-

that promote joint decision making coupled with incentive-

establishments that have adopted human resource practices

ment that is associated with higher productivity. Unionized

Douglas production function with both cross section and panel

on productivity. The authors estimate an augmented Cobb-

tices, information technology, and human capital investments

Productivity

system),

manage-

(total

businesses, the authors examine the impact of workplace prac-

Using data from a unique nationally representative, sample of

ment

TQM

dummy

dummy,

tion Technology on

*

union

Union

Finding on productivity

quality

Prac-

Sales

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

tices and Informa-

Workplace

1987-1993

establishments,

of

The

(2001)

Impact

Manufacturing

Sample

How to Compete:

Title

Lynch

Black and

journal

year and

Author,

tions, 1962-1980

tion Elections and

(1990)

Firm Profitability

U.S. union elec-

Sample

Union Representa-

Title

Deere

Bronars and

journal

year and

Author,

date excess return

return; certification

Petition date excess
characteristics

Firm and industry

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

indicates the presence of union spillover effects.

the bargaining unit involved in the election. The latter result

in the most labor-intensive firms, independent of the size of

gains are the highest and unionization rates are the largest, and

equity losses are the greatest in industries where union wage

tation elections in the firm. The empirical results indicate that

sentation election, and the number of previous union represen-

election is held, the number of workers covered in the repre-

ence or absence of right-to-work laws in the state where the

fraction of workers organized in the firm’s industry, the pres-

intensity of the firm, the size of the union wage premium and

tion in shareholder equity losses can be explained by the labor

losses across individual election events. Cross-sectional varia-

there exists substantial variation in the magnitude of equity

mean effect of union elections on the equine value of firms,

declines in firm profitability. In addition to the significant

Union representation elections are associated with significant

Finding on productivity

Fraction unionized

that formal union-organizing activity significantly lowers a

Ruback and Zimmerman’s (1984) event study, which showed

U.S. manufacturing
industries, 1972

Trade Unions in the

Production Process

(1978)

conclusive.

not verify directly; attempts to relax these assumptions are not

result depends on two important assumptions which we can-

substantial positive effect on output per worker. However, this

tions for U.S. manufacturing, unionization is found to have a

ity in previous studies. Using state by two-digit SIC observa-

form is similar to that used to isolate the effect of worker qual-

unionization is included as a variable. The resulting functional

tivity, a Cobb-Douglas production function is modified so that

In order to estimate the effects of unions on worker produc-

Zimmerman.

times as large as the own-firm effects reported by Ruback and

cross-firm or spillover effects are included, are nearly three

that the total negative effects of unionization on profits, after

of other firms in the same narrowly defined industry suggests

NLRB representation elections at one firm on the share prices

and Zimmerman’s. Analysis of the impact of petitions for

itability using a data set and methodology similar to Ruback

native approach for estimating union spillover effects on prof-

union-organizing activity occurs. This paper presents an alter-

tially understated by focusing only on the firm in which the

union organizing on the wealth of firm owners may be substan-

performance of neighboring firms. Thus the total impact of

ity may also have sizable cross-firm or spillover effects on the

ization reduces a firm’s profitability. Union-organizing activ-

Value added

Petition date

Finding on productivity

Effects

Medoff

Brown and

Excess return

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

firm’s market value, provides compelling evidence that union-

tions, 1962-1980

U.S. union elec-

Sample

dence of Spillover

Profitability - Evi-

(1994)

and

Unionization

Title

Deere

Bronars and

journal

year and

Author,

(1980b)

Clark

(1980a)

Clark

journal

year and

Author,

on

A

Unionization

Productivity:

of the enterprise.

unionization can lead to productive changes in the operation

in order in interpreting the results, the evidence suggests that

cross-section and time series data. Although some caution is

itive union effect on the order of 6-8 percent is found in both

establishment level data from the U.S. cement industry. A pos-

tablishments. The effect of these changes on establishment

cedures governing the employment relation in organized es-

It is widely agreed that unionization affects the rules and pro-

Evidence

Micro-

tivity:

Union dummy

productivity, however, is unclear. This issue is examined using

try, 1973-1976

Produc-

and

Tons per manhour

Econometric

U.S. cement indus-

and procedures.

from a series of extensive changes in management personnel

unionization leads to productivity gains, deriving in large part

ization affects productivity. The empirical results indicate that

studies are designed to show the specific ways in which union-

also for the possible union impact on labor quality. The case

differences in variables such as the quality of management and

deals primarily with the problem of controlling for interfirm

policy and management practice. The econometric analysis

estimation and the traditional institutional analysis of union

and management officials to forge a link between econometric

cal estimation of the union impact and interviews with union

in the U.S. cement industry. The analysis combines statisti-

This study examines the effect of unionization on productivity

dustry, 1953-1976

Union dummy

Finding on productivity

through the use of time-series data on selected establishments

Tons per manhour

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

in U.S. cement in-

Six establishments

Sample

Unionization

Case Study

of

Impact

The

Title

(1994)

Cooke

Clark (1984)

journal

year and

Author,

Partic-

Per-

A

Company

formance:

The evidence indicates that employee participation programs

Comparison

in nonunion firms than in unionized firms.

ing programs contributed substantially more to performance

firms than in nonunion firms, whereas profit and gain shar-

contributed substantially more to performance in unionized

against data on 841 manufacturing firms in Michigan in 1989.

profit and gain sharing, and union representation is estimated

of the independent and interaction effects of participation,

ing firm performance. Examined at the firm level, a model

participation programs and group-based incentives in improv-

tively or negatively influences the effectiveness of employee

This analysis examines whether union representation posi-

operation and consequences of collective bargaining.

cators of firm behavior in order to draw inferences about the

of the theoretical analysis is the need to examine several indi-

of the union on economic performance. A clear implication

data on over 900 product-line businesses to gauge the impact

and production take place. This article uses microeconomic

mance depends on the particular context in which bargaining

and the impact of the union on a given measure of firm perfor-

Unionization works through more than one mediating factor

tion, exit and entry, dispute resolution and internal promotion.

and nonunion establishments in policies governing compensa-

Union-Nonunion

plan

profit/gain sharing

and

with

dummy

Incentives,

interacted

Union

work teams and

turing firms, 1989

Value added

Group-Based

ipation Programs,

Employee

Michigan manufac-

with collective bargaining recent research has revealed the

flated sales

and Productivity

Growth,

continuing existence of important differences between union

prise. In spite of the diffusion of many practices associated

of growth of de-

Profits,

on

the change unionization brings to the operation of an enter-

Impact

return on sales, rate

The

marked by dramatic episodes of confrontation that underscore

return on capital,

nesses, 1970-1980

The history of collective bargaining in the U.S. has been

Firm Performance:

Union dummy

Finding on productivity

Sales, value added,

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

Product-line busi-

Sample

and

Unionization

Title

Lee (2004)

DiNardo and

journal

year and

Author,

what unsuccessful at securing significant wage gains.

nomic impact on employers, because unions have been some-

employer to bargain with a certified union has had little eco-

at least in recent decades–the legal mandate that requires the

mates for wages are close to zero. The evidence suggests that–

finds small impacts on all outcomes that we examine; esti-

pared with those where the unions barely lost. The analysis

unions barely won the election (e.g., by one vote) are com-

ity, and wages. Essentially, outcomes for employers where

ization on business survival, employment, output, productiv-

gression discontinuity design to estimate the impact of union-

in the United States during 1984-1999, this paper uses a re-

sets that represent establishments that faced organizing drives

pay higher wages. Using multiple establishment-level data

at highly profitable enterprises that are more likely to grow and

to estimate in the absence of large, representative data on es-

1984-2001

ments

Economic impacts of unionization on employers are difficult

confounded by selection bias, because unions could organize

tions, 1984-1999

Vote share

Finding on productivity

Sector Employers:

Union-

Total value of ship-

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

tablishments with union status information. Estimates are also

New

U.S. union elec-

Sample

ization on Private

of

Economic Impacts

Title

et al. (1983)

Ehrenberg

Stone (1987)

Eberts and

journal

year and

Author,

Unions

data on 260 libraries, suggests that collective bargaining coverage has not significantly affected productivity in municipal

book and periodical circulation

libraries.

data. The empirical analysis, which uses 1977 cross-section

circulation,

total

wide variety of public sector functions, the focus of the paper

public sector. Although the methodologies are applicable to a
is on municipal libraries because of the availability of relevant

bor-

ologies to analyze the effect of unions on productivity in the

This paper develops and illustrates the use of two method-

percent.

all students, the average union productivity advantage is three

the view that unions tend to standardize the workplace. Across

cialized instructional techniques. This result is consistent with

gin, apparently because teacher unions reduce the use of spe-

nonunion districts are more productive by about the same mar-

dents who are significantly above or below average, however,

more productive for average students. For the minority of stu-

sure of output, they find that union districts are seven percent

and using achievement gains on standardized tests as the mea-

U.S. Department of Education. Holding resources constant

data from the Sustaining Effects Survey sponsored by the

The authors examine this question using individual student

Do teacher unions affect the productivity of public schools?

interlibrary loans,

of

requests,

Union dummy

Union dummy

Libraries

number

mation

Number of infor-

test

Finding on productivity

rowers, number of

A

li-

scores

Standardized

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

Study of Municipal

Public Sector:

the

braries, 1977

in

ductivity

Public

Municipal

of

pro-

grams, late 1970s

Educational

Sample

Unions and Pro-

Schools

tivity

and the Produc-

Teacher

Title

U.S. manufacturing
firms, 1977

Monopoly Profits?

(1987)

firms, 1972-1980

U.S. manufacturing

Sample

Do Unions Capture

United

Profitability

Coverage

States Firms

Among

and

Union

Title

Connolly

Hirsch and

(1991)

Hirsch

journal

year and

Author,

return on sales

Tobin’s q, rate of

return on capital

Tobin’s q, rate of

Fraction unionized

Fraction unionized

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

does industry concentration.

competition provide more likely sources for union rents than

on research and development, and its protection from foreign

found suggesting that a firm’s market share, its expenditures

that unions capture concentration-related profits. Evidence is

in concentrated industries, as suggested by the hypothesis

Moreover, they find that the union wage effect is not greater

centration produces monopoly profits for unions to capture.

thors conclude that there is no convincing evidence that con-

their analysis of 1977 data on 367 Fortune 500 firms, the au-

trated industries. From their review of previous studies and

ies that unions reduce profits exclusively in highly concen-

This paper challenges the conclusion reached in recent stud-

bership.

nies may help explain the recent decline in U.S. union mem-

The relatively poor profit performance of unionized compa-

the 1972-80 period, but vary considerably across industries.

rious union effects on firm profitability are sizable throughout

extensive control for firm and industry characteristics. Delete-

unionized company than in a nonunion company, following

ings are estimated to be about 10%-15% lower in an average

705 U.S. companies during the 1970s. Market value and earn-

at the firm level to examine union effects on the profitability of

This paper utilizes unique survey data on labor union coverage

Finding on productivity

(1988)

Lovell et al.

(2009)

Lee and Mas

journal

year and

Author,

Unions

of

GDP

Fraction unionized

Evidence

tic sector of the U.S. economy.

ship, using aggregate time-series data from the private domes-

model with GLS estimates of the exact, nonlinear relation-

bias by comparing GLS estimates of the linear Brown-Medoff

ductivity effect. The authors illustrate the magnitude of this

overstatement of the absolute value of the exact union pro-

approximation introduces a bias that necessarily results in an

squares (GLS) techniques. The authors demonstrate that this

resulting linear equation is estimated with generalized least-

the intrinsically nonlinear unionization variable is made; the

derive this model, a first-order Taylor-series approximation to

Additional

Some

have investigated the effect of unionization on labor productivity using a log-linear, Cobb-Douglas model of technology. To

on

Unionization

Following Brown and Medoff (1978), a number of studies

that would marginally increase the ease of unionization.

order to conduct counterfactual policy simulations of policies

"median voter" model of endogenous union determination in

magnitudes from the analysis, the athors calibrate a structural

to reconcile these seemingly contradictory findings. Using the

turns and the vote share in support of the union, which allows

a negative relationship between the cumulative abnormal re-

siderably smaller and close to zero. The analysis indicates

impact of close union election wins to close losses – are con-

regression-discontinuity design – comparing the stock market

Labor Productivity:

of

Effect
1948-1973

value of the firm equivalent to a cost of at least $40,500 per

1961-1999

The

study estimates show an average union effect on the equity

Financial Markets,

unionized worker. At the same time, point estimates from a

resentation elections matched to stock market data. Event-

bled sample of National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) rep-

equity value over the 1961-1999 period using a newly assem-

The authors estimate the effect of new unionization on firms’

from

Economy,

Election

Finding on productivity

Evidence

U.S.

Abnormal return

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

New

tions, 1961-1999

U.S. union elec-

Sample

on Firms:

pacts

Im-

Long-Run

Title

Stone (1992)

Mitchell and

(1991)

Machin

journal

year and

Author,

engi-

Lumber

(million

Union dummy

analysis, the estimate of union productivity is biased upward.

product quality and raw material usage are not included in the

nonunionized mills in fiscal year 1986. As predicted, when

sawmills were between 12% and 21% less productive than

a survey administered by the authors shows that unionized

tailed product attributes and inputs. An analysis of data from

fairly standardized commodity, lumber, and controls for de-

techniques. To avoid those problems, this study examines a

of unionized labor leads to less labor-intensive products and

ity and input usage-important omissions if the higher cost

to overestimate the productivity of union firms relative to

ern U.S. Sawmills

board feet)

nonunion firms due to inadequate controls for output qual-

sawmills, 1986

Productivity: Evi-

The authors conjecture that previous studies have tended

dence from West-

Western

Union Effects on

estimated effects being more negative in larger firms.

employee is found to depend significantly on firm size, the

around this average, and the union impact on value added per

cating the presence of closed-shop arrangements, are found to

mated using this measure, or using a dummy variable indi-

Average union non-union effects on labour productivity esti-

Engineering Firms

U.S.

of union presence

Several indicators

Finding on productivity

be statistically insignificant. However, there is some variation

In

value-added

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

British

Size

the period 1978-82

British

ization And Firm

52
neering firms over

Productivity

Sample

Effects Of Union-

The

Title

the

idence

(1984)

Salinger

Ev-

Profitability:

(1984)

firms, 1979

ization,

a firm to the replacement value of its physical assets, to mea-

This article uses Tobin’s q, the ratio of the market value of

ship

Relation-

monopoly rents.

and unionization provide evidence that unions do capture most

tionship between Tobin’s q and measures of market structure

manage to capture monopoly rents. Empirical tests of the rela-

suggests either that monopoly power is absent or that unions

q is generally not high in the American economy, the result

to even small amounts of monopoly power. Since the level of

puts are supplied competitively, q should be highly sensitive

long-run monopoly power is established. Provided that all in-

tains an adjustment for risk. The relationship between q and

additions, it is subject to less measurement error and it con-

itability because it measures long-run monopoly power. In

sure of monpoly profits than indices of single-period prof-

market structure and profitability. Tobin’s q is a better mea-

Fraction unionized

cent in the equity value of the firm.

lose an election, there is an average net reduction of 1.3 per-

unionization drive is 3.8 percent of equity value. When unions

unions win an election, the average loss associated with the

average, is associated with a reduction in equity value. When

the election outcome. The results suggest that unionization, on

month in which the National Labor Relations Board certifies

month in which the union petitions for an election and for the

for a sample of 253 NYSE-listed firms are estimated for the

itability of firms. Abnormal monthly common stock returns

This paper examines the effect of unionization on the prof-

Profits

profit

cation dates

Petition and certifi-

Finding on productivity

sure monopoly power and to examine the relationship between

rate

Tobin’s q,

Abnormal return

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

Concentration-

and the

Manufacturing

tions, 1962-1980

U.S. union elec-

Sample

Tobin’s Q, Union-

Capital Market

from

and

Unionization

Title

Zimmerman

Ruback and

journal

year and

Author,

firms, 1968-1972

on Profits:

(1986)

part by either profitability or industry structure. Endogene-

gin Data

prices less than was previously believed.

turing sector. An important conclusion is that unions raise

estimated redistribution from capital to labor in the manufac-

larger than OLS estimates. The final section explores the total

union impact on profits: two-stage estimates are considerably

ity is found to be an important consideration in estimating the

that assume union status is exogenous and not determined in

extent to which unions reduce profits. Estimates allowing for

This paper uses industry price-cost margin data to estimate the

try Price-Cost Mar-

Fraction unionized

Finding on productivity

the endogeneity of union status are contrasted with estimates

Price-cost margin

dent Variables

Variables

Indepen-

Main

Main Dependent

dence from Indus-

Evi-

U.S. manufacturing

Sample

The Union Impact

Title

Mishel

Voos and

journal

year and

Author,

