                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 COORDINATION, SWITCHING COSTS AND THE DIVISION OF LABOR IN GENERAL MEDICINE:
AN ECONOMIC EXPLANATION FOR THE EMERGENCE OF HOSPITALISTS IN THE UNITED STATES

                                               David O. Meltzer
                                              Jeanette W. Chung

                                             Working Paper 16040
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w16040


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           May 2010




     Financial support for this work was provided by Robert Wood Johnson Investigator Program, (RWJF
     Grant ID 63910 Meltzer, Principal Investigator), a Midcareer Career Development Award from the
     National Institute of Aging (1 K24 AG031326-01, PI Meltzer and the Agency for Healthcare Quality
     and Research through the Hospital Medicine and Economics Center for Education and Research in
     Therapeutics (CERT) (U18 HS016967-01, Meltzer, PI). The views expressed herein are those of the
     authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

     NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
     reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
     NBER publications.

     © 2010 by David O. Meltzer and Jeanette W. Chung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
     to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
     © notice, is given to the source.
Coordination, Switching Costs and the Division of Labor in General Medicine: An Economic
Explanation for the Emergence of Hospitalists in the United States
David O. Meltzer and Jeanette W. Chung
NBER Working Paper No. 16040
May 2010
JEL No. I1

                                              ABSTRACT

General medical care in the United States has historically been provided by physicians who care for
their patients in both ambulatory and hospital settings. Care is now increasingly divided between physicians
specializing in hospital care (hospitalists) and ambulatory-based care primary care physicians. We
develop and find strong empirical support for a theoretical model of the division of labor in general
medicine that views the use of hospitalists as balancing the costs of coordinating care across physicians
in the hospitalist model against physicians’ costs switching between ambulatory and hospital settings
in the traditional model. Our findings suggest opportunities to improve care.


David O. Meltzer
Section of General Internal Medicine
University of Chicago
5841 S. Maryland, MC 2007
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
dmeltzer@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Jeanette W. Chung
Section of Hospital Medicine
University of Chicago
5841 S. Maryland MC 2007
Chicago, IL 60637
jwchung1@midway.uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

       The division of labor is a necessary consequence of the accumulation of human capital in
societies and has fundamental consequences for the organization of markets and organizations,
and for overall productivity. Accordingly, the optimal division of labor has been the subject of
close examination. With roots that go back at least to Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations
(1776[1965]), the optimal division of labor can be understood as reflecting a balance between
advantages of specialization that come from increasing returns to specialized human capital and
the costs of specialization that arise from the need for coordination across persons with
specialized human capital (Becker and Murphy 1992). This line of argument suggests that when
returns to specialized human capital are lower and when coordination costs are greater, the
optimal degree of specialization should be lower.

       An important point made by Becker and Murphy (1992) is that coordination costs can be
generated by a variety of mechanisms. For example, coordination costs may result from either
agency problems or communication costs that increase as the number of parties involved in a
production process increases. Less appreciated, perhaps, is the variety of mechanisms that may
generate increasing returns to human capital. For example, Becker and Murphy emphasize the
greater fixed time costs of acquiring multiple types of human capital. Another source of
increasing returns to specialized human capital is switching costs. For example, in Smith’s pin
factory, a pin maker with expertise in both cutting wire and sharpening pins has to spend time
switching between tools to do each, and so might naturally gravitate towards working in only one
of the two roles. Switching costs can also arise in the use of human capital because of the need
to shift one’s “mental set”. (Jerslid, 1927). Although switching costs may sometimes be small
(e.g. the pin maker can easily pick/put down the hand tools used for sharpening and cutting), this
may not always be the case. For example, when different tasks need to be executed in physically
separate locations, switching costs may be concretely reflected in large transport costs. Even
when switching costs are large, a worker with ability and motivation to perform both roles can
often minimize switching costs by restructuring their work (e.g., the pin maker may cut many
pieces of wire at a time and then sharpen the resulting pieces into pins en masse). However,
sometimes such reorganization of work is not possible, for example when a task must be



                                                     3
completed in specified time period to be of value. In these settings, switching costs may be an
important cause of increasing returns to specialized human capital because the different tasks can
be more easily performed in the required locations by discrete individuals with the needed
specialized human capital.

       The division of labor is an active and important subject of debate within medicine, and
one in which these concepts of the determinants of the optimal division of labor may be
particularly salient. The field of general internal medicine in the United States is an excellent
example of this. Up until about the mid 1990s, the established model of general internal
medicine in the U.S. involved a single physician providing general medical care in both clinics
and in the hospital. This traditional model placed major emphasis on the value of coordinated
care across settings that was afforded by having a single physician care for the patient in both
settings (Peabody 1927, Meltzer 2001). In 1996, this model was challenged with the publication
of an article in the New England Journal of Medicine describing the advent of a new type of
physicians, “hospitalists”, that focuses on the care of hospitalized patients, returning the care of
those patients to ambulatory physicians after the hospitalization (Wachter and Goldman 1996).
Since that time, hospitalists have become the fastest growing medical specialty in the United
States, providing more than one third of all general medical care in the United States (Wachter
and Goldman 2002).

       The effects of hospitalists on the cost, quality, and outcomes of care remain areas of
active study (Wachter and Goldman 2002). However, it is clear that the field has grown to the
point where it is unlikely to go away, and its rapid growth raises questions about why it has
grown so quickly, under what conditions continued growth would be desirable, and what the best
direction would be for such growth. Critical to these discussions is an understanding of the forces
that have caused the growth of the hospitalist movement.

       A number of theories have been put forward to explain the development and growing use
of hospitalists. The most prominent include: 1) the growth of managed care and hospital
prospective payment, intensifying the incentives for hospitals to have physicians focused on the
care of hospitalized patients, 2) the increasing organization of physicians into groups, facilitating
the division of labor between inpatient and outpatient settings, 3) the increasing severity of



                                                       4
illness of hospitalized patients, making it more important that the physician responsible for a
patient’s care be able to be physically present for a larger part of the day.

       In this paper, we do not dispute the potential importance of these factors but instead
develop a theory of the division of labor in general medical care that argues that efficiency of the
hospitalist model compared to the traditional model is determined, at least in part, by the
advantages of specialized human capital due to reduced switching costs between ambulatory and
hospital settings relative to the costs of coordinating physicians across these settings. As perhaps
might be expected, our theoretical model predicts that hospitalists are more advantageous as
switching costs rise and coordination costs fall. There are also some less obvious predictions,
such at that hospitalists become more advantageous as total physician work hours decline and as
the time required for hospital care and ambulatory visits increase. The advantages of hospitalists
are also found to depend on the rate of clinic visits compared to the rate of hospitalization, with
hospitalists tending to be less advantageous when the rate of hospitalization is low compared to
the rate of clinic visits. We test and find evidence for all these theoretical predictions using data
from the Community Tracking Study, a longitudinal panel study of households, physicians, and
employers in 60 communities that are nationally representative of health system change in the
U.S. Our results provide evidence in support of all of our theoretical predictions. These findings,
in turn, suggest that a number of previously unappreciated forces, such as the increasing role of
female physicians within general internal medicine, the desire for physicians for controllable
lifestyles, and the growing rate of ambulatory relative to hospital care, have likely contributed to
the increased use of hospitalists in the United States. The findings also suggest the potential for
new models of care that can optimize the use of the hospitalist model and traditional models that
combine ambulatory and hospital care under the direction of a single physician. More generally,
our results provide support for the value of theoretical constructs emphasizing the importance of
coordination and switching costs in understanding the division of labor.

       In developing our model and in our empirical work, we emphasize transportation costs
between the clinic and hospital as the key element of switching costs in this context. However,
switching costs may also include costs of adjusting to work in different settings with concomitant
differences in standard operating procedures, such as different computer systems, medical
records formats, and clinical protocols. Switching costs can also arise from changing sets of


                                                       5
production teammates and colleagues, especially in a complex process such as hospital care that
requires services from nurses and other staff. All these forms of switching costs may be salient in
the decision of a general internist to work in both ambulatory and hospital settings or to focus on
just one of the two. Nevertheless, we note that most of these switching costs have a large fixed
component once a physician has decided to maintain any practice in both hospital and
ambulatory settings, while transport costs are especially important when a physician decides to
provide care for a specific set of patients in both ambulatory and hospital settings because the
physician cannot typically schedule when those hospitalizations will be needed and so must
travel to the hospital whenever the patients happens to need their care. Therefore, the model we
develop is focused on the decision of physicians whether to provide care for a specified set of
patients in both the inpatient and outpatient settings as an example of an instance in which
switching costs may be an important cause of increasing returns to specialization. This is contrast
to the situation – common (though decreasingly so) in many academic medical centers and rare
elsewhere – in which physicians spend blocks of time caring for different sets of patients in both
settings, which we see as motivated by the desire of physicians to retain expertise in a diverse set
of clinical environments and to take advantage of revenue opportunities from relatively higher
inpatient than outpatient fees as opposed to being motivated by fundamental economic
efficiencies or by benefits to patients.




II. The Model

        We analyze the conditions under which a system planner chooses to organize the delivery
of general medicine services according to a hospitalist model with physicians specialized in
either inpatient care or ambulatory care as opposed to a traditional internist model in which
physicians care for their patients in both settings. A system-level perspective can reflect the
decision of a firm such as a health maintenance organization, or it can reflect the decision of a
generalist physician in solo practice deciding whether to organize his/her practice as a traditional
internist practice, or as a hospitalist practice

        In the context of our model, a “traditional internist” practice involves a generalist
physician who provides both inpatient and outpatient care for his/her patients. Because internists


                                                       6
alternate between outpatient and inpatient settings, they face switching costs, most notably the
daily costs of traveling between their clinic location and the hospital wards. The alternative to
care by a traditional internist is care by separate doctors providing hospital care (“hospitalists”)
and ambulatory care (“ambulists”). Neither hospitalists nor ambulists face switching costs, but
instead face coordination costs. These coordination costs reflect the effort required by
hospitalists and ambulists to communicate and acquire information needed to coordinate care of
patients who transition between inpatient and outpatient settings.

        In developing our model, we assume that a system-level decision-maker chooses a mode
of organizing the delivery of services to minimize aggregate (total) physician time costs in caring
for some defined patient population. It is not a difficult extension to argue that increasing the
efficiency with which care can provided could translate into higher quality but we do not develop
that idea in either our theoretical analysis or empirical analysis.

B. Traditional Internist Model

        In a traditional internist practice, internists allocate their total professional time ( TI )
between providing ambulatory care ( t A ), providing hospital care ( t H ), and transportation

between the ambulatory and inpatient setting ( tT ). An internist’s professional time budget
constraint is:

        TI  n IAt A  n IH t H  tT [Eq. 1], where

            nIA is the number of ambulatory visits seen by an internist during some period

            nIH is the number of hospital visits made by an internist during some period

        To assess the total time needed to care for patients with N ambulatory visits in the
internist model, one must first determine the number of ambulatory visits and associated
inpatient activity that a single internist can provide and then calculate the number of internists
needed to provide those ambulatory visits. Assume the probability a patient seen in the
ambulatory setting will require hospitalization is  . For simplicity, further assume that all
patients are admitted to the hospital from the outpatient setting. This implies that the total



                                                         7
number of inpatients seen by an internist during a given period is n IH  n IA . Substituting this
expression into Equation 1, the number of ambulatory encounters that can be seen by an internist
in a given period is:

                             (TI  tT )
                  n IA                 [Eq. 3]
                             t A  t H

In this equation, the numerator reflects the effective time for direct patient care available for the
internist once transport costs are accounted for, while the denominator is the total time costs of
direct patient care linked to an ambulatory encounter, including also the expected time in
hospital care. Since n IA is the number of ambulatory visits per internist, providing N ambulatory

visits will require N / n IA internists at the system level, so that the total time required at the

system level by all these internists would be TI N / n IA hours. Aggregating up to the system level,
total internist time costs are:

                             TI N        TI
          Total
        TInternist Model          N            t A  t H    [Eq. 4]
                              n IA    (TI  tT )

Note that in Equation 4, as the total amount of professional time per internist increases, total
system-level costs in the internist model approach the cost of direct care – i.e., as TI  

                                TI
approaches infinity,                     1 and total system-level costs in the internist model approach
                             (TI  tT )
the cost of direct care.

B. Hospitalist Model

        In the hospitalist model, hospitalists allocate total professional time ( TH ) between

providing direct patient care to hospitalized patients ( t H ) and communicating with patients’

outpatient physicians ( t C ). Similarly, ambulists allocate their professional time ( T A ) between

providing direct patient care to ambulatory patients ( t A ) and communicating with hospitalists
about hospitalized patients. For simplicity, we assume that the time spent communicating per
hospitalization is the same for ambulists and hospitalists, although it is a simple extension to



                                                                 8
allow these times to different between these two types of physicians. At the system level, total
system-level time physician time costs of for providing N ambulatory encounters per year are:


                   t Model  N t A  t C   N t H  t C   N t A   (t H  2t C )  [Eq. 5]
         Total
        THospitalis


Comparative Statics

        To compare the difference in costs of the hospitalist and internist models, it is useful to
convert both to a per visit basis by dividing time costs by the number of visits needed (N) and to
examine the difference,  , between them. Thus, the time costs of the hospitalist model relative to
the internal medicine model are:




                        Total                       Total
                       THospitalis                TInternist
                                            
                                   t Model                   Model
                                                                             [Eq. 6a]
                               N                         N




 is the relative cost of hospitalist vs. internist care per hour of direct patient care. Substituting
Equations 1 and 4 into the numerator of Equation 6a,

                                                                        TI
                                                               N                t A  t H 
                       N (t A   (t H  2t C )                    (TI  tT )
                                                                                             [Eq. 6b]
                                  N                                          N

which can be simplified to be represented by any of the following three equations:

                                          t A   t H 
                   2 t C  tT                                   [Eq. 7a]
                                           (TI  tT )


                                   tT
                   2t C                                        [Eq. 7b]
                                   n IA


                                     tT                    t           
                   2t C                      2t C  T              [Eq. 7c]
                                   n IH                  n IH          


                                                                             9
Equations 7a-c all highlight the costs of the hospitalist model relative to the traditional internist
model as shaped by the costs of communication (first terms in 7a-c) relative to the costs of
transport required to switch between the inpatient and outpatient settings (second terms a-c).
Equation 7a shows the difference in time costs per visit in our model in terms of its underlying
parameters, and is used for the comparative statistics exercise below. However, Equations 7b
and 7c provide useful intuition into the results: Equation 7b reveals scale effects in our model:
as the panel size ( n IA ) of an internist increases, travel costs fall. The first term inside the
brackets in Eq. 7c, captures the communication costs per hospital visit incurred in a hospitalist
model, and the second term captures the average travel costs per hospital visit of internists.
Hospitalists are more costly relative to internists when average bilateral communication costs per
hospital visit are greater than average travel costs per hospital visit. The presence of  outside the
bracket implies that, in the case that communication costs per hospital visits are greater than
travel costs, the system cost per ambulatory visit also increases with the rate of hospitalization.

        Comparative statics analysis of Equation 7a produces several key results:

        RESULT 1 – Increasing communication costs increase the cost of the hospitalist model
relative to the traditional internist model.

        d
              2  0 [Eq. 8]
        dt C

Because traditional internists deliver both ambulatory and hospital care, they do not face the
coordination costs inherent in hospitalist models of care. Therefore, increasing communication
costs unambiguously increases the costs of hospitalists compared to internists.

        RESULT 2 – Increasing travel costs decreases the cost of the hospitalist model relative to
the traditional internist model.

        d    T t  t H             d
             I A          ,                0 [Eq. 9]
        dtT    TI  tT 2             dt T


        RESULT 3 – Increasing total professional time available to physician increases cost of
the hospitalist model relative to the internist model:


                                                          10
        d t A  t H t T
                           0         [Eq. 12]
        dTI   TI  tT 2

As the amount of internist professional time rises, the relative cost of hospitalists also rises. This
is because the internist model benefits from distributing the fixed costs of switching over a
greater number of remaining hours for direct patient care. This suggests that, if there is a greater
preference for limited work hours among physicians, either for example because of a greater
desire for limited hours overall or because of the large influx of women into general internal
medicine and their tendency to work fewer hours than males physicians, then the desire for
shorter hours may have contributed to the growth of hospitalists in the U.S.

       RESULT 4 – Increasing ambulatory care time and increasing hospital care time increase
the cost of the hospitalist model relative to the traditional internist model.

       If the average amount of time required per ambulatory visit increases, total time
requirements for direct patient care for each patient rises so that the number of patients a given
internist can care for decreases and travel costs per patient become more important relative to
total professional time available. Consequently, the costs of the internist model rise relative to
those of the hospitalist model, with the difference between the hospitalist model and internist
model falling by the ratio of travel time to patient care time:

        d         tT             d
                         ,            0 [Eq. 10]
        dt A    TI  tT         dt A

       Effect of changing hospital care time. Similarly, increasing the average amount of time
required per hospital visit increases costs of the internist model and reduces the difference in
costs between the hospitalist and internist models.

        d         tT
                         0         [Eq. 11]
        dt H    TI  tT 


       RESULT 5 – The effect of changing probability of admission depends on the relative
magnitude of communication costs and travel costs. To determine how changes in the


                                                       11
probability of hospital admission affect the relative cost of hospitalists compared to traditional
internists, we differentiate with respect to the probability of admission (  ):

        d           t t
            2t C  H T       [Eq. 13]
        d         TI  tT 

        d                t t          d                t t
            0 if 2t C  H T       but     0 if 2t C  H T
        d              TI  tT      d              TI  tT 

Equation 13 shows that the sign of the effect of changes in the probability of hospital admission
on  is ambiguous, and depends on whether communication costs exceed travel costs. This
makes predictions about the direction of this effect an empirical matter. However, if transit costs
                                                           tT
consume a small fraction of the time of internists so              is generally small (e.g. 30 minutes /
                                                        TI  tT 
                                          t H tT
9 hour work day  0.06 )) then 2t C               should hold if communication costs relative to
                                        TI  tT 
hospital care costs are more than 0.06. This seems likely in general but is particularly likely if
one includes in communication costs time required by a hospitalist unfamiliar with a patient to
learn their case when the patient is hospitalized, which would require not only time
communicating with the patient’s ambulatory care doctor, but also extra time communicating
with the patient themselves and reviewing their records, which would be much reduced for a
traditional internist already familiar with their case. This could also be modeled formally by
defining separate communication costs for the hospitalist and the ambulatory care physician, but
would complicate our notation somewhat without providing any major theoretical additional
insights.




III. Empirical Tests

Data

        We used data from the Restricted Use 2004-2005 Community Tracking Study Physician
Survey (CTS PS) to test the empirical predictions of our model. Conducted by the Center for


                                                        12
Studying Health System Change (CSHSC), the CTS is a longitudinal panel study of households,
physicians, and employers in 60 communities that are nationally representative of health system
change in the U.S. The 60 sites correspond roughly to metropolitan statistical areas, and include
large MSAs (48 sites), small MSAs (3 sites), and non-MSAs (9 sites). 48 sites are large MSAs
(population > 200,000). The CTS PS survey covers several content areas, including: physician
sociodemographic and professional background characteristics; practice characteristics; time use;
computer use and care management; attitudes about care provision, and compensation and
revenue. We used the 2004-2005 CTS PS because it is the only survey in the series that includes
data on the number of hospital visits physicians made as well as the percent of a physicians
patients who were cared for by hospitalists. As we discuss in detail below, both of these
variables were critical for identification in our models.

       The sample for the first CTS PS (1996-1997), was drawn using a complex stratified
random sampling method of physicians in the American Medical Association (AMA) Masterfile
and American Osteopathic Association (AOA) membership file who practiced at least 20 hours a
week providing direct patient care. Within each site, physicians were stratified by primary care
specialty (general internal medicine, general practice, family practice and general pediatrics) as
well as expected survey response variables. A proportion of the physicians in the 2004-2005
sample were randomly drawn from the original 1996-1997 sample (approximately 70%) with the
remaining randomly drawn from the sampling frame using the original sampling method.

       In order to properly account for the complex survey sampling design in our estimation
methods, we applied for, and obtained through a Data Use Agreement, the 2004-2005 CTS-PS
Restricted Use Data from the CSHSC through the Interuniversity Consortium for Political and
Social Research (ICPSR). The Restricted Use File contains survey design variables that are not
available in the Public Use File, and which are necessary for estimating variance and standard
errors. The Restricted Use File also contains geographic identifiers.

       We restricted our analyses to generalist physicians in the CTS PS, which were defined as
physicians reporting general internal medicine, family practice, or general practice as their
primary specialty. All analyses were weighted to produce national-level estimates.

Empirical Strategy


                                                      13
        Our theoretical model is framed from the perspective of a central planner choosing
between alternative modes of organizing the delivery of healthcare services. However, the
model can also apply at the physician level to explain the extent to which a generalist physician’s
practice departs from the traditional model in which s/he provides both inpatient and outpatient
care for all his/her patients, and does not rely at all on hospitalists. We adopted a physician-
level approach in the empirical analyses that follow.

        The dependent variable in our analyses was the percent of a physician’s patients who
were hospitalized in the previous year who had a hospitalist involved their care (HSPLST).
Greater use of hospitalists reflects greater departure away from the traditional model of
organizing generalist care.

        Hypothesis 1 – Communication (Coordination) Costs. RESULT 1 of our model predicts
that as communication costs increase, the relative cost of the hospitalist model (  ) increases,
ceteris paribus. Therefore, physicians with greater expected communication costs are expected
to rely less on hospitalists, and are predicted by our model to maintain greater levels of activity
in the hospital setting.

        We measured communication costs 4 ways using questions from the CTS PS that reflect
varying dimensions of communication costs. First, the CTS PS asked physicians whether the
lack of qualified specialists affects their ability to provide high quality care. Perceived lack of
qualified specialists may imply greater expected communication costs (with less-qualified
specialists, perhaps due to lack of trust). We created a dichotomous variable, SPECPROB,
indicating whether a physician reported a lack of qualified specialists, which we hypothesize
might require that physicians devote more time to communicating with specialists in order to
reduce the risk of bad outcomes.1 Second, physicians were asked in the survey whether failure to
receive reports from other physicians and facilities affected their ability to provide high quality
care, which we regard as a communication cost. REPPROB is a dichotomous variable indicating
whether a physician reported problems obtaining timely reports. Third, physicians were asked
whether medical errors in hospitals affected their ability to provide high quality of care. We
regard medical errors as indicative of fundamental communication problems in the hospital that
1
 The original survey item response scale included three categories: “not a problem,” “minor problem,” and “major
problem.”


                                                             14
may result in expectations of interaction difficulties and lack of trust between the inpatient and
outpatient setting. We created a dichotomous variable, ERRPROB, indicating whether a
physician reported problems in providing quality care due to medical errors in hospitals. Finally,
we summed across these four indicators to create an index of communication costs, and then
created a dichotomous variable COMCOST indicating whether a physician reported 2 or more
types of coordination costs.

        Because our dependent variable was the fraction (percent) of a physician’s hospitalized
patients who were cared for by a physician in the last year, its range of values was bounded by
(and included) 0 and 1. An estimation method such as ordinary least squares regression that does
not account for this fact may yield predicted values that are out of range. Since our measure
included both 0 and 1, we followed Papke and Wooldridge (1996) and estimated a generalized
linear regression model with a binomial distribution and a logit link function. 2 We estimated
separate fractional logit models for each measure of communication cost, with controls for
physician age, physician gender, practice type, and a set of site fixed effects. Practice type
included the following categories: Solo/2-Physician practice (omitted category); Group Practice;
HMO; Medical School; Hospital Based; and Other. In each of these models, all communication
cost variables were expected to have a negative sign: greater communication costs reduce use of
hospitalists.

        Hypothesis 2 – Switching (Travel) Costs. RESULT 2 of our model predicts that as travel
costs increase,  narrows as total costs of the traditional internist model increases, ceteris
paribus. Physicians facing greater expected travel costs are predicted to consolidate their
practice within the outpatient or hospital setting. Physicians who maintain a presence in both
settings are predicted to reduce activity in the hospital setting under higher travel costs.

        The 2004-2005 data provide no information on the amount of time physicians would
require to commute from their clinic location to where their patients would be hospitalized. In
addition, even if such data were available, it would likely be endogenous to the decision about
whether to practice in both settings. However, the Restricted Use File includes site identifiers,
which correspond to MSAs, and identifiers for the county in which a physician’s practice is
2
 All models were estimated using the survey estimation (svy) commands in Stata 10.0, which take into account the
complex survey design in estimating variance and standard errors.


                                                             15
located. To create a rough measure of travel costs, we used information from a 2009 article in
Forbes that ranked 100 U.S. MSAs according to traffic congestion. We created a dichotomous
variable, CONGEST25, indicating whether a physician’s practice site was listed among the top
25 most congested MSAs.3 Although the Forbes data are not perfectly congruent with our study
period, rankings among the top 25 cities were relatively stable between 2007 and 2008 (reported
in the article). Our measure captures the notion that physicians in the top 25 most congested
cities face greater travel costs than physicians in less congested cities.

         We estimated the effects of CONGEST25 on the percent of a physician’s patients cared
for by hospitalists using the fractional logit model described previously. We predicted that
greater travel costs should increase the use of hospitalists, and decrease the extent to which
primary care physicians make in-person hospital visits, ceteris paribus.

         Hypothesis 3 – Total Professional Work Time Available. RESULT 3 of our model
predicts that as the amount of professional time available to a physician increases, the cost of the
hospitalist model compared to the traditional model (  ) will increase so that physicians will rely
less on hospitalists and maintain higher levels of inpatient activity.

         As a measure of total professional work time available, we created a dichotomous
variable indicating whether a physician worked 60 or more hours in medically-related work
during the last full week of work (HRSMED60). Based on the hypothesis that women may have
less total professional time available, we also examined the effect of gender (FEMALE) on use
of hospitalists and own inpatient activity using the two models described in previous sections.

         We do not have a direct test of RESULT 4 of our model because we cannot identify a
variable that we think is a convincing marker of the time required for an individual ambulatory
or hospital visit.4

3
 The CTS-PS MSAs that ranked among the top 25 most congested cities were: Los Angeles, New York City,
Chicago, Washington, D.C., Houston, San Francisco, Boston, Seattle, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Atlanta, Phoenix,
Miami, Denver, Baltimore, Detroit, Riverside (CA), Bridgeport (CT), Portland, and San Antonio.
4
 We considered the idea that older patients might be more complex and therefore require more time for care, but
were not convinced that this was empirically true since clinic visits are generally of a fixed duration. In addition,
younger patients may come for clinic visits less frequently but with a larger list of issues to address in any visit.
Similarly, conditional on hospitalization, it is not clear whether younger patients require more or less time than older
ones, as younger patients with relatively minor health problems tend not to be hospitalized even when they would


                                                                16
         Hypothesis 4 – Probability of Admission. RESULT 5 of our model suggests that the
theoretical effect of the probability of admission is ambiguous, and depends on whether
communication costs exceed travel costs. However, as noted above, we have reason to believe
that communication costs will often exceed travel costs so we expect that the costs of the
hospitalist model, and consequently extent generalist inpatient activity, will rise as the
probability of admission rises.

         Assuming that older patients are also at greater risk of hospitalization, we constructed a
variable, MCPROB, indicating whether 33% or more of a physician’s total payments came from
Medicare.5 We regressed the percent of a physician’s patients that were cared for by hospitalists
on MCPROB.




Results

         Descriptive Statistics. Frequencies and descriptive statistics for the variables in our
analyses are presented in Table 1. Our weighted sample size was 112,946 generalist physicians,
of which 41% were general internists, and 59% were family or general practitioners.
Coordination costs were common in this sample: more than 50% reported that lack of qualified
specialists reduced their ability to provide quality care; over three-quarters of the sample (76%)
reported lack of timely reports, and nearly 60% reported that hospital errors reduced their ability
to provide quality care. Sixty-five percent of the physicians in this sample reported problems
with 2 or more of the dimensions of communication cost we measured. Roughly a third of the
physicians in our sample practiced in one of the top 25 most congested MSAs in the U.S. Half
of the physicians reported that 33% or more of their total payments came from Medicare, which
suggests an older patient population that may be more likely to require hospitalization at any
given time, other things being equal.


have been had they been older, so that hospitalized younger patients may be more complex than might be expected
otherwise.


5
 Constructing a variable based on the fraction of a physician’s patient panel that are Medicare patients would have
been preferable because a few high-cost services may result in a large share of revenue from Medicare. However,
such data were not available in the CTS-PS.


                                                               17
        Tests of Hypotheses. Table 2 summarizes the fractional logit estimates of the effects of
communication costs, switching costs, work time, and hospital admission probability from the 8
models. For ease of interpretation, we also present the sample average marginal effect of each
variable, which represents the change in the fraction of patients seen by a hospitalists resulting
from a move from 0 to 1 for each variable (all dichotomous), ceteris paribus.

        In our tests of the association of measures of communication costs with the use of
hospitalists, we found that reporting a perceived lack of qualified specialists was associated with
a 6 percentage point decline in the fraction of a physician’s patients that were cared for by
hospitalists in the previous year. Similarly, reporting a lack of timely reports and hospital errors
resulted in 7 and 9 percentage point declines in the percent of patients cared for by hospitalists,
respectively. Reporting two or more of these communication costs was associated with an 11
percentage point decline in the use of hospitalists, compared to those who reported one or none.

        As predicted, our measure of travel costs – practicing in one of the top 25 most
congested MSA in the U.S. – was associated with increased the use of hospitalists, with
physicians in the top 25 most congested areas having an 11 percentage point higher rate of using
hospitalists.

        Findings relating to our measures of work time were also consistent with our hypothesis;
greater work time available reduced use of hospitalists, with physicians practicing 60 or more
hours per week having an 11 percentage points lower rate of using hospitalists, and female
physicians (who we assumed to have less professional time available) having a 9 percentage
point greater fraction of their patients cared for by hospitalists.

        Finally, in our test of admission probability, physicians reporting one third or more of
total payments being for Medicare patients (who we viewed as being at increased risk of
hospitalization because of their age) reduced the use of hospitalists by 12 percentage points.

        In summary, all these results are consistent with our hypotheses. Communication costs
and travel both increase total costs of the hospitalist model and render it less favorable to general
internists, other things being equal. Greater professional time available increases the relative
cost of hospitalist practice and reduce its use among general internists. Finally, higher



                                                       18
probability of having patients admitted to the hospital imply greater coordination and switching
costs, and also reduce the advantages of hospitalist practice compared to traditional general
internist practice.




IV. Conclusions

        In this paper, we find strong support for a diverse set of predictions derived from a
theoretical model of the division of labor that views the use of hospitalists as balancing the costs
of coordinating care across physicians and the costs of physicians in switching between the
provision of care in ambulatory versus hospital settings. As suggested by the model, we find that
the use of hospitalists is greater as coordination costs fall and switching costs rise. We also find
support for more subtle predictions, such at that hospitalists become more advantageous as total
physician work hours decline. The advantages of hospitalists are also found to depend on the
rate of clinic visits compared to the rate of hospitalization, with hospitalists tending to be less
advantageous when the rate of hospitalization is low compared to the rate of clinic visits.

        Our findings have a diverse set of implications for the division of labor in medical care.
First, our findings have implications for understanding why the use of hospitalist has grown so
greatly in recent decades. Specifically, our finding that the use of hospitalists is more attractive
as the rate of hospitalization falls relative to ambulatory visits, suggests that the use of
hospitalists may have grown partially because hospital utilization has been declining relative to
ambulatory utilization, which has been the case for at least the past several decades (Meltzer and
Chung, 2010). The exact reasons for this are unclear, but reflect some combination of decreasing
use of hospitalization that may be due to greater ability to manage some conditions in
ambulatory settings and shorter hospital lengths of stay, and increasing use of ambulatory
services, at least partially driven by increasing attention to prevention. It is also possible that the
growth of women in medicine and greater attention to work-life balance among both male and
female physicians have encouraged the growing use of hospitalists.

        Our findings also have implications for the future patterns in the division of labor within
medicine. For example, if admission rates continue to decline and physician willingness to work



                                                        19
long hours continues to lessen, then the growth of hospitalists would be expected to increase.
Similarly, if electronic health record systems and convergence to universal health informatics
standards succeed in reducing communication and coordination costs, the use of hospitalists
would be expected to continue to increase. These forces would suggest that continuing growth in
the use of hospitalist is likely.

        While this line of reasoning would seem to suggest that the decline of traditional models
of internal medicine combining ambulatory and hospital will continue, there are reasons for
caution about this trend. Indeed, no matter how much effort goes into better communication, the
greater use of hospitalists is likely to entail some loss for patients who have close relationships
with their ambulatory physicians and find themselves hospitalized, and especially those for
whom hospitalization is a frequent event. This suggests that a group of patients who have high
rates of hospitalization may continue to benefit from traditional models of general medical care.
Indeed, this may provide a way forward for physicians wishing to continue to provide such
integrated care – to focus on patients at high risk of hospitalization, providing a sufficient
number of patients hospitalized to allow the physician to justify a daily presence in the hospital,
and eliminating the need for much costly communication about the patients care and providing
true integrated care for these patients. For patients at lower risk of hospitalization, models in
which care is divided between ambulatory-based and hospital-based physicians would be chosen.
The predictive models needed for such a model to be implemented already exist to a large extent
and suggest that a large enough group of patients at high enough risk to make such a model
feasible could indeed be identified (Meltzer and Chung, 2010).

        The model we have developed also suggests that efforts to reduce transport costs might
be a valuable strategy to increase the ability of physicians to care for patients in both ambulatory
and hospital settings. For example, clinics could be located in hospitals or directly adjacent to
hospitals. This might create some inconvenience for patients since hospitals may be further away
from their home than nearby clinics, and because parking and distances from parking to clinic
offices may be greater, but for patients who are at great risk of hospitalization and who wish to
have a doctor with whom they are more familiar treat them in the hospital, these may be
acceptable inconveniences. Alternatively, telemedicine options might allow physicians to be
directly involved in the care of their patients when they are hospitalized even if the physician is


                                                       20
located remotely. Such care would surely require some onsite presence of physicians or nurses to
complement the activities of the clinic physician working remotely, and blurs the distinction
between transport and communications costs. Nevertheless, it is an important reminder that the
optimal division of labor can be strongly influenced by changes in the technology of production,
including both communication and switching costs that can affect the costs of coordination.




                                                    21
REFERNCES
Becker Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs, and
Knowledge.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107:285-326.


Coleman, James S. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press.


Jerslid, Arthur. 1927. “Mental Set and Shift.” Archives of Psychology. 14:1-81.


Klemperer, Paul. 1987. “Markets with Consumer Switching Costs.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 102:375-394.


Klemperer, Paul. 2008. “Network Effects and Switching Costs.” In New Palgrave Dictionary
of Economics, ed. Steve N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.


Meltzer, David. 2001. “Hospitalists and the Doctor-Patient Relationship.” Journal of Legal
Studies. 30:589-606.

Meltzer, David and Jeanette Chung. 2010. “U.S. Trends in Hospitalization and Generalist
Physician Workforce and the Emergence of Hospitalists.” Journal of General Internal Medicine.
In press.


Peabody Francis W. 1927. “The Care of the Patient.” Journal of the American Medical
Association. 88:877.


Forbes. 2009. “America’s Most Congested Cities.” http://www.forbes.com/2009/02/24/traffic-
congested-cities-lifestyle-real-estate_congested_cities.html. (accessed 04 September 2009).


Smith Adam. 1965. The Wealth of Nations. New York: Modern Library.


Wachter Robert M. and Lee Goldman. 1996. “The Emerging Role of ‘Hospitalists’ in the
American Health Care System.” New England Journal of Medicine. 335:514-7.


                                                   22
Wachter Robert M. and Lee Goldman. 2002. “The Hospitalist Movement 5 Years Later.”
Journal of the American Medical Association. 287:487-494.




                                                 23
Table 1. Frequencies of Variables in the Analysis
Variable                                                  Percent     Weighted N
Communication Costs
  Lack Qualified Specialists                                 53%         56,611
  Lack Timely Report                                         76%         80,529
  Hospital Errors                                            57%         60,813
  MD Reported 2 or More Communication Costs                  65%         69,377

Switching (Transportation) Costs
  MD Practice in Top 25 Most Congested MSAs                  34%         35,972

Probability of Hospital Admission
  33% or More Total Payments from Medicare                   50%         52,908

MD Hours
  MD Practiced 60+ Hours in Last Week of Work                37%         39,368
  MD Female                                                  29%         31,049

Control Variables
  Practice Type
    Solo/2 Physician                                         40%          42,042
    Group Practice (3+ Physicians)                           25%          26,274
    HMO                                                       6%           6,593
    Medical School                                            5%           5,068
    Hospital-Based                                           12%          12,988
    Other                                                    12%          13,147
Data Source: Center for Studying Health System Change Community Tracking Study Physician
Survey, 2004-5 Restricted Use Data File. All frequencies were weighted to produce U.S.
population estimates. The total weighted population size in our analyses was 106,113 generalist
physicians.




                                                    24
Table 2. Summary of Estimates from Fractional Logit Models
Variable                                             Coef.      S.E.     P          95% C.I.          Avg.       S.E. of
                                                                                                    Marginal     AME
                                                                                                      Effect
                                                                                                     (AME)
Communication Costs
  Lack Qualified Specialists                           -0.29    0.14    0.04     -0.57      -0.02      -0.06      0.03
  Lack Timely Report                                   -0.31    0.16    0.06     -0.63       0.01      -0.07      0.04
  Hospital Errors                                      -0.40    0.16    0.01     -0.71      -0.08      -0.09      0.04
  MD Reported 2 or More Communication Costs            -0.47    0.17    0.01     -0.80      -0.14      -0.11      0.06

Switching (Transportation) Costs
  MD Practice in Top 25 Most Congested MSAs            0.49     0.16    0.00     0.18       0.80       0.11       0.04

Probability of Hospital Admission
  33% or More Total Payments from Medicare             -0.55    0.14    0.00     -0.81      -0.28      -0.12      0.03

MD Hours
  MD Practiced 60+ Hours in Last Week of Work          -0.50    0.15    0.00     -0.81      -0.20      -0.11      0.03
  MD Female                                             0.39    0.16    0.01     0.08        0.71       0.09      0.04

Data Source: Center for Studying Health System Change Community Tracking Study Physician Survey, 2004-5 Restricted Use Data
File. All frequencies were weighted to produce U.S. population estimates. The total weighted population size in our analyses was
106,113 generalist physicians.




                                                  25
