NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF MEANS-TESTED SCHOOL VOUCHERS
David N. Figlio
Cassandra M.D. Hart
Working Paper 16056
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16056

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050
Avenue of Education, the U.S. Department
This research was supported by funds
fromMassachusetts
the Florida Department
Cambridge,
MAthe
02138
of Education under the aegis of the National
Center for
Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education
June
2010
Research, and the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development. The second author
was supported by an Institute for Education Sciences predoctoral training grant. We are grateful to
the Florida Department of Education and the Scholarship Funding Organizations (Carrie Meek Foundation,
Children First Florida and Florida P.R.I.D.E.) for providing the micro-level data necessary for this
analysis, as well as considerable technical and programmatic support and advice, and we thank the
school districts that provided us with the aggregate data necessary for our supplemental analyses.
We appreciate the helpful comments of Sherrilyn Bilger, Rajashri Chakrabarti, Dennis Epple, Maria
Ferreyra, Jon Guryan, Jeff Henig, Larry Kenny, David Myers and Miguel Urquiola, as well as seminar
participants at Carnegie Mellon University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Iowa State University,
Michigan State University, National Bureau of Economic Research, New York University, Northwestern
University, Stanford University, University of Chicago, University of Florida, University of Illinois-UrbanaChampaign, University of Kentucky, University of Maryland-Baltimore County, Upjohn Institute,
Uppsala University, and Vanderbilt University/National Center for School Choice, and participants
at the annual meetings of the American Economic Association (2010), American Education Finance
Association (2010), Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management (2009), Society for Research
on Education Effectiveness (2010) and Southern Economic Association (2009). All opinions and errors
are our responsibility, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Florida Department of Education,
the U.S. Department of Education, the National Institutes of Health, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by David N. Figlio and Cassandra M.D. Hart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Competitive Effects of Means-Tested School Vouchers
David N. Figlio and Cassandra M.D. Hart
NBER Working Paper No. 16056
June 2010
JEL No. I2,I21,I22
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of private school competition on public school students’ test scores in the wake
of Florida’s Corporate Tax Credit Scholarship program, now known as the Florida Tax Credit Scholarship
Program, which offered scholarships to eligible low-income students to attend private schools. Specifically,
we examine whether students in schools that were exposed to a more competitive private school landscape
saw greater improvements in their test scores after the introduction of the scholarship program, than
did students in schools that faced less competition. The degree of competition is characterized by
several geocoded variables that capture students’ ease of access to private schools, and the variety
of nearby private school options open to students. We find that greater degrees of competition are
associated with greater improvements in students’ test scores following the introduction of the program;
these findings are robust to the different variables we use to define competition. These findings are
not an artifact of pre-policy trends; the degree of competition from nearby private schools matters
only after the announcement of the new program, which makes nearby private competitors more affordable
for eligible students. We also test for several moderating factors, and find that schools that we would
expect to be most sensitive to competitive pressure see larger improvements in their test scores as
a result of increased competition.

David N. Figlio
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu
Cassandra M.D. Hart
Northwestern University
cassandra.hart@u.northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
School choice options—including both voucher and neo-voucher options like tuition tax
credit funded scholarship programs—have become increasingly prevalent in recent years
(Howell, Peterson, Wolf and Campbell, 2006). One popular argument for school choice policies
is that public schools will improve the education they offer when faced with competition for
students. Because state funds are tied to student enrollment, losing students to private schools
constitutes a financial loss to public schools. If schools face the threat of losing students--and
the state funds attached to those students--to private schools, they should be incentivized to
cultivate customer (i.e., parental) satisfaction by operating more efficiently and improving on the
outcomes valued by students and parents (Friedman, 1962). Alternatively, vouchers may have
unintended negative effects on public schools if they draw away the most involved families from
public schools and the monitoring of those schools diminishes, allowing schools to reduce effort
put into educating students (McMillan, 2004).1
It is notoriously difficult to gauge the competitive effects of private schools on public
school performance because private school supply and public school performance affect each
other dynamically (Dee, 1998; McEwan, 2000). In cross-section, the relationship between
private school supply and public school performance could plausibly be either upward-biased or
downward-biased. On the one hand, private schools may disproportionately locate in
communities with low-quality public schools. In such a case, the estimated relationship between
private school penetration and public school performance would be downward-biased. On the
other hand, if private schools locate in areas with high valuation of educational quality, then the
presence of private schools could be correlated with unobservable features of public school
1

Of course, it is also possible that vouchers might attract the students who are the most mismatched to their present
education environment. If so, this changing compositional effect could potentially benefit the students remaining in
the public sector.

2

quality and public school student performance, and the estimated relationship between private
schools and public school performance would be upward-biased.
This paper takes advantage of the introduction of a major new school voucher program –
one of the largest in the United States and the largest in terms of the number of low-income
students served-- to directly study the competitive effects of school vouchers on student
outcomes in public schools. The Florida Tax Credit Scholarship Program (FTC; formerly called
the "Corporate Tax Credit Scholarship Program") offers assistance to students eligible for free or
reduced-price lunches at school (that is, those with family incomes below 185 percent of the
federal poverty line) to attend private religious or non-religious schools in the state.2 To qualify
for a voucher, students must have spent the entire prior year in a Florida public school (or be
entering kindergarten or first grade) in addition to being low-income. Vouchers need not cover
all of the costs of attending private schools, and parents are free to send their children to any
private school regardless of the share of tuition and fees covered by the voucher. The voucher,
however, is quite generous relative to the costs of attending religious private schools; the $3,500
voucher size at the program's introduction3 was about 90 percent of elementary-grade tuition and
fees at a typical Florida religious private school.4 And the policy change was very large for the
target population -- the number of scholarships available was larger than half the size of the lowincome population using private schools on the eve of the policy's introduction. For low-income
Floridians, the voucher represented a major demand shock for private schooling. Florida's
experience with this policy is particularly important because similar policies are being
2

Through 2009-10, participants may keep their voucher if family income rises above 185 percent of the poverty line
so long as family income stays below twice the poverty line.
3
The size of the voucher in 2009-10 was between $3,950 and $4,100 depending on whether the student is new to the
program or a returning participant. In 2010 the Florida Legislature passed a law that would increase the generosity
of the voucher program, expand the number of students eligible to participate, and increase the income levels at
which eligible participants could continue to receive a voucher.
4
In contrast, the size of the voucher is less than two-thirds of the typical tuition and fees at a religious high school in
Florida.

3

considered at the time of writing in Maryland and New Jersey and recently enacted in Indiana as
of 2010-11, and a bill to establish a similar policy in Chicago was just defeated in the Illinois
Legislature. Clearly, this form of voucher program has the potential to expand considerably over
the coming years in the United States.
We specifically examine whether students in schools that face a greater threat of losing
students to private schools due to the introduction of tuition tax credit scholarships improve their
test scores more than do students in schools that face less pronounced threats. We use the
introduction of the FTC program as a source of exogenous variation that dramatically increased
the potential demand for non-public school options after 2001, when the policy was announced,
by lowering the effective cost of private school attendance for eligible students. We examine
whether test scores improved more in the wake of the new policy for students attending public
schools with more (or more varied) nearby private options that suddenly became more affordable
for low-income students, than did scores for students attending schools with fewer (or less
varied) potential competitors.
This is possible because of the considerable variation in potential competition faced by
schools across the state of Florida. Prior to the introduction of the program, some communities
in Florida had a much richer and more diverse set of private school options than did other
communities. We suspect that public schools in these communities may have experienced more
competition at the outset of the program, causing them to respond differently from schools with
fewer potential competitors. Because we are identifying off of a policy change, we do not rely
on cross-sectional variation to estimate the effects of private school competition on public
schools, but rather apply a differences-in-differences modeling strategy. We find evidence that
public schools subject to more competitive pressure from private schools raised their test scores

4

the most following the introduction of Florida's voucher program.5 Therefore, while the state
caps the number of program participants at a small fraction of the overall student body, the
magnitude of the program nonetheless appears to be large enough to generate substantive public
school responses.
In addition to employing a stronger identification strategy than most past work, our
analysis also uses the timing of the roll-out of the policy to isolate the effect of competitive
pressure per se from other potential effects that voucher policies may have on public schools. A
simple pre-post comparison of the extent to which private school penetration was associated with
public school performance would typically conflate three distinct aspects of the effects of the
voucher on public schools. In addition to the competitive effect of the voucher that we seek to
identify, there is also a composition effect -- if vouchers change the composition of the public
schools, and if peer effects are important,6 then the voucher effect on public schools would also
include the changes in performance associated with the composition of the school changing.
Furthermore, if vouchers influence the resources available to a school, then the voucher effect
will capture these changes in resources as well.
We are able to separate the competition effect from the other two effects of vouchers
because of the timing of the voucher roll-out. For a year following the announcement of the
policy, students were applying for vouchers for the following school year, but no students had yet

5

Indeed, we find evidence that the effects of the voucher program are generalized to the school's overall population.
There is reason to believe that competitive effects would generalize if it is difficult to target additional attention to
groups of students on the basis of categories such as free-or-reduced-price lunch eligible, or if parents rely on overall
indicators of school quality, such as average test scores or state-administered school grades, to judge quality. Both
seem highly plausible; the evidence on voluntary donations to schools (Figlio and Kenny, 2009) shows that Florida
families' contributions to schools are highly related to school grades, especially for schools serving low-income
families.
6
See Epple and Romano (forthcoming) for a comprehensive review of the peer effects literature. Lavy (2009)
suggests one particular avenue through which composition effects may operate; his study of public school choice in
Israel indicates improvements in behavioral as well as academic outcomes under school choice, including reduction
of violence and disruption in schools.

5

left the public school on a voucher. Therefore, any public school changes in this first year of the
program, when public school students were applying for vouchers but before they actually used
them, can be thought of as a pure competition effect of vouchers.7
We are also able to exploit key aspects of the policy environment to obtain further
evidence of the competitive effects of school vouchers. First, because the voucher is for a fixed
amount regardless of the level of the school, the voucher covers a dramatically larger portion of
the tuition and fees at elementary and middle schools than at high schools. For the set of
voucher participants for whom we can observe information on actual tuition and fees charged
(those residing in roughly the southern half of Florida), out-of-pocket costs for families using
vouchers are typically over three times higher for high school students than for elementary
school students. And indeed, the overwhelming majority of students who have left the public
schools to attend a private school using a voucher in Florida have been elementary and middle
school students (Figlio, Hart and Metzger, 2009). Hence, one would expect larger competitive
effects of vouchers at the lower schooling levels than at the high school level.
Second, the federal Title I program provides generous additional cash assistance, levied
on a student-by-student basis, as well as substantially increased flexibility as to how to spend it,
to schools with relatively high levels of students eligible for free or reduced-price lunches. Title
I funds are paid to school districts, which in turn allocate resources to schools, and district
policies directing how schools receive those supplemental funds vary dramatically. The

7

It is possible that the results could be driven by low-income students working harder in the "pure competition" year
to help to attain a place in a private school. However, we find little evidence of differential effects for low-income
versus higher-income students, indicating that our estimates are likely best considered to be generalized performance
effects of the program. We also observe little evidence of strategic entry into the public schools of families seeking
to "game the system" by attending public schools for a single year. Among students observed selecting out of the
public schools to attend a private school using the voucher program, only about five percent had spent just one year
in Florida prior to using the voucher. Given that some of these students may have come from out of state, this is at
most an upper bound of the fraction of students strategically selecting into public schools in the year before students
could leave the public schools using a voucher.

6

program's generosity levels were increasing monotonically beginning in 1999-2000, leading
some school districts to provide Title I assistance to schools higher in the income distribution
than before. The overall effect of the funding change between 2001-02 and 2002-03 was to
increase the statewide percentage of schools receiving Title I funds by five percent, with larger
changes in some school districts; in Florida, these changes were largely not due to the No Child
Left Behind Act, which increased Title I funding in 2002-03 in areas that benefitted smaller
fractions of Florida schools than elsewhere.8 Nonetheless, the increases in Title I funding
observed in Florida were consistent with a secular trend toward increasing numbers of schools
eligible for Title I funding. We suspect that the schools that stand to become Title I schools and
experience a dramatic increase in discretionary revenues if they do not lose many of their free or
reduced-price lunch students are the schools that would be the most likely to respond to the
competitive threats embedded within the voucher policy. We find evidence that the schools
facing higher levels of competitive threat or greater financial incentives to retain low-income
students were the schools more likely to respond to the competitive threat of school vouchers.
The fact that we observed generalized improvements in school performance in response to the
competitive threats of school vouchers, even in a state with rapid population growth, provides
strong evidence that voucher competition may have effects elsewhere.

2. Comparison with the existing literature
A number of researchers have estimated the relationship between private school
penetration and student outcomes -- either test scores, graduation rates, or grade completed -using effectively cross-sectional variation; examples include Arum (1996); Dee (1998); Hoxby
8

That said, the appropriations law that codified the increases in Title I funding was signed by President Bush on
January 10, 2002, meaning that Florida schools may have responded not only to expectations of further secular
increases in Title I funding but also to the realized appropriations. The distinction is not material for our purposes.

7

(1994); Jepsen (1999); and Sander (1998) in United States settings, and Andersen and Serritzlew
(2005) abroad.9 Most of these studies have found either modestly positive, or null or
inconsistent effects of private school competition on public school students’ educational
outcomes (Belfield and Levin, 2002; McEwan, 2000). These studies use a variety of estimation
techniques to attempt to overcome the simultaneity problem; while some studies rely on OLS
with covariates to adjust for possible omitted variables (Arum, 1996), most use some form of
instrumental variable analysis (Dee, 1998; Jepsen, 1999; Sander, 1998). Some studies use
population-level demographic data as instruments for private school attendance (Couch,
Shughart, and Williams, 1993), but most use some measure of the density of the Catholic
population in a given area (Dee, 1998; Hoxby, 1994; Jepsen, 1999; Sander, 1998) The rationale
is that larger populations of Catholics in a given area increase the likelihood that the Catholic
church will expend resources in that area to support a private Catholic school (Dee, 1998;
Hoxby, 1994; Jepsen, 1999). However, there are reasons to question the validity of religious
concentration as an instrument for private schooling (Altonji, Elder and Taber, 2004), and studies
relying on cross-sectional variation in private school concentration in a community are subject to
the usual omitted variables and reverse causation problems. In addition, Catholic shares might
capture only a small fraction of the private school landscape in large swaths of the country, such
as the south. For instance, in Florida, which runs the scholarship tuition program analyzed in
this paper, 12.08% of private schools operating in 2001 were Catholic. By contrast, 13.44%
were Baptist; 8.58% were evangelical, 8.25% were reported as Christian with no further
identifying information, and 13.93% were non-denominational.
9

There exists an even larger related literature on the performance effects of the degree of traditional school
competition. Well-known examples in this literature include Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2005), Hoxby (2000) and
Rothstein (2006) in the United States, and Clark (2009), and Gibbons, Machin and Silva (2008) in England. Hsieh
and Urquiola (2006) study the effects of generalized competition in Chile, and Lavy (2009) examines effects of
public school choice in Israel.

8

A few papers have taken a different tack and identified the effects of voucher programs
directly on student outcomes in the public schools. Greene and Marsh (2009) study the effects of
vouchers in Milwaukee, and find evidence of modest positive effects of private school
competition. However, the fact that in cross-section the degree of competition facing any given
school in Milwaukee is relatively similar and over time could be due to endogenous changes in
competition makes interpretation of evidence from Milwaukee more limited. Chakrabarti (2008)
and Hoxby (2003) make use of school-level differences in a Milwaukee school's percentage
eligible for vouchers, but one might be worried that schools with different levels of student
eligibility may be fundamentally different, and there is no arguably exogenous selection
mechanism. Other papers (e.g., Chakrabarti, 2007; Chiang, 2009; Figlio and Rouse, 2006;
Rouse et al., 2007; and West and Peterson, 2006) estimate the effects of receipt of an "F" grade
in Florida's school accountability system, because repeated receipt of the lowest grade triggered
voucher eligibility for students under the Opportunity Scholarship Program. But while these
papers find evidence that receipt of an "F" grade leads to improved student outcomes, it is
unclear to what extent these findings reflect the competitive effects of school vouchers versus the
performance effects of accountability pressure. Bohlmark and Lindahl (2008) and Sandstrom
and Bergstrom (2005) study the introduction of a voucher program in Sweden, but the principal
available outcomes are grades, rather than objective measures of test performance. In addition,
the Swedish evidence relies on changes in post-voucher private school enrollment for
identification, but expansion of the private sector is likely related to public school performance.
West and Woessmann (2008) make use of cross-country variation to find that countries with
more private schools have higher-performing public schools; they find evidence of a positive
cross-sectional relationship between the private school penetration and public school

9

performance using historical Catholic shares as an instrument for private schooling. Gallego
(2006) presents similar evidence using a cross-section of Chilean localities in which the
historical stock of Catholic priests in a community serve as an instrument for current voucher
schools.
The most similar work to ours in the present literature, a working paper by Chan and
McMillan (2009) written simultaneously with our paper, studies the effects of a tuition tax credit
that was phased in for two years in Ontario and then unexpectedly canceled. The authors take
advantage of the fact that some public schools were nearby a larger number of private schools at
the time of the voucher's introduction, an identification strategy that is fundamentally similar in
key respects to our own. They find that once Ontario began offering its tax credit, initially
valued at $700 and set to rise over time, public schools with a larger private school share in their
catchment area improved their students' test-passing rates, but these gains were not sustained
once the credit was ended.
The Florida Tax Credit Scholarship Program setting provides distinct advantages over
studying the Milwaukee voucher program or Florida's Opportunity Scholarship Program. The
voucher program being studied is not linked to an accountability system, so we are not
confounding voucher threats with accountability pressure, as is the case in studies that measure
the effects of "F" receipt under Florida's accountability plan. And unlike studies of the
Milwaukee program, we are able to observe data both before and after the introduction of the
voucher program, and take advantage of the fact that Florida is not a single educational market
like Milwaukee, a relatively small city from a spatial perspective. Our ability to study the
introduction of a voucher program at its outset, combined with our study of a state with a vast
variation in private school penetration on the eve of the program's introduction, offers

10

considerable opportunities for causal identification of the effects of a school voucher program in
the United States.
As mentioned above, our identification strategy is similar in nature to that of Chan and
McMillan's (2009) working paper using data from Ontario. Like Chan and McMillan, we find
evidence that the increased competitive pressure associated with school vouchers led to
improvements in public school performance. That said, our paper is distinct from theirs in a
number of key ways. First, we are able to investigate the effects of a voucher aimed at lowincome families, with a level of generosity that approaches the costs of sending a child to a
religious elementary school. The Ontario tuition tax credit began at a level sufficiently small that
it was unlikely to attract low-income families, and so was unlikely to lead to a demand shock for
that population. Our paper looks at the effects of a voucher on the types of schools unlikely to be
affected by the Ontario tax credit. Second, Florida's population is dramatically more disperse
than is Ontario's, as it has more than twenty major population centers as opposed to six,
affording us the ability to exploit a wider variety of cross-market differences in the nature of
private school competition. Third, while in Ontario families already enrolled in private schools
could collect tax credits, in Florida students must have spent a full year in the public schools to
collect a voucher. This fact means that the Florida voucher would work through the attraction of
new private school students rather than the subsidization of existing private school students.
We are also able to identify the effects of school vouchers for sets of schools that
experience different levels of incentive to respond to changes in competitive pressure. We
consider two specific dimensions – school grade span and district Title I policies—that we
believe moderate the extent to which public schools will experience the voucher program as a
threat. With regard to grade span, we posit that voucher competition is likely to be more intense

11

for elementary and middle schools, where the voucher covers a much larger fraction of the total
tuition bill, than for high schools. With regard to Title I policies, we use differences in schools’
likelihood of receiving Title I funds based on student body composition and district policies to
determine whether schools more at risk of losing Title I funds if they lose a few low-income
students respond more sharply to the policy than those whose Title I status is not in question.
Finally, and most importantly, there was a year lag between when the policy was
announced (and students began actively applying for the school voucher) and when students
actually began attending private schools. Therefore, we are uniquely able to identify the pure
competitive effects of private school vouchers, absent the composition and resource effects of
vouchers. Taken together with the new Chan and McMillan (2009) findings, our results provide
strong evidence of the potential effects of school vouchers on the public school system.

3. Florida Tax Credit Scholarships and the Private School Landscape in Florida
The FTC Program, signed into law in 2001 and opened to students in the 2002-2003
school year, provides corporations with tax credits for donations that they make to FTC
organizations. These organizations, in turn, provide scholarships to students who qualify for free
or reduced-price lunch and who either attended a Florida public school for the full school year
before program entry, or who are entering kindergarten or first grade. With the exception of
these early grade private school students, students already attending private schools in Florida
are not eligible for first-time scholarships (though students who enter a private school on a
scholarship are eligible to retain their scholarships in future years, so long as their family income
remains below twice the federal poverty line.)

12

We exploit geographic variation in potential private school competition to estimate
differential effects of this program. Because we want to employ an identification strategy that is
not subject to reverse causation bias, we characterize geographic areas by the amount of private
school competition in existence before the program was announced; we have no reason to
believe that there was anticipatory entry by private schools, as the program had not been widely
discussed for long prior to its announcement, and no students could attend private schools using
a voucher in the year following announcement; students could only apply for school vouchers
during that year. Thus, while there was increased entry into the private school market following
the introduction of the program, our results do not identify program effects off of the entry of
these new private schools.
To illustrate the nature of private schooling in the state of Florida on the eve of the
program's announcement, we examined parent reports of their children’s school attendance in the
5% microdata sample of the 2000 Census IPUMS. As seen in Table 1, private school attendance
was fairly widespread overall; 11.4% of Florida students aged 6-17 attended private schools.
Unsurprisingly, given the resource constraints of low-income students, private school attendance
rates were dramatically lower for this group. Among students in income groups that would
become eligible for the FTC program, only 5.4% attended private schools on the eve of the
voucher.
One can see from Table 1 that metropolitan areas of Florida had very different levels of
private school penetration, as well as very different degrees to which low-income students
participated in private schooling prior to the introduction of the program.10 The share of lowincome students attending private schools varied widely in different metropolitan areas, ranging
from 1.4% attendance in Punta Gorda to 7.9% attendance in the Melbourne-Titusville-Cocoa10

Metropolitan areas are ordered by school-age population for ease of apples-to-apples comparisons.

13

Palm Bay area. Similar-sized metropolitan areas had very different levels of private school
penetration; for instance, Ocala and Tallahassee were nearly the same size, but Ocala's lowincome population share in private schooling was nearly twice that of Tallahassee's.
Interestingly, Tallahassee had a larger overall private school attendance share than Ocala, so the
variation across metropolitan areas is even more nuanced. We employ both cross-metropolitan
area and within-metropolitan area variation in private school penetration in this study, because
the concentration of existing private schools is not uniform across a metropolitan area. This
difference in penetration of private schools provides us with some degree of variation in the
extent to which public schools in different areas face competitive pressure from private schools
that could realistically entice away low-income students with FTC scholarships. We present
information on within-metropolitan area differences in private school competition in the next
section.

4. Data and Methods
4.1 Data: Our analysis draws on several sources of data from the state of Florida. The Florida
Department of Education (FDOE) publishes public and private school addresses, including
latitude and longitude measures for the public schools. The FDOE also publishes details on
public schools such as the grades that they receive from the FDOE, the grade ranges that they
serve, and the percent of their students that are subsidized lunch eligible. Identifying schools as
elementary, middle or high school grades is important because we match private school
competitors to public schools based on their grade levels served. In the cases in which the FDOE
did not report the grade ranges served, we deduced whether the school served elementary, middle

14

or high school grades based on the grades of observed test-takers in the school. The schools
were then classified as elementary, middle, high, K-8, 6-12, or all grades.
The address information was geocoded using ARCGis software to generate the
competition measures detailed below. Physical addresses were used to geocode private school
locations, yielding valid locations for 85% of private schools. We used latitude and longitude
data to locate the public schools, as this generated valid locations for a higher proportion of
schools than did using physical addresses. The geocoding process generated valid data for 89%
of the public schools, which were then matched to the student data.
Test scores and demographic characteristics for all students in Florida public schools are
provided through FDOE's Education Data Warehouse. We also have information on the schools
that students attended during the year. Some students attended multiple schools during the school
year. Because we lacked information for the proportion of time students spent in each school, we
randomly assigned children observed in multiple schools to one of the schools in which they
were observed. Our analysis includes test score data from the 1999-2000 school year through the
2006-2007 school year. While we could have also included test score data for the 1998-1999
academic year, the first year of statewide student testing in Florida, we opted to begin our
analysis in 1999-2000 for two main reasons. First, the test scores in 1999-2000 are more
comparable to future years of data because the state calculated a developmental scale score on
the statewide criterion-referenced examination, the Florida Comprehensive Achievement Test
(FCAT). Second, 1999 is the first year in which Florida assigned letter grades to schools as part
of its school accountability program. Restricting our analysis to the post-accountability years
allows us to avoid any contaminating effects from the introduction of the accountability program
in the period prior to the introduction of the FTC scholarship program. As a further check, we

15

also present additional evidence using a longer panel of older data to evaluate the potential
exogeneity of our measure of private school competition for public schools.
Students classified as learning disabled were excluded from the analysis. Disabled
students are eligible for a more generous scholarship program, the McKay Scholarship Program,
and the new FTC program should therefore have had no additional effect on schools' efforts to
retain these students by improving their education. Indeed, applicants for vouchers under the
FTC program who were disabled and therefore eligible for a McKay Scholarship were directed
to that program instead. The full dataset includes 9,765,799 student-year observations, observed
over the 1999-2000 to 2006-2007 school years, for a total of 2,787,158 students. Because scores
for students in the same school in the same year are likely to be correlated, we cluster our
standard errors at the school-year level.

4.2 Measures: Our dependent measure is a student's developmental scale test scores on the
Florida Comprehensive Achievement Test, a criterion-referenced test used for school and student
accountability. To ease interpretation, test scores are standardized at the grade level.
We use four primary measures to estimate the competitive pressure that public schools
face from private competitors. While our measures of competition are all variations on a similar
theme, we believe that it is important to report our results using a variety of competition
measures in order to help to ensure that our results are not due to a fortuitous choice of
competition measure. Our first measure is the crows-flight distance between the physical
addresses of each public school and the nearest private competitor. A private school qualifies as
a competitor to a public school if it serves any of the grades taught in that public school. We call
this the "distance" measure of competition. We find that, as Florida's population is heavily

16

urban, the overwhelming majority of public schools have a private school within five miles.
Therefore, we restrict our analysis in this paper to schools with at least one private school within
five miles.
Second, we consider the number of private competitors within a five mile radius of the
public school (“local” private competitors). We call this the "density" measure of competition.
The distance and density measures gauge whether easier access to a private school of any type
increased the competitive pressure on public schools when the new policy lowered the effective
price of private school for eligible students.
Third, we consider the number of types of local private schools. A type is defined by
religious affiliation; schools self-identify as to their affiliation when reporting to the FDOE. We
identify 10 types of private schools, including non-religious; non-denominational or
multidenominational; Catholic; Protestant; Evangelical; Baptist; Islamic, Jewish; Christian
general (no specific denominational information); and other religious schools. A type is
considered to be represented if at least one school of that type is located within a five mile radius
of the public school. We call this the "diversity" measure of competition.
In the final specification of the model, we use the counts of different types of schools
within a five mile radius to generate a modified Herfindahl index score for each school. We call
this the "concentration" measure of competition. The Herfindahl index is a measure of market
concentration given by the sum of the squares of the market shares held by each competitor. In
our measure, a "competitor" is defined as a religious (or secular) type r, and the share is given
by:

Count r

 Count

. Higher values of the Herfindahl index indicate a greater concentration of the
r

R

share of private schools in the hands of one particular denomination or type of school. Thus, a

17

Herfindahl index score of 1 indicates a monopoly on the private school market by one
denomination or type of school, while scores closer to 0 represent markets that are well-served
by a variety of denominations. These last two measures capture the variety of options available
to students; public schools in areas with a greater variety of options should feel more competitive
pressure in the wake of the policy change. In order to ease interpretation of our results, we report
the results of regression models in which we measure negative distance and one minus the
Herfindahl measure, so that all four measures' models would generate results in which a positive
coefficient means that more competition is associated with higher levels of student outcomes.
We also multiply the coefficients on the competition variables by 100 in our tables to be able to
distinguish between relatively small differences in effect sizes; descriptions of the effects in the
text convert the coefficients back to their natural metrics.
The last three measures of competition are based on counts of private schools, and weight
large and small schools equally. We prefer count-based measures of competition because we
believe that it is more plausible for public school educators to know whether there are private
schools nearby than how large or small those private schools are, or how many potential slots
they have for voucher program participants. That said, we have also estimated models in which
we measure the total number of potential spaces available within a five mile radius (based on the
number of seats per grade level observed in the data) of the public school. The results of these
specifications are consistently along the same levels of statistical significance as those reported
in the paper; for instance, the relevant t-statistics from the model specification analogous to that
reported in Table 3 range from 10.6 to 13.4. Out of concern for paper length, we do not include
results of this competition measure in the paper, but the full set of results are available on
request.

18

Additional individual-level controls include demographic characteristics such as the sex
and race of the student (Black, Hispanic, Asian, or other race; White is the omitted category),
English language learner status, and free or reduced price lunch eligibility. These characteristics
are all reported by schools to the Florida Education Data Warehouse.
Until 2000-01, Florida only tested students in a handful of grades; beginning in 2000-01
Florida began to test students in every grade from three through ten. Therefore, we do not
observe prior test scores for all students in our analysis. For this reason, and because we would
lose another pre-policy year of data were we to include them, our primary models do not include
lagged test scores for students, but we have estimated our models including lagged scores. In
general, the results that we present are weaker than the results that occur using the same sample
when we control for lagged test scores. If anything, therefore, we present estimates that are on
the modest side.
We controlled for some time-varying characteristics of schools that affect the degree of
competitive pressure they may feel. Specifically, we controlled for the grades that schools
received from the FDOE in the prior year; schools with lower FDOE grades may feel particular
pressure to increase their scores to avoid accountability sanctions, independent of the effects of
the FTC policy. Missing dummy variables were included to preserve information for students in
schools for which these data were not reported. We also controlled for the percent of the school’s
student body that was eligible for free and reduced-price lunch. Finally, a series of year dummies
were included to account for time trends in scores.

4.3. Models: We use a series of fixed effects regression models to isolate the effect of
competitive pressures from private schools on public school performance. Our basic model is:

19

(1) Yist   s   C s * Pt   X it   S st   T  

where Yist represents the math (or reading) score for student i in school s in year t;  s represents
a fixed effect for school s; C s represents the measures of the competitive pressure faced by
school s; Pt is an indicator for whether year t is post-policy implementation;11 X it is a vector of
student characteristics, including sex, race, English language learner status, and eligibility for
free or reduced price lunch, for student i in year t; S st is a vector of tim-varying school
characteristics; T is a series of year dummies; and  represents an error term. The coefficient on
the competition measures interacted with the post-policy indicator, β, is our parameter of interest.
We estimate models with just the first year of the program -- before any students have left the
public schools but following the program's announcement -- as well as those with multiple postimplementation years in order to gauge the evolution of the effects of the program over time.
Other models reported later in the program interact our competition measures with variables that
reflect how strongly schools might respond to the policy. In particular, schools might respond to
the policy more when they stand to lose more financial resources were a student to leave the
school or when they believe that students are more likely to leave the school. We take up these
considerations later in the paper.
We report robust standard errors, clustered at the school-year level, in our regression
results. We have also estimated our models in which we have aggregated all data to the school
level, and find consistent results.
11

In our first set of models, post-implementation is simply the year during which students are applying for vouchers
but none have left the public sector. We also estimate models with year-by-year post-implementation estimates. In
this case P can be thought of as a vector of post-implementation year variables.

20

4.4. Descriptive statistics: Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the dependent and
independent measures used in the regressions. Most students in Florida had access to at least
some nearby private school options. The average distance from a child’s current public school to
the nearest private school option was 1.42 miles. Figure 1 shows the distribution of distance
between a child’s current public school to the nearest private school that served at least some of
the same grades as the public school for all students, and for eligible students specifically. These
graphs indicate that most students, regardless of program eligibility, attended public schools with
private competitors that were within five miles of the public school, although eligible students
tended to attend schools with a slightly closer nearest competitor than did non-eligible students.
Moreover, students generally had access to a relatively large number of schools, and a
fairly diverse sampling of types of schools, within five miles of their public schools. Students
attended schools that had an average of 13.97 private competitors within a five mile radius,
representing an average of 5.02 different types of religious (or secular) affiliations (Table 2).
Figures 2 and 3 show the distribution of number of schools within a five mile radius of students’
public schools and the number of types within that radius, respectively. Eligible students tended
to have a greater number of private school competitors within a five mile radius of their public
schools and a greater number of types of denominations among those competitors than did the
population at large. Finally, Figure 4 shows the distribution of Herfindahl index scores. As can
be seen in the graph, a sizeable fraction of public schools face just one type of private
competitor, leading to a Herfindahl index of one. In order to have a higher value of this
concentration measure equate to higher degrees of competition, we operationalize this variable as
one minus the Herfindahl index in our regression models.

21

The degree of variation in these figures is somewhat unsurprising since our data draw
from the entire state. However, even within metropolitan areas, a high degree of variation in
competition measures exists. Figures 5 through 8 present box-and-whisker plots of the
distributions of our four competition measures in each of the eight most populous school districts
in Florida. As can be seen, there exist considerable differences both within and between
metropolitan areas in different parts of the state. Therefore, our analyses are driven both by
within-area and between-area differences in the level of potential voucher competition faced by
schools.

5. Results

5.1. Immediate effects of the introduction of the voucher program: There are three main ways in
which the introduction of a school voucher could affect public school performance. Public
schools could react to private school competition by altering their policies, practices, or effort -the direct competitive effect of school vouchers. In addition, school vouchers could affect public
schools by changing the set of students who attend the school; if students are positively selected
into private schools with the voucher, this could lead to a reduced-ability clientele remaining in
the public schools, or vice versa. Figlio, Hart and Metzger (2009) find that the voucher program
led to negative selection into the private schools, indicating that the ability levels of those
remaining in the public sector are higher than before. In the presence of positive peer effects,
this could mean that part of a positive "competitive" effect of vouchers is the changing of the
composition of the public school student body. A third possibility is that, so long as only a few
students leave a public school with school vouchers, the vouchers could have a positive resource

22

effect on public schools, as effective per-pupil resources might increase due to the indivisibility
of classroom teachers. On the other hand, especially in Title I schools (which comprise a
majority of public schools in Florida), losing students eligible for free or reduced-price lunches
results in resource reductions that could affect student outcomes as well.
It is possible to eliminate the composition and resource effects of school vouchers and
concentrate solely on the competition effects of school vouchers by looking only at the first year
of the voucher program -- in the 2001-02 school year, after the program's announcement but
before students could actually leave the public schools on a voucher -- in comparison with prior
years before the program was announced. During this entire academic year, students in the
public schools were applying for private school vouchers but had not yet left for the private
schools. We therefore begin with school fixed effects estimates of the effects of competition on
student performance in the first year of the program, when students were applying for school
vouchers but none had yet left the public schools.
The results of this first analysis are reported in Table 3, in which the point estimates (with
standard errors clustered at the school-year level) of the key competition variable for the four
alternative models of competition are reported. As can be seen in the table, all four measures of
competition are positively and significantly related to student performance. Every mile the
nearest private school moves closer, public school math performance increases by 0.015 of a
standard deviation (0.014 in reading.) Likewise, a one standard deviation increase in the number
of nearby private schools increases test scores by about 0.02 to 0.03 of a standard deviation in
reading and math; a one standard deviation increase in the variety of nearby private schools
increases scores in both subjects by about 0.02 of a standard deviation. A one standard deviation
increase in the (negative) concentration of private schools nearby is associated with about a 0.01

23

of a standard deviation increase in reading and math test scores. While these estimated effects
are modest in magnitude, they are very precisely estimated and indicate a positive relationship
between private school competition and student performance in the public schools even before
any students leave the public sector to go to the private sector.12 That is, these results provide a
first piece of evidence that public schools responded to the threat of losing students to the private
schools via the voucher program.
The third column of Table 3 presents the results of a model in which the dependent
variable is the average of a student's standardized reading and standardized math exam (or the
single exam score in the case of a student taking just one or the other.) We do this for two
reasons: First, in 1999-2000, elementary students took only one test or the other, but not both, in
the same year, so aggregating the two tests into the same dependent variable ensures that we
include all test-taking students in the same model. Second, we combine the two tests so that we
do not need to report two sets of regression results in all subsequent tables. Nonetheless, the
three columns yield nearly identical results.
It may be that the levels of existing private school competition merely reflect the effects
of being in more densely populated areas that are changing over time. We therefore repeat the
analysis reported in column three, but also control for the log of the number of students attending
public schools within a five mile radius of the public school in question. As can be seen,
controlling for this measure of public school student density leads to a very modest reduction in
the point estimates of the effects of voucher competition, though the overall magnitudes and
statistical significance levels remain basically unchanged. We can conclude that any correlation

12

We have also estimated these models aggregated to the school-by-year level and continue to see strong positive
and statistically significant estimated effects of private school competition on public school performance. These
results are available on request. We therefore conclude that regardless of whether we estimate student-level models
with clustered standard errors or aggregated models, the fundamental results remain unaltered.

24

between public school student density and private school concentration measures is not driving
our estimates of the competitive threats of vouchers. We focus the remainder of the paper on
specifications based on that reported in the third column of Table 3.
One potential concern is that any apparent competitive effects of private schools on
public school performance picked up in regressions may simply reflect superior performance by
schools that have close competitors, regardless of whether or not scholarships are offered to lowincome students. For instance, perhaps schools of all different types are more likely to open up
in areas with a large concentration of high-income families. This would produce a spurious
positive correlation between public school scores (since high-income children tend to outperform
their low-income peers on standardized tests, on average) and competition (McEwan, 2000).
While the school fixed effect would control for this in a cross-sectional regression, school fixed
effects will not remove spurious correlations between competition measures and longitudinal
score gains, or in trends over time in the performance of public schools in a community.
Therefore, it is useful to test how competition and public school performance levels and
longitudinal trends were related prior to the introduction of the policy.
One test for whether there were differences in student performance based on the strength
of competition prior to the introduction of the FTC scholarship program involves estimating
models that include a one-year lead of the policy -- in the 2000-01 school year before the policy
was announced. If schools with nearby private schools were improving over time, one would
expect to observe positive coefficients on these policy lead variables. Indeed, as seen in Table 4,
we do observe modest positive coefficients on the lead of the policy variable -- statistically
significant in two of the four models -- suggesting that there may be some evidence that public
schools with more nearby private schools (and a larger number of nearby private school types)

25

had been improving prior to the voucher program. That said, the coefficients on the lead of the
policy variable are at most one-fifth of the magnitudes of the corresponding coefficients on the
first year of the policy, suggesting that a break from trend has been taking place. Unfortunately,
Florida did not collect a long panel of statewide data prior to the policy introduction that would
allow us to gauge the presence of long-term trends. The results with the lead of the policy
variable indicate that it is also important to see whether the policy had differential estimated
effects on the schools for which we would expect to see larger impacts.
Because we have only two years of pre-program data, we cannot rule out the possibility
that public schools with a larger amount of private school competition nearby had been on a
different growth trajectory during the period of time prior to the policy's introduction. We can,
however, use a different data source to investigate the potential presence of longer trends in
public school performance. Prior to the policy's introduction, each Florida school district
administered its own nationally-normed standardized test (generally the Stanford Achievement
Test, Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills or the Iowa Test of Basic Skills), and the three most
populous school districts in the state (Broward County, Miami-Dade County, and Palm Beach
County) have provided us with school average reading and math performance on the relevant
standardized tests for the years prior to the policy's introduction.13 Figures 9 through 12 present
graphs showing the relationships between our four private school competition measures and
school-level changes in average national percentile rankings in reading and mathematics from
1996-97, five years before the policy introduction to 2000-01, the year before the policy
introduction. As can be seen in the graphs, there is no apparent relationship between the level of

13

These three counties yield results that are roughly representative of the rest of the state. Were we to restrict our
Table 4 analysis to just these three counties, the figures in the first column would be 2.218 (with a standard error of
0.680) for distance; 0.216 (with a standard error of 0.040) for density; 0.955 (with a standard error of 0.256) for
diversity; and 4.690 (with a standard error of 3.210) for concentration.

26

private school competition present in 2000 (when we measure competition for the purposes of
our analyses) and over-time changes in school-level test performance. The correlations between
the competition measures and changes in test performance in the long difference are -0.086 for
distance, -0.023 for density, +0.014 for diversity, and +0.006 for concentration.
Moreover, year-by-year comparisons demonstrate that there was no general improvement
trend in the schools with more local private school competitors. Results of school fixed effect
regressions of school-year average test scores in the three school districts on year dummies and
year-specific leads of the competition measures indicate that there is no consistent pattern in the
relationship between 2000 levels of competition measures and the leads of the policy over the
longer time horizon.14 For example, with regard to the diversity measure of competition, the
coefficients of the interaction between competition and dummies for 1997-98, 1998-99 and
1999-2000, compared with 1996-97, are -0.17, -0.17 and -0.18.15 The same three coefficients for
the density measure of competition are +0.02, +0.00 and -0.04, and for the concentration
measure the three coefficients are -3.0, -3.6 and -2.1. For the distance measure of competition
there is a trend over these three years (coefficients of +0.19, -0.09, and -0.17) but they follow no
apparent pattern as compared with 1996-97 or 2000-01 and none are statistically distinct from
one another. Therefore, while we cannot rule out with absolute certainty the possibility that
long-term trends are responsible for our results, the available evidence contradicts that
explanation.
Out of concern that results may be driven by particular districts that house a large
proportion of the students in the state, we estimate the same analysis excluding, one at a time,

14

This paragraph presents some basic findings from these fixed effect regressions. Full results are available on
request.
15
The dependent variable in these comparisons is the average reading plus math national percentile rank in the
school.

27

each county in the state. We find consistent evidence that, regardless of which county is
dropped, the signs and general significance levels of the competition interactions are maintained.
That said, the magnitudes of our key findings are notably smaller when we exclude Dade
County, home of Miami and the largest county in the state. When Dade County is excluded, the
magnitude of our estimated effects of voucher competition effects fall by between 10 and 20
percent, though remain statistically significant at effectively the same levels as when Dade
County is included in the analysis. No other county apparently affects our findings at all, as
when we drop any of the other 66 Florida counties, our results remain virtually identical to the
full-state analysis. Therefore, it is difficult to believe that some combination of counties is
driving the general nature of our results, though the results are clearly stronger in the case of
Dade County than in the rest of the state.

5.3. Differential estimated effects by incentives to respond: One would expect that some schools
would have a greater degree of incentive to respond to potential competition associated with
school vouchers aimed at low-income students than would others. We consider two major ways
in which schools may face different incentives to react to competitive pressure. First, we suspect
that elementary and middle schools will have more of an incentive to respond to competitive
pressure than would high schools because the vouchers cover so much more of the share of
private school tuition and fees in the early grades versus in the high school grades. While the
differences in the share covered might not be salient for higher-income families (and therefore
estimation of differences in responsiveness across school levels might not be as relevant in the
case of a universal tuition tax credit like the one studied by Chan and McMillan (2009)) the
difference in out-of-pocket expenses between an elementary or middle school and a high school

28

might be strongly prohibitive for many low-income families. Public high schools, knowing this,
might not react as strongly to voucher competition as would public elementary and middle
schools. Second, we suspect that public schools who stand to gain or lose the largest amounts of
revenues depending on how many voucher-eligible students they retain would be more
responsive than would those schools less likely to lose large amounts of revenues. We take
advantage of plausibly naturally-occurring variation across the 67 Florida school districts in the
implementation of the federal Title I program in an attempt to gain purchase on this second
question.
There exists strong evidence to believe that the costs of attending a private school on a
voucher would be more prohibitive in the case of high schools than in the case of elementary and
middle schools, given that the voucher is capped at the same level regardless of the school level.
In the case of the two Scholarship Funding Organizations that serve the southern half of Florida
(Florida P.R.I.D.E. and the Carrie Meek Foundation) we have access to the actual out-of-pocket
costs incurred by families for tuition, fees and books for students who participate in the voucher.
As can be seen in Figure 13, the typical out-of-pocket expense is considerably higher for voucher
participants in high school than it is for voucher participants in elementary and middle school.
While the typical out-of-pocket expense post-voucher for elementary and middle school students
is close to zero, it is around two thousand dollars for a high school student. That this is a
substantial amount of money for the low-income families eligible for school vouchers in Florida
is reinforced by the findings reported in Figure 14. In order to send a child to a high school
using a school voucher, the typical family must spend over one-tenth of its family income per
student, more than twice the share of family income necessary to send a child to an elementary or
middle school using a voucher.

29

Table 5 presents the estimated effects of increased private school competition through the
school voucher on combined public school test scores, broken down by elementary and middle
schools versus high schools. As can be seen, in each of the four model specifications, the
estimated effect of voucher competition is sizably and statistically significantly stronger in the
case of elementary and middle schools than in the case of high schools. In all four cases, the
magnitude of the estimated effect in lower school levels is two to three times the estimated
magnitude of the effect in high schools. This provides the first piece of evidence that public high
schools were less responsive to private school competition that came about through the voucher
program than were public elementary and middle schools.
We next consider whether public schools that face increased financial incentives to
respond to voucher competition do so. As mentioned above, all public schools may experience
resource effects as a consequence of losing students to private schools on the voucher. However,
no schools have as large of an incentive to retain free or reduced-price lunch eligible students as
those who are on the margin of receiving federal Title I aid. These federal resources, which
average more than $500 per pupil, are directed to school districts, which then allocate them to the
elementary and middle schools where low-income students attend.16 Not every public school
with low-income students receives Title I aid; indeed, in 2001-02, 61 percent of elementary
schools and 31 percent of middle schools statewide received Title I aid. Title I aid is allocated
based on where schools rank within the school district; the highest-poverty schools receive Title
I aid while the lower-poverty schools do not, and the poverty threshold that generates Title I
funding differs considerably from district to district. In some school districts, generally very
small, rural districts, all elementary or middle schools are Title I schools, and school districts
16

In Florida, high schools do not receive Title I funding. The potential loss of Title I funding is therefore another
possible reason for the differences in estimated effects of voucher competition for elementary and middle schools
versus high schools.

30

also have discretion to limit Title I funding to elementary schools. In Florida, the overwhelming
majority (92 percent) of Title I schools are considered "Schoolwide" Title I schools, where the
Title I aid is not required to follow individual students per se but can be spent anywhere in the
school (as the school is considered to be sufficiently low-income that all uses of the money
would likely serve low-income students.) The remaining eight percent of Title I schools are
considered "targeted assistance" schools, where the school's allocation for Title I must be spent
on the low-income students themselves.17 In either case, there is a large discrete jump in funding
for a school that comes with being considered a Title I school versus not being a Title I school.
Title I funding, and the number of schools receiving Title I aid in Florida, began rising
monotonically starting in 1999, and schools that were just below the 2001-02 cutoff for Title I
aid were likely to believe that they stood a good chance of receiving Title I aid in 2002-03.18
The likely expansion of Title I funds, which enjoyed strong bipartisan support in Congress, was
well-known to Florida schools for all or most of the 2001-02 school year, according to
conversations with school officials. While we do not know when exactly schools knew what the
Title I cutoff for the next year in their school district would be, it is reasonable to believe that
schools already receiving Title I funding in 2001-02 were relatively secure in the knowledge that
they would likely continue to receive funding in 2002-03, and the poorest schools not yet
receiving Title I funding in 2001-02 might expect that, should they not lose many low-income
students to private schools via the voucher, they might themselves become Title I schools in the
next year.

17

This differs from the nation as a whole. Nationally, just over half of all Title I schools were schoolwide Title I
schools in 2001-02.
18
The reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act on January 8, 2002, and the signing of the
associated appropriations law on January 10, 2002, further increased the level of Title I spending, though less in
Florida than in other states. Nonetheless, this is likely to have reinforced the belief that schools close to the 2001-02
Title I cutoff might qualify for Title I the following year were they to not lose many qualifying students.

31

We envision that, in 2001-02, during which time public school students were applying for
school vouchers, there were five different groups of public elementary and middle schools: (1)
schools in districts where every school of a given level receives Title I funding; (2) schools in
districts where no school in that given level receives Title I funding; (3) schools that received
Title I funding in 2001-02 and, we suspect, expected to continue to receive funding in 2002-03;
(4) schools on the margin of Title I funding in 2001-02 who might have expected to receive
funding in 2002-03 were they to not lose many low-income students; and (5) schools below this
margin who likely expected not to receive funding in 2002-2003. Of the 67 school districts, 30
districts identified all elementary schools as Title I schools, and 15 districts identified all middle
schools as Title I schools in 2001-02 (group 1). All school districts had at least one Title I
elementary school in 2001-02, but in 24 districts no middle schools were Title I schools (group
2). Of schools receiving Title I in 2001-02 (group 3), nearly 96 percent continued to receive
Title I funding in 2002-03, indicating that ex post the presumption that with increased generosity
would come some measure of Title I security appears to be accurate.
It is not obvious how to draw the dividing line between groups 4 and 5, so we choose to
be agnostic and look instead at how the school districts redrew their Title I allocation thresholds
between 2001-02 and 2002-03. Specifically, we consider a school to be in group 4 if their 200102 student free/reduced-price lunch share is below the 2001-02 threshold for inclusion but above
what would be the district's 2002-03 threshold for inclusion, and we consider a school in group 5
if its 2001-02 free/reduced-price lunch share is below what would be the district's 2002-03
threshold for inclusion. This distinction appears to be discerning: 40 percent of our group 4
schools ultimately received Title I funding in 2002-03, while only 5 percent of group 5 schools
did. In 17 school districts, the threshold for elementary school Title I inclusion was lower in

32

2002-03 than it was in 2001-02, as compared with one district in which the threshold increased.
In five school districts, the threshold for middle school Title I inclusion was lower in 2002-03
than it was in 2001-02, while it increased in two districts. Hence, while we do not know how
much schools knew about their prospects for receiving Title I aid the next year, this definition at
least allows us to speculate as to which schools might have been on the margin of Title I receipt.
We are particularly interested in the differential effects of voucher competition for group 4, these
schools that we consider to be on the margin.
We estimate separate effects of voucher competition for three groups -- groups 1 (alwaysreceivers in district), 2 (never-receivers in district), and 4 (on the margin of Title I receipt) -relative to groups 3 (almost sure receivers) and 5 (almost sure non-receivers), which we lump
together for now. Table 6 reports the differential estimated effects of voucher competition for
these different groups. The estimated effect of competition for schools in districts where they
would always receive Title I aid tends to be negative, though it is only statistically significantly
different from zero in the case of the concentration measure of competition. The estimated
effects of competition for those schools that never receive Title I follows the same patterns as the
estimated effects for "almost sure Title I" schools and "almost sure not Title I" schools. The
estimated effect of private school competition for schools that we measure to be in group 4, on
the other hand, is always positive and strongly statistically significantly different from the other
groups of schools. This result indicates that public schools that are likely to receive Title I aid in
the next year if they retain their low-income students, but not if they don't, tend to
disproportionately improve in the voucher-threat year.
Title I assistance is not the only way in which program-eligible students might plausibly
bring resources to a school. Schools on average tend to receive more funding from their districts

33

the more students they have in the school, and therefore these students -- like all other students -could generate resources for the school. We therefore repeat the same exercise, but now also
include the 2001-02 percentage eligible for free or reduced-price lunch (interacted with a dummy
variable for post-policy and with that dummy for post-policy times the competition measure, as
is the case with the other interacted variables. This interaction allows us to consider both ways
in which more program-eligible students might bring more revenues to a school. There is no
need to interact the 2001-02 percentage free or reduced-price lunch with the competition
measure, as this interaction is subsumed into the school fixed effect.) The results of this
specification are reported in Table 7. The findings from Table 6 remain basically unchanged,
and that in two of the four specifications there is a positive and significant relationship between
the estimated effects of the degree of competition and the percentage in the school eligible to
receive a school voucher. These results again indicate that the schools on the margin of
becoming Title I eligible -- the schools that would gain considerably were they to become Title I
eligible -- are also the schools that apparently respond the most to the competitive threats of
school vouchers. There is consistent evidence that the schools with the biggest incentives to
improve as a result of the voucher program were the schools that improved.

5.4. Longer-term estimates of the effects of school vouchers: We also investigate whether the
estimated effects of the voucher program persist to later years. After the first year of the
program, in addition to the competitive effects of the program there are also resource and
composition effects as students leave the public schools for private schools under the voucher
program. These results can be seen in Table 8, which presents results of models that include
year-by-year estimates of the effects of the voucher program competition as well as leads of the

34

policy. Table 8 shows that the estimated effects of the voucher program grow stronger over
time; this could be due to increased knowledge of the program which might contribute to greater
competitive pressure or to composition and resource effects. It is difficult to disentangle the
reasons for this strengthening over time in the estimated effects of the voucher program.

6. Discussion
Our results indicate that the increased competitive pressure faced by public schools
associated with the introduction of Florida's FTC Scholarship Program led to general
improvements in public school performance. Both greater ease of access to private school
options (measured by the distance and density measures) and the variety of options that students
have in terms of the religious (or secular) affiliations of private schools (measured by the
diversity and concentration index measures) are positively associated with public school
students’ test scores following the introduction of the FTC policy. The gains occur immediately,
before students left the public schools to use a voucher, implying that competitive threats are
responsible for at least some of the estimated effects of the voucher program. The gains appear
to be much more pronounced in the schools most at risk to lose students (elementary and middle
schools, where the price of private school attendance with a voucher is much lower) and in the
schools that are on the margin of Title I funding (with the attendant increases in revenues that
might accrue.)
That said, our study has several limitations. First, our measures of competition reflect the
state of the private school market in 2001, before private schools had a chance to respond to the
FTC scholarship program. Although that ensures that the competition measure is not
endogenous to post-policy test scores, it does give a less accurate view of the competitive

35

pressures faced by schools as more time passes following the introduction of the FTC program.
However, since we view this measure of competition as an instrument for the true degree of
competition faced by public schools, these are likely to be conservative estimates of the effects
of competitive pressures on public school students’ test scores.
Second, our study includes only Florida data. It is possible that the dynamics between
competitive pressures and public students’ test scores are systematically different in Florida than
in the rest of the nation. In particular, over 90 percent of Florida’s students live in the top 20
most populous metropolitan areas represented in Table 1. In states with a greater share of the
population in rural areas, the effects of a voucher program may not exert the same degree of
competitive pressure on public schools. (That said, in sensitivity testing we do find evidence that
rural schools with nearby private alternatives respond similarly to urban and suburban schools
with similar levels of measured competition.) It may also be the case that Florida's diverse range
of private school options may mean that Florida has a larger amount of private school
competition in existence relative to other places. To the extent that this is true, it limits the
study's generalizability. Nonetheless, this study indicates that private school competition,
brought about by the infusion of means-tested scholarships aimed at low-income families, could
have sizeable effects on the performance of traditional public schools.

36

References
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., & Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1).
Andersen, S. C., & Serritzlew, S. (2005, Aug 11-13). The unintended effects of private school
competition. Paper presented at the 14th Conference of the Nordic-Political-ScienceAssociation, Reykjavik, Iceland.
Arum, R. (1996). Do private schools force public schools to compete? American Sociological
Review, 61(1), 29-46.
Belfield, C. R., & Levin, H. M. (2002). The effects of competition between schools on educational
outcomes: A review for the United States. Review of Educational Research, 72(2), 279-341.
Bohlmark, A., & Lindahl, M. (2008). Does school privatization improve educational achievement?
Evidence from Sweden's voucher reform. IZA Discussion Paper #3691, September.
Chakrabarti, R. (2007). Vouchers, public school response, and the role of incentives: Evidence from
Florida. FRB of New York Staff Report No. 306. Available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1028557
Chakrabarti, R. (2008). Can increasing private school participation and monetary loss in a voucher
program afect public school performance? Evidence from Milwaukee. Journal of Public
Economics, 92(5-6), 1371-1393.
Chan, P. C. W., & McMillan, R. (2009). School choice and public school performance: Evidence
from Ontario's tuition tax credit. Working paper, University of Toronto.
Chiang, H. (2009). How accountability pressure on failing schools affects student achievement.
Journal of Public Economics.
Clark, D. (2009). The performance and competitive effects of school autonomy. Journal of Political
Economy, 117(4):745-783.
Couch, J. F., Shughart, W. F., & Williams, A. L. (1993). Private school enrollment and public-school
performance. Public Choice, 76(4), 301-312.
Cullen, J. B., Jacob, B. A., & Levitt, S. (2006). The effect of school choice on participants: Evidence
from randomized lotteries. Econometrica, 74(5), 1191-1230.
Dee, T. S. (1998). Competition and the quality of public schools. Economics of Education Review,
17(4), 419-427.
Epple, D. & Romano, R. (forthcoming). Peer effects in education: A survey of the theory and
evidence. In J. Behabib, A, Bisin, and M. Jackson, eds., Handbook of Social Economics.

37

Figlio, D.N., Hart, C.M.D., & Metzger, M. (2009). Who uses a means-tested scholarship and what do
they choose? Economics of Education Review, 29(2): 301-317.
Figlio, D.N., & Kenny, L.W. (2009). Public sector performance measurement and stakeholder
support. Journal of Public Economics.
Figlio, D. N., & Rouse, C. E. (2006). Do accountability and voucher threats improve low-performing
schools? Journal of Public Economics, 90(1-2), 239-255.
Friedman, M. (1962). Chapter 6. The role of government in education Capitalism and Freedom (pp.
85-98). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Gallego, F. (2006). Voucher-school competition, incentives, and outcomes: Evidence from Chile.
Working paper, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile.
Gibbons, S., Machin, S., & Silva, O. (2008). Choice, competition, and pupil achievement. Journal of
the European Economic Association, 64(4), 912-947.
Greene, J. P., & Marsh, R. H. (2009). The effect of Milwaukee's Parental Choice Program on student
achievement in Milwaukee Public Schools. SCDP Comprehensive Longitudinal Evaluation of
the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program. Report #11.
Howell, W. G., Peterson, P. E., Wolf, P. J., & Campbell, D. E. (2006). The education gap: Vouchers
and urban schools. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Hoxby, C. (1994). Do private schools provide competition for public schools? NBER Working Paper
No. W4978. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=226577.
Hoxby, C. (2000). Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers? The
American Economic Review, 90(5), 1209-1238.
Hoxby, C. (2003). School choice and school competition: Evidence from the United States. Swedish
Economic Policy Review.
Hsieh, C.-T., & Urquiola, M. (2006). The effects of generalized school choice on achievement and
stratification: Evidence from Chile's voucher program. Journal of Public Economics, 90:
1477-1503.
Jepsen, C. (1999). The effects of private school competition on student achievement. Northwestern
University working paper.
Lavy, V. (forthcoming). Effects of free choice among public schools. Review of Economic Studies,
McEwan, P. J. (2000). The potential impact of large-scale voucher programs. Review of Educational
Research, 70(2), 103-149.
McMillan, R. (2004). Competition, incentives, and public school productivity. Journal of Public
Economics, 88(9-10), 1871-1892.
38

Rothstein, J. (2006). Good principals or good peers: Parental valuation of school characteristics,
Tiebout equilibrium, and the incentive effects of competition among jurisdictions. American
Economic Review 96(4), 1333-1350.
Rouse, C. E., Hannaway, J., Goldhaber, D., & Figlio, D. N. (2007). Feeling the Florida heat? How
low-performing schools respond to voucher and accountability pressure. NBER Working
Paper Series, from http://www.nber.org/papers/w13681
Sander, W. (1998). Private schools and public school achievement. Journal of Human Resources,
34(4), 697-709.
Sandstrom, F. M., & Bergstrom, F. (2005). School vouchers in practice: Competition will not hurt
you. Journal of Public Economics, 89(2-3), 351-380.
West, M.R., & Peterson, P.E. (2006). The efficacy of choice threats within accountability systems:
Results from legislatively induced experiments. Economic Journal, 116(510), C46-C62.
West, M.R. & Woessmann, L. (2008). 'Every Catholic child in a Catholic school': Historical
resistance to state schooling, contemporary private competition, and student achievement
across countries. CESifo working paper series.

39

Table 1: Private school shares of total Florida student population aged 6-17, from 2000
Census
Share of
state student
population
Statewide
Miami-Hialeah
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater
Orlando
Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood-Pompano Beach
Jacksonville
West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Delray Beach
Lakeland-Winter Haven
Melbourne-Titusville-Cocoa-Palm Bay
Pensacola
Sarasota
Daytona Beach
Fort Myers-Cape Coral
Fort Pierce
Tallahassee
Ocala
Gainesville
Naples
Fort Walton Beach
Panama City
Punta Gorda
Other areas of Florida

100%
14.4
13.7
11.0
9.8
7.8
6.5
3.2
3.1
2.9
2.8
2.5
2.4
1.9
1.8
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.2
0.9
0.6
9.1

Percent of
students in
private
schools
11.2%
12.4
12.3
11.6
12.4
13.0
13.5
8.7
11.5
10.9
11.6
9.7
10.7
11.0
11.1
10.1
10.5
9.4
7.3
7.6
5.2
5.7

Percent of s
below 185%
poverty in p
schools
5.4%
4.7
6.5
5.9
5.5
6.9
5.3
4.6
7.9
6.5
7.0
5.7
6.0
4.5
3.8
6.7
6.4
4.7
3.2
4.9
1.4
3.7

Notes: Data are collected from the 5 percent public microdata sample from the 2000 Census
IPUMS files. Extrapolating to the state as a whole, there would be approximately 226,000
students enrolled in private schools statewide, with approximately 50,000 coming from
families with incomes below 185 percent of the poverty line.

40

Table 2: Descriptive statistics for students represented in 1999-2000 through 2001-2002
school years and in schools with at least one private competitor within a five mile radius

Test performance
State scale math score
State scale reading score
Competition measures
Miles to nearest private school competitor
Number of local private schools
Number of denominational types represented in 5 mile radius
Herfindahl index of concentration of denominational types
Log of public school population in five mile radius
Demographic measures
Black
Hispanic
Asian
White
Other race
Male
English language learner
Free lunch eligible
Reduced lunch eligible

Mean

Standard
deviation

0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00

1.42
13.97
5.02
.35

1.09
11.72
2.31
.25

9.86

0.95

.22
.20
.02
.54
.01
.49
.18
.35
.10

Observations
2,761,350
Notes: Data from the Florida Education Data Warehouse, the Florida Department of Education’s
Florida School Indicators Reports, and the Florida Department of Education. Means include only
children in schools for which at least one local competitor existed (92.4% of the sample); the
Herfindahl index is undefined if there are no local competitors.

41

Table 3: Fixed effects regression estimates of the effects of the introduction of voucher
competition on public schools: first year program estimates only (data through 2001-02)
Competition measure

Distance
Density
Diversity
Concentration
Number of schoolby-year clusters
Observations (all 4
models)
R-squared (all 4
models)

Estimated effect on
math scores

Estimated effect on
reading scores

Estimated effect
on average of
reading and
math scores

1.415***
(0.170)
[1.542]
0.216***
(0.019)
[2.531]
0.732***
(0.087)
[1.691]
4.681***
(0.740)
[1.170]
7748

1.317***
(0.154)
[1.436]
0.193***
(0.015)
[2.262]
0.717***
(0.075)
[1.656]
4.608***
(0.641)
[1.152]
7745

1.438***
(0.155)
[1.567]
0.216***
(0.016)
[2.532]
0.766***
(0.077)
[1.769]
4.982***
(0.656)
[1.246]
7751

Also
including
public school
density
control
1.330***
(0.161)
[1.450]
0.213***
(0.018)
[2.496]
0.719***
(0.086)
[1.661]
4.272***
(0.731)
[1.068]
7751

2,604,746

2,610,177

2,761,350

2,761,350

0.255

0.247

0.281

0.286

Notes: Each cell represents the key coefficient estimate (on the interaction between the measure of
pre-policy private school penetration and a post-policy indicator) from a separate regression model.
Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for interpretability. Standard errors that adjust for clustering at the
school-year level are beneath parameter estimates. Estimated effects of a one-standard-deviation
change in the competition variables are presented in square brackets beneath standard errors. The
dependent variable is a student's standardized test score in reading or math (or the average of the
standardized reading+math scores.) Controls include sex, race dummies, subsidized lunch eligibility
dummies, English language learner dummies, year dummies, percent of student body eligible for free
or reduced price lunch and the school's prior year grade from the Florida Department of Education, as
well as school fixed effects. The final column includes the log of the number of public school
students within five miles as an additional control. Data come from 1999-2000 through 2001-02
years only. There are more observations for the average of reading and math scores because in 19992000 elementary-aged students took reading and math examinations in different grades. Coefficients
marked ***, **, * and + are statistically significant at the 0.001, 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels,
respectively.

42

Table 4: Fixed effects regression estimates of the effects of the introduction of voucher
competition on public schools: first year program estimates only, including program leads
(data through 2001-02)
Competition measure

Distance
Density
Diversity
Concentration
Number of schoolby-year clusters
Observations (all 4
models)
R-squared (all 4
models)

Estimated effect on
average reading+math scores
Lead of program
First year program
(2000-01)
effect
(2001-02)
1.591***
0.225
(0.239)
(0.230)
0.261***
0.067**
(0.024)
(0.023)
0.908***
0.211+
(0.114)
(0.111)
5.659***
0.997
(1.011)
(0.983)
7751
2,761,350
0.281

Notes: Each pair of cells represents the key coefficient estimate (on the interaction between the
measure of pre-policy private school penetration and a post-policy indicator) as well as the
coefficient estimate on the lead of the same variable from a separate regression model. Coefficients
are multiplied by 100 for interpretability. Standard errors that adjust for clustering at the school-year
level are beneath parameter estimates. The dependent variable is a student's standardized test score
in reading or math. Controls include sex, race dummies, subsidized lunch eligibility dummies,
English language learner dummies, year dummies, percent of student body eligible for free or
reduced price lunch and the school's prior year grade from the Florida Department of Education, as
well as school fixed effects. Data come from 1999-2000 through 2001-02 years only. Coefficients
marked ***, **, * and + are statistically significant at the 0.001, 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels,
respectively.

43

Table 5: Fixed effects regression estimates of the effects of the introduction of voucher
competition on public schools: differences by elementary or middle versus high school, first
year program estimates only (data through 2001-02)
Specification
Distance
Density
Diversity
Concentration

Estimated effect on
elementary and
middle schools
1.738***
(0.177)
0.263***
(0.017)
1.046***
(0.085)
7.304***
(0.735)

Estimated effect on
high schools

p-value of
difference

0.835**
(0.300)
0.107
(0.067)
0.346+
(0.183)
1.685
(1.252)

0.009
0.024
0.001
0.000

Notes: Each row represents the key coefficient estimate (on the interaction between the measure of
pre-policy private school penetration and a post-policy indicator) broken down by elementary/middle
versus high school status. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for interpretability. Standard errors that
adjust for clustering at the school-year level are beneath parameter estimates. The dependent
variable is a student's standardized test score in reading or math. Controls include sex, race
dummies, subsidized lunch eligibility dummies, English language learner dummies, year dummies,
percent of student body eligible for free or reduced price lunch and the school's prior year grade from
the Florida Department of Education, as well as school fixed effects. All relevant two-way
interactions are included as control variables. Data come from 1999-2000 through 2001-02 years
only. Coefficients marked ***, **, * and + are statistically significant at the 0.001, 0.01, 0.05 and
0.10 levels, respectively. All models have 2,761,350 observations in 7751 school-by-year clusters,
an a R-squared of 0.281.

44

Table 6: Fixed effects regression estimates of the effects of the introduction of voucher
competition on public schools: differences by likely Title I status in 2002-03 (data through
2001-02)
Competition
measure
Distance

Estimated effect for
"almost sure Title I"
and "almost sure not
Title I" schools
1.127***
(0.222)

Density

0.205***
(0.021)

Diversity

0.785***
(0.105)

Concentration

6.072***
(1.008)

Estimated effect for
schools where all
schools at this level
receive Title I
0.364
(0.642)
[p=0.254]
-0.877
(1.366)
[p=0.428]
-1.881
(1.791)
[p=0.137]
-7.200+
(4.186)
[p=0.002]

Estimated effect
Estimated effect
for schools on
for schools where
no schools at this margin of Title I
level receive Title I
3.818***
1.200**
(0.615)
(0.435)
[p=0.000]
[p=0.881]
0.538***
0.137+
(0.049)
(0.074)
[p=0.000]
[p=0.373]
2.979***
0.505+
(0.289)
(0.260)
[p=0.000]
[p=0.316]
14.402***
2.794
(2.397)
(1.785)
[p=0.001]
[p=0.104]

Notes: Each row represents the key coefficient estimate (on the interaction between the measure of
pre-policy private school penetration and a post-policy indicator) as well as the coefficient estimates
of the interaction of this variable with indicators of potential incentives for retaining students to
receive Title I funding. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for interpretability. Standard errors that
adjust for clustering at the school-year level are beneath parameter estimates. P-values of differences
from the estimates in the first column are reported in square brackets. The dependent variable is a
student's standardized test score in reading or math. Controls include sex, race dummies, subsidized
lunch eligibility dummies, English language learner dummies, year dummies, percent of student body
eligible for free or reduced price lunch and the school's prior year grade from the Florida Department
of Education, as well as school fixed effects. All relevant two-way interactions are included as
controls. Data come from 1999-2000 through 2001-02 years only. Coefficients marked ***, **, *
and + are statistically significant at the 0.001, 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively. All models
have 1,975,505 observations in 5525 school-by-year clusters (high school students are excluded, as
they do not receive Title I aid), an a R-squared of 0.272.

45

Table 7: Fixed effects regression estimates of the effects of the introduction of voucher
competition on public schools: differences by likely Title I status in 2002-03, models also
including interactions with percent free/reduced-price lunch (data through 2001-02)
Estimated
effect for
"almost sure
Title I" and
"almost sure
not Title I"
schools

Estimated effect
for schools
where all
schools at this
level receive
Title I

Estimated
effect for
schools where
no schools at
this level
receive Title I

Estimated
effect for
schools on
margin of
Title I

Distance

-0.808+
(0.445)

Density

0.056
(0.056)

-2.206*
(0.846)
[p=0.048]
-1.059
(1.383)
[p=0.420]
-2.294
(1.813)
[p=0.125]
-7.504
(4.784)
[p=0.003]

-0.299
(0.543)
[p=0.294]
0.027
(0.082)
[p=0.713]
0.258
(0.313)
[p=0.466]
2.514
(2.441)
[p=0.170]

2.106**
(0.724)
[p=0.000]
0.416***
(0.062)
[p=0.000]
2.716***
(0.336)
[p=0.000]
13.811***
(2.816)
[p=0.001]

Competition
measure

Diversity
Concentration

0.466***
(0.233)
5.334*
(2.123)

Interaction
between
competition
measure x
post and
percent
free/reducedprice lunch
0.044***
(0.009)
0.003***
(0.001)
0.006
(0.004)
0.007
(0.040)

Notes: Each row represents the key coefficient estimate (on the interaction between the measure of
pre-policy private school penetration and a post-policy indicator) as well as the coefficient estimates
of the interaction of this variable with indicators of potential incentives for retaining students to
receive Title I funding. Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for interpretability. Standard errors that
adjust for clustering at the school-year level are beneath parameter estimates. P-values of differences
from the estimates in the first column are reported in square brackets. The dependent variable is a
student's standardized test score in reading or math. Controls include sex, race dummies, subsidized
lunch eligibility dummies, English language learner dummies, year dummies, percent of student body
eligible for free or reduced price lunch and the school's prior year grade from the Florida Department
of Education, as well as school fixed effects. All relevant two-way interactions are included as
controls. Data come from 1999-2000 through 2001-02 years only. Coefficients marked ***, **, *
and + are statistically significant at the 0.001, 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively. All models
have 1,975,505 observations in 5525 school-by-year clusters (high school students are excluded, as
they do not receive Title I aid), and a R-squared of 0.272.

46

Table 8: Fixed effects regression estimates of the effects of the introduction of voucher
competition on public schools: year-by-year program estimates, including leads (data through
2006-07), estimates using average of reading plus math test scores
Competition
measure (prepolicy)
Distance
Density
Diversity
Concentration

Lead of
program
(2000-01)
0.096
(0.334)
0.048
(0.034)
0.084
(0.168)
0.071
(1.491)

First year
(200102)
1.435***
(0.305)
0.242***
(0.031)
0.779***
(0.150)
4.646***
(1.332)

2002-03

2003-04

2004-05

2005-06

2006-07

1.207***
(0.296)
0.239***
(0.031)
0.700***
(0.146)
3.834**
(1.279)

1.580***
(0.294)
0.272***
(0.030)
0.862***
(0.144)
5.496***
(1.281)

2.130***
(0.300)
0.371***
(0.031)
1.270***
(0.148)
8.556***
(1.305)

2.549***
(0.302)
0.460***
(0.032)
1.619***
(0.151)
10.740***
(1.314)

1.969***
(0.315)
0.395***
(0.033)
1.342***
(0.155)
8.859***
(1.353)

Notes: Each cell represents the key coefficient estimate (on the interaction between the measure of
pre-policy private school penetration and year indicators) from a separate regression model.
Coefficients are multiplied by 100 for interpretability. Standard errors that adjust for clustering at the
school-year level are beneath parameter estimates. The dependent variable is a student's standardized
test score in reading or math. Controls include sex, race dummies, subsidized lunch eligibility
dummies, English language learner dummies, year dummies, percent of student body eligible for free
or reduced price lunch and the school's prior year grade from the Florida Department of Education, as
well as school fixed effects. Coefficients marked ***, **, * and + are statistically significant at the
0.001, 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively. All models have 8,979,603 observations spread
across 22,247 school-by-year clusters and a r-squared of 0.26.

47

Figure 1: Distribution of distance between students’ public schools and the public school’s
nearest private competitor

48

Figure 2. Distribution of number of private school competitors within five miles of students’
public schools.

49

Figure 3. Distribution of diversity measure

R

50

Figure 4. Distribution of Herfindahl Index of Private School Concentration

51

Figure 5. Distributions of distance competition measure, eight most populous school districts

52

Figure 6. Distributions of density competition measure, eight most populous school districts

53

Figure 7. Distributions of diversity competition measure, eight most populous school districts

54

Figure 8. Distributions of concentration competition measure, eight most populous school
districts

55

Figure 9: Relationship between distance to nearest competitor in 2000 and pre-policy test score trends,
1996-97 to 2000-01

Pre-policy trends in school test performance
change in average read+math percentile
-20
-10
0
10
20

changes from 1996-97 to 2000-01

0

2
4
miles to nearest private school, 2000

6

56

Figure 10: Relationship between number of nearby competitors in 2000 and pre-policy test score trends,
1996-97 to 2000-01

Pre-policy trends in school test performance
change in average read+math performance
-20
-10
0
10
20

changes in 1996-97 to 2000-01

0

20
40
number of private schools within 5 miles

60

57

Figure 11: Relationship between number of local competitor types in 2000 and pre-policy test score
trends, 1996-97 to 2000-01

Pre-policy trends in school test performance

change in average read+math percentile
-1
0
1
2
3
4

changes from 1996-97 to 2000-01

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

58

Figure 12: Relationship between distance to nearest competitor in 2000 and pre-policy test score trends,
1996-97 to 2000-01

Pre-policy trends in school test performance
change in average read+math percentile
-20
-10
0
10
20

changes from 1996-97 to 2000-01

.2

.4
.6
.8
Herfindahl index of private school concentration, 2000

1

59

Out-of-pocket expenses, Florida voucher participants

0

.0002

Density
.0004

.0006

.0008

Figure 13: Distribution of out-of-pocket expenses for voucher participants

0

5000
10000
out-of-pocket expenses for tuition, fees and books, in dollars

15000

elementary/middle school
high school
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 196.5176

60

Figure 14: Out-of-pocket expenses per voucher participant as a share of family income

0

5

Density

10

15

Out-of-pocket expenses as share of income

0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Per child out-of-pocket expenses on tuition, fees and books as share of family's income
elementary/middle school
high school
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0091

61

