                                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SEGREGATION AND TIEBOUT SORTING:
INVESTIGATING THE LINK BETWEEN INVESTMENTS IN PUBLIC GOODS AND NEIGHBORHOOD TIPPING

                                                  H. Spencer Banzhaf
                                                   Randall P. Walsh

                                                 Working Paper 16057
                                         http://www.nber.org/papers/w16057


                               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               June 2010




        Support for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation, NSF SES-03-21566.
        Additional support for Banzhaf was provided by the Property and Environment Research Center (PERC).
         We thank partici-pants in a 2008 ASSA Session, the 2009 NBER Summer Institute, and in seminars
        at Arizona State, Brown, Cornell, Duke, Georgetown, Harvard, PERC, Resources for the Future, the
        University of British Columbia, the University of Georgia, the University of Kentucky, the University
        of Wyoming, and Yale for comments on earlier versions of this paper. We especially thank Patrick
        Bayer, Antonio Bento, Don Fullerton, and Kerry Smith for their extensive comments. The views expressed
        herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
        Research.

        NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
        reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
        NBER publications.

        © 2010 by H. Spencer Banzhaf and Randall P. Walsh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
        to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
        © notice, is given to the source.
Segregation and Tiebout Sorting: Investigating the Link between Investments in Public Goods
and Neighborhood Tipping
H. Spencer Banzhaf and Randall P. Walsh
NBER Working Paper No. 16057
June 2010
JEL No. H4,J1,Q5,R2

                                            ABSTRACT

Segregation has been a recurring social concern throughout human history. While much progress
has been made to our understanding of the mechanisms driving segregation, work to date has ignored
the role played by location-specific amenities. Nonetheless, policy remedies for reducing group inequity
often involve place-based investments in minority communities. In this paper, we introduce an exogenous
location-specific public good into a model of group segregation. We characterize the equilibria of
the model and derive the comparative statics of improvements to the local public goods. We show
that the dynamics of neighborhood tipping depend on the levels of public goods. We also show that
investments in low-public good communities can actually increase segregation.


H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302
and NBER
hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu

Randall P. Walsh
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4901 WW Posvar Hall
230 S. Bouquet St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
walshr@pitt.edu
                                  Segregation and Tiebout Sorting:
 Investigating the Link between Investments in Public Goods and Neighborhood Tipping



       In the white community, the path to a more perfect union means acknowledging that what ails the
       African-American community does not just exist in the minds of black people; that the legacy of
       discrimination—and current incidents of discrimination, while less overt than in the past—are real
       and must be addressed. Not just with words, but with deeds—by investing in our schools and our
       communities….
               —Barack Obama


1. Introduction

Racial segregation of one form or another has been a recurring social concern throughout human
history. In the United States, much has changed since Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka
and the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ended de jure racial segregation. But despite the improvements
in black educational achievement, the narrowing of black-white income gaps, and even the elec-
tion of the first African-American President, de facto racial segregation continues to be one of
the country’s most prevalent social issues.

       Addressing this important topic, economists have explored the social mechanisms driving
segregation. Schelling (1969, 1971) and Pancs and Vriend (2007) have shown that the dynamics
of neighborhood "tipping" can force segregated outcomes even when there are tastes for some
degree of integration. More recently, Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008) have shown that, empiri-
cally, white households flee neighborhoods once they become 5-20% minority. Consistent with
this phenomenon, Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999) and Kiel and Zabel (1996) find that white
communities do command a price premium in part precisely because of their whiteness. In
related work, Hoff and Sen (2005) and Sethi and Somanathan (2004) show how positive exter-
nalities from the activities of richer households can impact community composition. At the same
time, Bayer, Fang, and McMillan (2005) and Sethi and Somanathan (2004) show that reducing
income inequality between groups can actually increase group segregation, because richer mi-
norities need no longer join whites to live in high-income communities.

       While this rich literature has made significant contributions to our understanding of the
equilibrium properties of segregation, it has almost completely ignored the role played by public


                                                                                                            1
goods and/or location-specific amenities in the process of segregation.1 This is an important
shortcoming because, as the above epigraph illustrates, many of the policy remedies for reducing
group inequity focus specifically on investments in minority communities. Investments in edu-
cation are only one example. In addition, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment (HUD) provides Community Development Block Grants (totaling $125B since 1974); the
US EPA's Superfund and Brownfields programs clean up contaminated sites and encourage
redevelopment; enterprise zones provide tax incentives for businesses; and the 1992 Federal
Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act steers Fannie and Freddie investments
to low-income and minority communities. Clearly, such place-based interventions play a central
role in efforts to address social concerns associated with segregation.

         In this paper, we advance the literature by introducing an exogenous location-specific
public good (to be manipulated by public policy) into a model of group segregation. In this
sense, we combine features of the segregation and public goods literatures.2 First, following the
tradition of Schelling (1969, 1971), we consider preferences for the endogenous demographic
make-up of the community.3 Second, following the tradition of Tiebout (1956), we include
heterogeneity in willingness to pay for public goods. In particular, we adapt a model of vertical-
ly differentiated communities from Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984), a model used in other
recent and related work (Banzhaf and Walsh 2008, Sethi and Somanathan 2004).

         We combine these two traditions into a general equilibrium model in which households
choose a community based on both its endogenous demographics and its exogenous public good.
We then characterize the equilibria of such a model and derive the comparative statics of policy


1
  An important exception is Becker and Murphy (2000). Using several compelling examples, they point out how,
even in a very simple model, the presence of an exogenous amenity can radically change the demographic sorting
dynamics. In this paper, we extend that theme, characterizing the way exogenous public goods and demographics
interact under more general conditions.
2
 Glaeser and Scheinkman (2003) show how these two models can be nested in a more general social interaction
model.
3
 Throughout our analysis a fundamental assumption is that individuals of a given type tend toward living together
due to preferences to live with individuals of their own type. We note, though, that identical results would be
obtained if the model assumed that concentrations of individuals of a given type lead to social spillovers that dispro-
portionately benefit that type (i.e. concentrations of businesses, community networks, restaurants, non-profit servic-
es, etc.).



                                                                                                                      2
shocks to the local public goods. The model generates several results regarding the importance
of place-based amenities. First, we establish that, even when sorting is driven by tastes for the
exogenous public good and not by demographic tastes, some racial segregation will result, with
the richer group enjoying higher levels of the public good. Second, we show that introducing
tastes for endogenous demographic composition can drive further segregation, as suggested by
Schelling's "tipping model." By the same token, we show that differences in public good levels
can alter the responses to demographic composition. Such dynamics may explain some of the
variation that Card, Mas and Rothstein (2008) observe in their empirical estimates of tipping
points in U.S. Cities. As a pragmatic matter, this increased segregation is likely to further the
differences in the average level of the public good enjoyed by the two groups. Finally, we show
that place-based interventions that improve the public good in a low-quality, high-minority
community may actually increase group segregation, as richer minorities are more likely to
migrate into the community following the improvement. Essentially, when differences in public
goods become less important, group-based sorting begins to dominate income-based sorting on
the public good.

        In the final section of the paper, we use large changes in the distribution of air pollution
from industrial facilities that occurred in California between 1990 and 2000 to illustrate the
predictions of the model. Consistent with our model’s predictions, we find that large scale im-
provements in the dirtiest sites are associated with increased racial sorting on exposure to toxic
air pollution.

2. Theoretical Model

In this section, we develop a model of the links between race, demographic composition, public
goods, and location choice. In the recent literature, the model is most similar to work by Becker
and Murphy (2000), Sethi and Somanathan (2004) and Banzhaf and Walsh (2008), but differs
from these papers in several important respects. It resembles Becker and Murphy (2000) in
combining preferences for an exogenous public good with the endogenous demographic com-
munity, but differs in going beyond their simple 2-person model to incorporate continuous in-
come distributions and heterogeneity in the willingness to pay for amenities. Generalizing their
model in this way is crucial for evaluating income-based segregation. Our model also differs


                                                                                                       3
from theirs in that each group prefers to be with their own type, rather than a particular "high
type." At the same time, our model resembles Sethi and Somanathan (2004) and Banzhaf and
Walsh (2008) in adapting the vertically differentiated framework of Epple et al. (1984). But it
differs from Banzhaf and Walsh (2008), who only consider the exogenous good, in including
racial groups and demographic preferences. And it differs from Sethi and Somanathan (2004) in
including an exogenous public good.4 Including this public good is obviously essential to ana-
lyzing the kinds of policy shocks that motivate our paper.

2.1 Model Basics

        We consider a model with two communities, j  {C1, C2}, each composed of an identic-
al set of fixed-size housing stock with measure 0.5. The price of this fixed housing unit is Pj.
Residents of these communities comprise two demographic types, r  {b, w}. Type b, the mi-
nority, has measure β < 0.5 and type w has measure (1-β). One obvious interpretation of these
types is as racial groups (w for white and b for blacks). However, in principle they could
represent any pair of groups with the minority group being poorer.

        There is heterogeneity in income Y within each type, which is described by the conti-
nuous distribution functions Fr(Y). We impose the following two assumptions on the income
distributions of type b and w individuals:

                                                 Fw(Y) ≤ Fb(Y) for all Y                                 (1)

and


                           M         M
                                                   .5       1   2          M         M
                                                                                         .                  (2)
                                                        1

The first condition requires that the population of type-w individuals is richer than the population
of type-b individuals in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance. The second condition
limits the difference in income distributions between the two groups. In particular, it states that



4
 We also provide a more general characterization of the equilibria of our model, including integrated and segregated
equilibria. Sethi and Somanathan (2004) focus on integrated equilibria.



                                                                                                                  4
some positive measure of each group falls in the top half of the pooled income distribution.

        Each individual is assumed to consume one unit of housing and to have preferences over
a numeraire good x (with a price set to unity), an exogenous community public good level Gj and
endogenous community demographic composition. Tastes for demographic composition are
captured by                     , where                 is the proportion of residents in community j who
are of type r. Individuals of each type experience the same service flow from the public good.
However, they view the demographic composition differently, so D is indexed by type r as well
as location j.

        Conditional on choosing location j, utility for an individual of type r and income Y is giv-
en by equation (3):

                                          ,        ,           = U[x, Vrj].                                  (3)

The function U(·) is continuous and increasing at a decreasing rate in both of its arguments, and
V(·) is increasing in both arguments. More compactly, let                           ,       . Consumption x is
simply income net of housing costs. We impose the Inada condition that                          ∞ as      0. We
also impose the following condition on        :

                            1   2                 1      2 1                       0, 0.5

and

                                2 1                        2                  0, 0.5 .

This condition guarantees that when                    , for any feasible sorting, each type prefers the
community with more of its own type. For example, if β=0.25, the condition requires that type-w
individuals prefer an all-w community to a community with less than 50% w and type-b individ-
uals prefer a community that is more than 50% type b to an all-w community. This condition
does not imply that preferences are monotonic. To the contrary, in general this assumption is
consistent with a wide range of preferences including for example any symmetric "bliss point"
specification,   = g[abs(           -ρr)], where            0, 1                   1, and              1. While
this restriction is not necessary for solving the model, we restrict the preference domain to these



                                                                                                                 5
cases because they are consistent with US racial preferences previously estimated in the litera-
ture.5

         Finally, without loss of generality, we assume that when public good levels differ the lev-
el of the public good is higher in Community 2 than in Community 1:                                   . And, because
we are working with an assignment model, to close the model we normalize the price of housing
in Community 1 to zero:                   0. This normalization allows us to work with households' wil-
lingness to pay to live in C2, given Vrj and Y. Denote this willingness to pay as BidYr.

         Equilibrium in the model is characterized by a sorting of individuals across the two
communities and a price level in Community 2, PC2, such that:

         E1. In each community, for each type,                      arises from the sorting of individuals:
                                  ,
                                      ,
                               0.5

         where         ,   is the measure of the set of individuals of type r choosing community j.

         E2. Each individual resides in his preferred community. That is, for all type-r individu-
               als choosing to live in community j:
                                                ,       ,                         ,         ,

         E3. Housing markets clear, so the measure of individuals choosing each community is
               equal to 0.5.

         The structure of the model allows us to simplify the characterization of the sorting of in-
dividuals across communities. Specifically, the concavity of U( ) in the numeraire and in V( ),
combined with the assumption that each household consumes an identical and fixed quantity of
housing, implies that within each type preferences satisfy the "single crossing" property in
and      . This in turn implies that equilibria in the model will exhibit stratification by income


5
  In particular, the survey literature suggests that the appropriate levels for ρw and ρb are around 0.9 and 0.5 respec-
tively (Farley et al. 1978 and Farley and Krysan 2002). Furthermore, it is reasonable to focus on this portion of the
parameter space, as such preferences are consistent with socially relevant phenomenon of "white-flight" or neigh-
borhood tipping recently documented by Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008), as well as the price premium for white
communities documented by Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999).



                                                                                                                           6
within each type.6 In other words, in equilibrium, for each type there is a boundary income,                               ,
such that all individuals of type r with incomes greater than                    , choose to live in the community
that that type views as more desirable (i.e. the community with the higher values of                          .7

           In analyzing equilibria in the model, it is particularly useful to consider these boundary
individual’s willingness to pay to be in Community 2 (relative to Community 1). Define
to be the price level in Community 2 that makes these individuals indifferent between the two
communities. Recalling that PC1 is normalized to 0,                           is implicitly defined by:

                                    ,        ,                            ,            ,    .                         (4)

By definition,              makes these boundary individuals indifferent between the two communities.
Note that the continuity of             . and      . implies that               is continuous in      and         .

2.2. Equilibria in the Model

           To provide intuition about the equilibrium properties of the model, we begin by working
through a four-step process for evaluating the potential for different demographic sortings to be
supported as equilibria. In this section, we also build intuition by working with one specific
example.

           In the first step, we note that the entire demographic profile of a given sorting of house-
holds can be expressed solely as a function of                        , the proportion of Community 1 that is
type w. In particular, if one knows the proportion of Community 1 that is type w, the proportion
of Community 1 that is type b follows directly. Similar logic identifies                              and              :

                                                               = 1-                ;                                  (5)



6
    See Epple et al. (1984) for discussion of single crossing and stratification in equilibrium sorting models.
7
 Formally, given          , the boundary income is defined as that income at which for all       , ,         , .
When individuals of type r reside in both communities, a type r individual with the boundary income is indifferent
between the two communities. However, there are equilibria where all type-b individuals locate in the same com-
munity. In this case            when Vbj is higher in the community in which they reside and             when Vbj is
higher in the other community.



                                                                                                                               7
                                              = 2(1 – β) -           ; and                        (6)

                                         = 1-             =            + 2β - 1.                  (7)

We graph these relationships in Panel 1 of Figure 1. Given the requirement that housing markets
clear (equilibrium condition E3), these relationships are purely tautological and are the same for
all possible parameterizations of the model. Given the complete identification of             , the
demographic components of         . can be expressed as a function of              ,
                .

       In the second step, we compute                ,       for both communities and types, again as
a function of          . Panel 2 of Figure 1 illustrates one particular specification with bliss-
point preferences over demographic composition. In particular, the figure illustrates results for
β=0.25, Drj = (        - ρr)2, ρb=0.5, ρw=0.9, and Vrj = Drj + Gj. That is, V(·) is separable in D
and G, and D is defined by a quadratic function around a bliss point ρ, with type w preferring
more segregation. (As noted above, this parameterization of Dr is consistent with previous find-
ings for racial attitudes and in the US.) The utility function U(·) is Cobb-Douglas in consump-
tion and V, with an expenditure share of 0.75 on consumption. Incomes are uniformly distri-
buted with Yrmin=0, Ybmax=1, and Ywmax=1.1. Finally, public good levels are identical:
GC1=GC2=1.

       The figure shows that, for this example, the utility received by type w in C1 is increasing
in          up to the bliss point at 0.9, at which point it begins to fall. Type-w's utility in C2
likewise is increasing in          up to the same bliss point, but this is mapped in the figure as
being decreasing in           up to the bliss point where             = 0.6 (which is where
= 0.9). On the other hand, type-b utility in C1 is decreasing in             while type-b utility in
C2 is increasing in          . In this example, since β=0.25, type b is always below its bliss point
of 0.5. Note that even with these bliss point preferences, both types always prefer the communi-
ty with the larger percentage of their own type. This is guaranteed by our condition on demo-
graphic preferences and the set of feasible profiles identified in Panel 1. Finally, note that be-
cause in this example GC1=GC2, both groups are indifferent when the community compositions


                                                                                                        8
are identical, which occurs where                      = 0.75.

       In the third step, we identify the boundary incomes associated with the sorting implied by
each value of         . These boundary incomes are a function of the utility values computed in
the previous step and the income distributions. For example, suppose β=0.25 and                                     is
0.6. By Equation 5,            is 0.9. In turn, it follows that 2/5 of type w are in Community 1.
Suppose further that with             = 0.6, the values of Gj imply that type w individuals prefer

Community 2. Then by single crossing, we know that                               must be equal to           . In general,


                                 .5                              2       1
                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                     (8)
                                      .5           1
                                                                                                    ,


                                 .5        2           2
                                                                                                        ,
                                                       1
                                                                                                                     (9)
                                           .5
                                                                                                        .
                                                       1

       We can similarly characterize the derivatives of these boundary incomes with respect to
        :

                                                       0.5
                                                                     0                         ,
                                                           0.5
                                                                     0                         ,


                                                           0.5
                                                                             0                      ,
                                               1
                                                       0.5
                                                                         0                          .
                                           1

       Panel 3 shows, for our example, the boundary incomes as a function of                                    . Be-
cause this example uses uniform income distributions, the boundary incomes are linear in
        . When              is below 1-β, type-w individuals prefer Community 2. As a result,



                                                                                                                            9
single-crossing implies that they will sort such that the richest type-w individuals locate in C2.
Consequently, the boundary income is that of the poorest type-w individual in C2 (alternatively
the richest type-w individual in C1). As            at first increases toward 0.75, the measure of
type-w individuals living in C2 must decrease. Thus, the boundary income must increase. But
when           increases above 1-β, the relative ranking of the communities changes and rich
type-w individuals now locate in C1. Thus, the boundary income is now decreasing in                    .
Because in this example the community switch occurs where type-w individuals are equally
distributed between the two communities, the boundary income function is continuous with a
kink at the point where          . As discussed below, in cases where public good levels differ
and indifference between the two communities occur where                 ≠ 1-β, there will be a dis-
continuity in the boundary income function.

       While the boundary income function for type b looks similar to that of the type w, the un-
derlying process is different. When            is below 1-β, type-b individuals prefer Communi-
ty 1. Thus, by single crossing, the type-b boundary income will be that of the poorest type-b
individual in C1 (alternatively the richest type-b individual in C2). At the extreme, when
         = 1-2β = 0.5, all type-b individuals are in C1 and     = YbMin = 0.

       Based on the discussion to this point, we make the following observations.

       Observation 1. Some type-w individuals always live in both communities. This must be
       the case because the measure of type-w individuals is greater than 0.5. More specifically,
       the share of type w in any community can never fall below 1-2β. In contrast, all type-b
       individuals can reside in only one of the two communities.

       Observation 2. When VwC1 ≠ VwC2, there is some           at which type-w individuals are in-
       different. All type-w individuals with income higher than          will reside in the more de-
       sirable (to w) community and poorer type-w individuals will live in the community that
       type-w individuals find less desirable. Moreover,         can never drop below
              0.5      ⁄ 1       . In contrast, it is possible that b's boundary income may fall to
         M
            .

       Observation 3. The community that type w perceives as more desirable will be more ex-
       pensive: VwC2 ≥ VwC1 ↔ PC2 ≥ 0. This relationship must hold. Otherwise, every type w
       individual would prefer to live in the community with higher Vw and lower price, and the
       demand for housing would exceed supply in that community. Further, PC2 =           .




                                                                                                       10
These observations are general to the model and do not depend on the specific assumptions
underlying the example depicted in Figure 1.

       As noted in Observation 1, because β<0.5, it is possible for all type-b individuals to live
in the same community. We will refer to equilibria where all type-b individuals live in the same
community as "segregated" and equilibria where some type-b individuals live in both communi-
ties as "integrated." We make the following observations about these two cases.

       Observation 4. For segregation of types with all type-b individuals locating in C1 to be
       supportable as an equilibrium, it must be the case that        ≤       . (Otherwise, if
              >        , then the boundary type-b individual would outbid the boundary type-w
       individual for housing in C2.) In particular, if VbC2 > VbC1 and VwC2 > VwC1, then        ≥
                         C1     C2       C2     C1                                     C1     C2
              > 0. If Vb > Vb and Vw > Vw then                  >0>        . And if Vb > Vb
              C1      C2
       and Vw > Vw , then 0 >            ≥       . Note also that if Vb > VbC2, then = M =
                                                                       C1

       0. Otherwise, = M . The opposite and symmetric cases hold for equilibria where all
       type-b individuals locate in C2.

       Observation 5. In any integrated equilibrium, both types must agree on which communi-
       ty is more desirable, and         =       . Additionally, some members of each type must
       be willing to pay to live in the more desirable community ( M <          =        <
         M
             ).

       The upshot of these observations is that equilibria can be identified by an analysis of the
bids of individuals at the boundary incomes. We use the term "boundary income bid function"
for the mapping from             to these bids. Note that the boundary income bid function for
type r is not the willingness to pay function for a specific individual, but a bid function over an
endogenous income level (the boundary incomes associated with each sorting).

       If at any integrated allocation the two groups' boundary income bid functions are equal,
       =         , then that integrated allocation can be supported as an equilibrium. Alternatively,
a segregated equilibrium with C2 all-w exists if at such an allocation           ≤       . Finally, a
segregated equilibrium with C1 all-w exists if at such an allocation         ≤       .

       The derivative of the boundary income bid function with respect to                is given by
Equation (10):




                                                                                                      11
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                    ,    (10)


where       is the derivative of the utility function with respect to the numeraire, evaluated in
Community j at the appropriate income (i.e.       ). All other derivatives are similarly defined. The
expression shows two effects. The first term inside the brackets captures the effect of the change
in the boundary income that is associated with the change in              . The second term inside
the brackets captures the effect of changes in the V(·) function that are associated with an in-
crease in           .

        Panel 4 of Figure 1 plots the boundary income bid functions associated with the previous-
ly defined example. Recall from the second step that, because the G's are equal in the two com-
munities, when             = 0.75 the demographic compositions are identical as well, so both
groups are indifferent between communities at that point. Accordingly, Panel 4 shows that, for
each type, the boundary income bid function is zero when                = 0.75.

        Type-w individuals prefer Community 2 when                  < 0.75, so the bid function is pos-
itive. Conversely, when              > 0.75, type-w individuals prefer Community 1 and the bid
function is negative. Using Equation (10), we find that the type-w boundary income bid function
is monotonically decreasing in             for this example. This relationship arises because the
utility effect of changes in          , shown in the second term of Equation (10), is negative and
always dominates the boundary income effect, shown in the first term of Equation (10), which is
positive.

        For type-b individuals, preferences for the communities are the reverse of those of type-
w. The bid function is always negative for              < 0.75 and always positive for              >
0.75. In terms of the slope of the bid function, the basic dynamics are the same as with type-w
individuals, except that for very low or very high levels of            the change associated with
the boundary income dominates the change associated with closing the gap in V(·). This result
differs from that for type-w individuals because of the steeper slope of       /           , which
arises from the fact that there are fewer type-b individuals.




                                                                                                        12
       Evaluating the figure, we can see that this example has three equilibria. At the far left,
type-w individuals are willing to pay to live in Community 2, type-b individuals are not, and C2
is all-w. At the far right is the opposite and symmetric segregated equilibrium. In the middle,
there is an integrated equilibrium in which the two communities have the same composition, and
all individuals of both types are indifferent between the two communities.

2.3 Characterizing the equilibria and their comparative statics

       We now characterize the equilibria and comparative statics of the model. We first estab-
lish the existence of equilibria in the model.

       Proposition 1.
       For preference functions and income distributions satisfying conditions (1) through (3) in
       Section 2.1, there is at least one allocation that satisfies equilibrium conditions E.1 to E3.
       Proof.
       Consider the sorting at           = 1-2β. (This is the point where            = 1 and is de-
       picted as the left-hand side of Panel 4 in Figure 1). At this point either       ≤         or
              >        . In the former case this point represents a segregated equilibrium and
       thus existence is trivial. Consider now the sorting at           = 1. Again, at this point
       either        ≤         or       >        . And again, in the former case, this point
       represents a segregated equilibrium. Finally, we must consider the possibility that
              >         at          = 1-2β and         >        at          = 1. But in this case,
       by continuity, the boundary income bid functions must cross at some point, where
              =        , which is also an equilibrium.

       In addition to the existence of such equilibria, we are also concerned with stability of
equilibria. We adopt the following definition of local stability.

       Definition
       Let an epsilon set of marginal individuals of type r in community j, be defined as follows:
                                            ,
                  ,                                                        .
                                                 ,
       An equilibrium is locally stable if there exists a , such that for any 4-tuple of epsilon
       sets ( , ,    , ,   , ,    , ) each having measure          , switching    , with     ,




                                                                                                    13
         across the two communities results in                   >             and switching       ,   with    ,
                                                                               8
         across the two communities results in                   >            .
         Essentially, this definition requires that when a small set of "almost indifferent" type-w
individuals in one community switch with a small set of "almost indifferent" type-b individuals
in the other community, they prefer to switch back. It insures that individuals moved from
Community 2 will outbid the individuals moved from Community 1; thus reversing the perturba-
tion and restoring the initial equilibrium. When this condition is not met, an equilibrium is
unstable and the perturbation causes the communities to tip toward segregation (or toward a
different integrated equilibrium).

         As discussed above, equilibria occur either at corners (the case of segregation) or in the
interior (the case of integration). Whenever corner equilibria exist, they will be locally stable.
For interior solutions, it is straightforward to demonstrate that the local stability conditions are
satisfied whenever the type-b boundary income bid function crosses the type-w boundary income
bid function from above.

         Additionally, by analogy to a "regular" Arrow-Debreu economy, we can define a regular

sorting as one in which, at each point where                   =          ,                        . In the case of a

regular sorting there are an odd number of equilibria. Moreover, if there are n such equilibria,
(n+1)/2 are stable, the analog of the index theorem in our model.9



8
 In the degenerate case where            , this definition collapses to switching any two arbitrary sets of individuals
having measure .
9
  The proof follows the logic of Proposition 1, and we sketch it briefly. Consider the sorting at              = 1-2β and
consider two cases. In case 1,          ≤        and this is a stable equilibrium (with C2 all-w). Consider three sub-
cases. (1a) If the bid functions never cross, then this is the only equilibrium. (1b) If the bid functions cross an even
number of times, there is only the one segregated equilibrium plus the even integrated equilibria, totaling an odd
number of equilibria. In addition, half the integrated equilibria will occur with type-b's boundary income bid func-
tion cutting type-w's from above, indicating stability. Thus, (n+1)/2 are stable. (1c) If the bid functions cross an
odd number of times, there will be a second segregated equilibrium at               = 1, with       ≤         . That is,
there will be an odd number of integrated equilibria plus two segregated equilibria, totaling an odd number of
equilibria. In addition, if there are m integrated equilibria, (m-1)/2 will be stable. With           2, this means there
will be (n+1)/2 stable equilibria again. Though we omit them for brevity, these sub-cases can be repeated for case 2,
where                   at           = 1-2β, to complete the proof.
   Note here the importance of the notion of the "regular" economy. Without it, there may be additional equilibria
where the two groups' boundary income bid functions are just tangent, or even an interval of equilibria. Debreu


                                                                                                                      14
        The example illustrated in Figure 1 has three equilibria, and only the two symmetric se-
gregated equilibria are stable. This result is not limited to this example. For any specification
satisfying the general preferences in Section 2.1, the following proposition holds.

        Proposition 2.
        Whenever              , there will be three equilibria: two stable segregated equilibria
        with           = 1 and            = 1-2β, respectively, and one unstable integrated equili-
                          C1
        brium with PCTw = 1-β.

        Proof: See the appendix.

When there are no differences in the public good, individuals sort solely based on demographics,
resulting in segregation.

        We now turn to an analysis of cases where public good levels differ across communities.
To build intuition for how relationships change when public goods differ, Figure 2 replicates the
example from Figure 1 but now for a case with unequal public good levels (GC1=0.9 and GC2=1).
Because the set of feasible demographic compositions is independent of public good levels, the
first panel of Figure 2 is identical to Figure 1. Comparing Panel 2 in Figure 2 to Figure 1 reveals
that when        falls,      shifts down for both types. As a result, type-b individuals are now
indifferent between the two communities when                       = 0.65 (instead of at .75 in the previous
case where                ). For type-w individuals the indifference point is now at                      = 0.92
(versus 0.90 in the previous case).

        Panel 3 shows the impact of the differential public good levels on the boundary income
functions. When public goods were equated across communities, both types were indifferent at
the point where              =            . As a result, even though relative preferences for communi-
ties switch at this point, reversing the income sorting, the boundary income functions were conti-
nuous (though kinked) at the indifference point. Differential public good levels separate the
indifference point for the two types moving them away from equal sorting. Consequently, the



(1970) shows that the equilibria in an Arrow-Debreu economy are regular "almost everywhere" in the set of prefe-
rence parameters and income distributions. Although a proof is beyond the scope of this paper, reasoning analo-
gously it seems likely that the set of parameters that would generate irregular sorting have measure zero in the
parameter space. Certainly, we have never found an example with irregular sortings.



                                                                                                               15
boundary income functions now have a discontinuity at each type's indifference point.

          Finally, Panel 4 of Figure 2 presents the boundary income bid functions under the new
public good levels. In spite of the discontinuity in boundary incomes, The boundary bid func-
tions are continuous at this point. This continuity, which will always hold, occurs because the
bid function at the point of indifference is by definition equal to zero and approaches zero conti-
nuously from both sides. In terms of potential equilibria, the model remains qualitatively similar
to the case where the public good levels were equal. There are still two stable segregated equili-
bria and one unstable integrated equilibrium, with the location of the unstable integrated equili-
brium now shifted slightly to the right to where             = 0.76. Thus, for small differences in
public good levels, it is possible to support a segregated equilibrium with all type-b individuals
in the high public good community. However, comparison of the bid functions in Figures 1 and
2 suggest that, at least for this example, if the public good gap were to increase further, then this
equilibrium will no longer be supported. As we shall see below, this result holds in general.

          As the public good gap increases, it becomes difficult to make general statements regard-
ing the character of equilibria. As is clear from an examination of Equation 10, the slopes of the
bid functions are highly sensitive to local variations in the density of the income functions and
the relative curvatures of the utility functions. For instance, it is relatively straightforward to
generate examples with multiple segregated and multiple stable and unstable integrated equili-
bria when the public good differentials are moderate in size.

          Nevertheless, the model does provide sharp predictions regarding equilibria for cases
with "small" or "large" differences in public goods, and a comparison of these two polar cases
provides important policy insights. We begin by considering the case with small differences in
the public goods levels. As stated in Proposition 2, the case where the level of public goods is
the same in each community always has one unstable integrated equilibrium and two symmetric
stable segregated equilibria. This proposition extends to a measure of        as stated in Proposi-
tion 3.

          Proposition 3
          For any given level of    , there exists     <      such that for all     <       <




                                                                                                      16
         there will be exactly three equilibria, two symmetric stable segregated equilibria and one
         unstable integrated equilibrium.

         Proof: See the appendix.

Proposition 3 addresses the case where differences between the public good levels are small
enough that demographic preferences dominate in the determination of equilibria. It states that
in this range, the stable equilibria are characterized by segregation.

         We also note that while difficult to formalize because of the complexity of the boundary
bid function relationship presented in Equation 10, it is the case that for all “standard” paramete-
rizations of the model that we have evaluated, the equilibrium with the lower income minority
group in the low public good community is stable over a much broader range of public good
differences than is the equilibrium with this lower income minority group in the high public good
community.

         Consider now the opposite extreme, where differences in public goods are very large and
effectively drive the sorting behavior, swamping any effect of the demographics. Intuitively, this
case will resemble earlier results from Epple et al. (1984) and other related papers with only a
public goods component. In particular, individuals will be stratified by income instead of segre-
gated by race.

         To operationalize this intuition in our model, assume that, for given levels of
     ,    , and       ,                              ∞.10 Then, at the limit, the boundary income bid
functions are equal to the boundary incomes themselves, and both types view Community 2 as
more desirable regardless of demographic sorting. By construction (Condition 2), the richest
type-b individual is richer than the boundary type-w individual when                           = 1-2β, and the
poorest type-b individual is poorer than the boundary type-w individual when                              = 1. As
a result, the boundary income of type-b individuals crosses the boundary income of type-w indi-
viduals exactly once from above. This case has a single equilibrium. The equilibrium is stable


10
  This condition essentially says that the public good is a necessity. For example, while there may be great hetero-
geneity in the marginal values for air quality, nobody can live without some minimum level, below which they
would suffocate. While this condition is sufficient for the emergence of a single integrated equilibrium as public
good differences increase, it is by no means necessary.



                                                                                                                  17
and integrated, with all individuals with income above the population median income locating in
Community 2. Proposition 4 formalizes this result.

       Proposition 4
       Assume that, for given levels of     ,    ,          ,                             ∞. Then,
       there exists    such that for all                        there is a single equilibrium that is
       integrated and stable.
       Proof: See the appendix.

That is, when public good differences are sufficiently large, the communities will be integrated
by group but stratified by income. In general, how "large" the differences in G must be will
depend on the preferences and income distributions.

       Even with perfect stratification by income, the high public good community will still
have a higher proportion of type-w residents than C1:

       Proposition 5
       Under the conditions of Proposition 4, for sufficiently low GC1,              >           .
       Proof: See the appendix.

The proof of Proposition 5 follows intuitively from Condition (1), first-order stochastic domin-
ance in the income distributions. Essentially, since type-w are richer on average, when there is
perfect stratification by income then the richer community also has a higher share of type w. In
this way, our model captures as a special case the earlier insights from McGuire (1974), who
showed how segregation can be driven by group differences in the willingness to pay for public
goods. It also speaks to important policy issues. For example, the "environmental justice"
movement has shown that minorities are disproportionately exposed to pollution (e.g. Bullard
2000). Thus, our model formalizes the idea that discrimination (at least in pollution patterns) is
not necessary to drive observed correlations in the consumption of public goods such as envi-
ronmental quality. Those correlations may be driven by differences in incomes and sorting on
amenities (see also Been 1994).

       To summarize the discussion so far, when public good levels in the two communities are
relatively similar, all equilibria are segregated. At intermediate differences in public good levels
it is difficult to make general statements about equilibria. However, the stable segregated equili-
bria with all type-b individuals in Community 1 will exist over at least part of this range. Final-



                                                                                                     18
ly, when differences in public good levels are high there will be a single stable equilibrium with
integration.

       To further illustrate the implications of Propositions 3 and 4, Figure 3 displays the bid
functions for the specification of Figures 1 and 2—fixing the level of GC2 at 1 and varying the
level of GC1 from 0.25 to 1. When GC1=0.25 the public goods difference is large enough that the
outcome resembles the limiting notion of Proposition 4 where the bid functions equal the boun-
dary income functions. When GC1=0.25 there is a single stable integrated equilibrium. As GC1
increases to 0.5, the bid functions no longer track the boundary income functions as closely, but
there is still a single stable and integrated equilibrium. When GC1=0.7, the bid functions no
longer cross and the only equilibrium is a stable segregated equilibria with all type-b individuals
located in the low public good community. In other words, closing the gap in public goods by
improving the public good level in Community 1 causes a change from integrated equilibrium to
segregated equilibrium. This stable segregated equilibrium exists in this example for all 1 ≥
GC1 > 0.6. When GC1=0.8, this stable segregated equilibrium continues to exist. In addition, two
new equilibria appear, an unstable and a stable integrated equilibrium. Finally, once GC1=0.9,
we are in the realm of Proposition 3 with two stable segregated equilibria and one unstable inte-
grated equilibrium. The figure illustrates the results of Propositions 3 and 4. Namely, when
public good differences are large, integrated equilibria (with income stratification) are especially
salient. When public good differences shrink, segregated equilibria are especially salient.

       Figure 4 shows how the equilibria evolve as GC1 improves. On the vertical axis it shows
levels of PCTwC1 that are sustainable as equilibria for different levels of GC1, shown on the
horizontal axis. The figure continues to illustrate the example shown in Figure 3. The far left of
the figure, at very low levels of GC1, has a single integrated equilibrium. As GC1 improves,
PCTwC1 decreases slightly as richer minorities migrate into C1. Then a "tipping point" is
reached, with type w "fleeing" C1 to the full extent possible in equilibrium, with the communi-
ties becoming completely segregated. Eventually, as GC1 improves to the point that it is better
than GC2, rich whites begin to move in and the process slowly reverses, until another tipping
point is reached and "gentrification" leads to the community becoming all-w. Finally, as the
public good gap between C1 and C2 gets “large” we return to income sorting (now with the



                                                                                                   19
richest households locating in C1.

2.4 Discussion

           These results speak to at least three important policy and empirical issues in the literature.
The first and most central to our application are policy concerns centered on the correlation
between low-income and/or minority populations and the levels of local public goods like public
school quality, public safety, parks and green space, and environmental quality. The "environ-
mental justice movement," for example, has highlighted such correlations with air pollution and
local toxic facilities (see e.g. Been 1994, Bullard 2000). Our model confirms the intuition that
such sorting can be the outcome of sorting by income when there are substantial income diffe-
rentials between groups. More interestingly, racial preferences can strengthen this result, direct-
ly and indirectly. First, with the high-G community mostly white, it will be less attractive to
minorities. Second, it will also be more expensive simply because of its whiteness. Both factors
will tend to drive even fairly rich minorities into the minority district (a theme raised in the law
literature by, e.g., Ford 1994).

           However, both advocates and analysts have raised concerns that improving public goods
in low-quality neighborhoods may drive gentrification (Sieg et al. 2004, Banzhaf and McCor-
mick 2006, NEJAC 2006). While there may well be price effects, our model suggests that it is
unlikely that public good improvements will lead to large turnovers in racial or other group
compositions. To the contrary, Propositions 3 and 4 together imply that improvements in public
goods may increase segregation.11 This theoretical result is generally consistent with empirical
studies of gentrifying neighborhoods that find little evidence of differential displacement of
minority groups.12 Perhaps most relevant on this point is the recent empirical finding of McKin-
nish et al. (2010) that gentrifying neighborhoods are attractive to highly educated black families.
Of course, the link is not as direct as one might hope given that this literature remains mute on



11
   This of course depends on which of the two stable equilibria obtain. However, a move to the stable segregated
equilibria with all type-b individuals in the high public good community would require a much larger shift in popu-
lations than is required for a move to the stable segregated equilibria with all type-b individuals in the low public
good community.
12
     See for instance Vigdor (2002), Freeman and Braconi (2004), Freeman (2005), and McKinnish et al. (2010).



                                                                                                                   20
the underlying drivers of the gentrification that it seeks to study.

        A second application of our model is to the recent revival of interest in "tipping models"
of racial segregation (e.g. Card, Mas, and Rothstein, 2008, Pancs and Vriend, 2007). Although
Schelling (1969, 1971) noted the link between public goods and demographic sorting in his early
work, the role of public goods has generally been under appreciated in models of segregation.
For example, Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008) recently have conducted a study of "tipping"
behavior in US Cities. They identify tipping points using tract-level data, looking for break
points in the change in the white population as a flexible function of the baseline minority com-
position of the tract. They assume tipping points are identical for all tracts within a metropolitan
area. However, our model suggests this is unlikely to be the case. When two tracts have large
differences in locational amenities, integration is supportable even with large proportions of
minorities. Conversely, when two tracts have small differences in amenities, only low levels of
integration can be supported before tipping occurs.

        Figure 5 illustrates this point. The first panel in the figure corresponds to the last panel in
Figure 3 (i.e., the case where G1=G2=1), but with the x-axis re-normalized to represent the pro-
portion of a community's residents who are type-b rather than type-w. In this symmetric case,
both communities have a tipping point where the proportion of type-b equals 0.25. "White
flight" occurs where PROPb exceeds 0.25. The second and third panels in Figure 5 correspond
to the fourth panel in Figure 3 (i.e., the case where G1=0.8 and G2=1). Panel two depicts Com-
munity 1. With these values of G, C1 experiences white flight whenever PROPb exceeds 0.21.13
Comparing the first and second panels, we are essentially decreasing G from 1 to 0.8 while
holding G in the relevant substitute community constant at 1. This is sufficient to lower the
tipping point from a proportion of type-b of 0.25 to 0.21.

        The third panel of Figure 5 depicts Community 2 in the same "city" as the second panel.
Here, tipping occurs whenever PROPb exceeds 0.29. Comparing the first and third panels of this
figure, we hold constant the value of the public goods in Community 2 at G=1. But in panel 1


13
  There is also a stable integrated equilibrium where PROPb=0.11, but as this is a stable equilibrium increases in
PROPb above this level but below 0.21 do not trigger tipping. A tipping point is not reached until PROPb exceeds
0.21 in this community.



                                                                                                                 21
the substitute community has G=1 while in panel 3 the substitute community has G=0.8. This is
sufficient to move the tipping point from a proportion of type-b of 0.25 to 0.29. Thus, not only
does the level of public goods in a community determine the tipping point, but so too does the
level of the public goods in the relevant substitute community.

       This sensitivity of the tipping point to public goods may be one reason more noise ap-
pears in Card, Mas and Rothstein’s predictions about demographic changes around their esti-
mated tipping point (see their Figure 4). Our model suggests more precise estimates of tipping
points could be obtained by adjusting for differences in public goods using multiple regression or
other methods.

       Third, our results may help explain recent empirical puzzles about the demographic ef-
fects of environmental cleanup. As noted above, the environmental justice literature shows that
the presence of minority households is correlated with undesirable facilities like hazardous waste
sites. But recently, using difference-in-difference methods, Cameron and McConnaha (2006),
Greenstone and Gallagher (2008), and Vigdor (2009) have found that improvements to such sites
do not appear to reduce these correlations. They suggest this may be because of long-lasting
"stigma" of the sites or the ineffectualness of cleanup. Our results suggest another explanation:
the reduced form relationship may change after a cleanup, so that the correlation between pollu-
tion and race becomes even stronger, not weaker as supposed in the literature. To illustrate this
point, consider the difference-in-difference relationships that come out of the previous example.
Figure 6 plots the relationship between Gj and          for our two communities, with GC2=1 and
GC1 taking on each of the values used in Figure 3 (0.25 to 0.9). The lines in the bottom panel
shows the cross-sectional relationships for each value of GC1. The lines illustrating the cross-
sectional relationships become successively steeper as GC1 improves, consistent with our finding
that racial correlations strengthen with improving GC1, as sorting on race becomes more salient.
The top panel shows difference-in-differences for each successive improvement in GC1. Togeth-
er, the two panels clearly show that while the cross-sectional differences have the expected
negative slope, the difference-in-differences have the opposite slope.

       One way to think about this problem is in terms of a mis-specification of the standard dif-
ference-in-differences regression. Our model suggests that the correlation between race and


                                                                                                   22
public goods increases as the low public good community sees increases in its public good level.
Consider the reduced form relationships between minority compositions and pollution in com-
munity j in two time periods (0 and 1):

                                                                                                             (11)

                                                                                            ,                (12)

with time-specific intercepts t in each of the two time periods, time-invariant fixed effects for
each community, αj, and time-specific pollution effects β1 > β0 > 0. First differencing the equa-
tions leads to:

     Δ                          Δ       Δ                                                        Δ          (13)

If                   is omitted from equation (13), the estimate of β1 will be biased downward
when Δ                    and                    are negatively correlated (i.e. if the dirtiest areas are
being cleaned up). In this case, the problem may simply be one of omitted variables. Including
baseline pollution levels is suggested as a control. Although this kind of Oaxaca procedure is
common in the labor literature, the literature on local public goods has tended to ignore its im-
portance. Our model shows why it is important to take account of the changes in the reduced
form relationships.

3. Empirical Example

In essence, our model predicts that an exogenous improvement in public goods that closes the
public goods gap across neighborhoods will change locational equilibria in such a way as to put
more emphasis on sorting by race.14 As discussed above, the model's theoretical predictions are
generally consistent with recent empirical results on gentrification and the impacts of environ-
mental remediation. However, these empirical results are rather weak evidence as to the model’s


14
  It might seem equally true that it should put less emphasis on sorting by income. However, this is not necessarily
so. The reason can be seen in the logic of Figure 6. As GC1 rises and PCTwC1 falls, both effects lead to a higher
absolute value of the slope in the cross-sectional relationship between race and G. In contrast, as GC1 rises and mean
income rises in C1, there are two offsetting effects on the cross-sectional relationship between income and G.



                                                                                                                    23
empirical relevance. Unfortunately, to our knowledge, there is no extant work that bears directly
on this question. As an initial attempt to fill this gap, we consider the demographic shifts asso-
ciated with large reductions in localized toxic air emissions that occurred in California between
1990 and 2000, using a data set previously assembled by Banzhaf and Walsh (2008).

        At the core of the data are 25,166 "communities" defined by a set of tangent half-mile di-
ameter circles evenly distributed across the urbanized portion of California. This approach has
the virtue of establishing equally sized communities with randomly drawn boundaries, in con-
trast to political and census boundaries which may be endogenous. These neighborhoods are
matched to the presence of large industrial emitters of air pollution and their emissions levels, as
recorded in the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI), in each year from 1990 to 2000. TRI releases are
a common measure of pollution in the literature on the relationship between environmental
quality and demographic composition.15 Firms handling more than 10,000 pounds each year of
certain hazardous chemicals have been required to report these emissions since 1987. This
censoring at the reporting threshold gives rise to a kind of errors-in variables problem. As in the
usual case, this is likely to have a "conservative" effect on our results, biasing them to zero, as
some exposed communities are included in the control group. See de Marchi and Hamilton
(2006) for further discussion of the data. We use a three-year lagged average of the toxicity-
weighted emissions of all chemicals reported since 1988, looking at the change from 1988-90 to
1998-2000.16

        Emissions from each plant are assumed to disperse uniformly over a half-mile buffer
zone, and are allocated to each residential community accordingly. The data are also matched to
1990 and 2000 block-level census data on the total populations of each racial group. These
block-level data are aggregated to the circle-communities assuming uniform distributions within
each block. See Banzhaf and Walsh (2008) for additional details including summary statistics.

        Ten percent of our communities were exposed to at least some TRI emissions in the base-


15
  E.g., Arora and Cason (1996), Brooks and Sethi (1997), Kriesel et al. (1996), Morello-Frosch et al. (2001), Rin-
quist (1997), Sadd et al. (1999).
16
  The list of reporting chemicals greatly expanded in 1994. To maintain a consistent comparison of TRI emissions
over time, we have limited the data to the common set of chemicals used since 1988.



                                                                                                                 24
line period (1988-1990), with 4 percent of our communities (or approximately 40% of those
exposed in 1988-1990) losing their exposure by 1998-2000. Figure 7 shows the link between
baseline TRI exposure and the 10-year change in emissions. The figure clearly demonstrates that
the largest pollution reductions occurred in the communities with the highest baseline emissions.
Thus, these improvements are consistent with the "large" improvements in low-public good
communities discussed above.

         Using these data, we test for changes in the structural relationships between race and pol-
lution over time. In particular, we estimate

                                                                                                (14)

where      is an indicator for whether community j was "exposed" to TRI pollution (i.e. was
within a half-mile of at least one such facility) in year t and is the continuous level of air emis-
sions from nearby facilities allocated to community j. The variable E captures the extensive
margin and any non-air pollution related disamenity of the polluting facilities (visual, noise,
smell), while I captures the intensive margin, namely emissions weighted by EPA’s toxicity
index.

         A key challenge to identifying changes predicted by the model is the likely presence of
other, confounding location-specific public goods. Our approach to controlling for unobserved
spatial amenities is to employ in Lj successively more stringent time-invariant spatial variables,
including controls for latitude and distance from the coast, school district dummies, and zip code
dummies. These effects should capture unobserved public goods that vary on a spatial scale that
exceeds that of the pollution impacts from TRI facilities. School district fixed effects have the
advantage of mapping directly into an important but difficult-to-measure local public good, and
zip code fixed effects control for locational amenities that vary on spatial scale much smaller
than that of a school district.

         Table 1 displays the results. It shows the estimated effects, in each year, of a typical level




                                                                                                    25
of exposure in 1990 (for exposed communities).17 That is, for each year, it shows

                                                          1                       
                                               It                    I   1990    t .
                                                    1( I 1990    0)
                                                                            j
                                                                                    E
                                                   j j                j|
                                                                                   

The table clearly shows that as the public goods gap shrinks from 1990 to 2000, sorting on race
increased—precisely the predictions in the model. As the time-invariant locational controls get
more local, the estimated levels of the cross-sectional sorting parameter shrink, perhaps because
of unobservables or perhaps simply because less variation remains for estimating the model. But
in all cases, the estimated change in the relationship is consistently around 3 percentage points
and highly significant. That is, the effect of a "typical" polluting plant was associated with more
minorities in both years, but in 2000 the typical plant was associated with an increase in nearby
minorities 3 percentage points more than was the same sized plant in 1990.

           Moreover, these results are robust to a number of alternative specifications of the model.
In particular, we estimated the model on only the extensive margin of proximity to a polluting
facility as well as only the intensive margin of logged emissions. The results are qualitatively
similar for these variants of the model. We also estimated the model separately on the eight
metropolitan statistical areas in California with populations above 1 million. Again, the city-
specific results are qualitatively similar to the pooled results, though naturally somewhat less
precise.18 Finally, the effects are qualitatively similar if we consider the effect of an average size
plant in 2000 rather than 1990.

4. Conclusions

Our model suggests that any analysis of the distribution of spatially delineated public goods
across demographic groups must account for endogenous sorting on those demographics, while
at the same time studies of spatial patterns in demographics must account for public goods. That


17
     Similar results are obtained by using the average of 2000 emissions as an alternative normalization.
18
  In particular, for all three specifications of the spatial controls, the effect of the normalized level of pollution was
greater in 2000 than in 1990 for six of the eight metropolitan statistical areas, with the difference being statistically
significant in four or five of these cities, depending on the model. The estimated effect of pollution was actually
smaller in 2000 than in 1990 for two of the eight cities, but the difference is not statistically significant. Detailed
results are available from the authors.



                                                                                                                        26
is, sorting models in the tradition of Tiebout (1956) and tipping models in the tradition of Schel-
ling (1969) are fundamentally connected. We show that when sorting includes demographics,
changes in public goods can lead to counter-intuitive results. In particular, improving public
good levels in disadvantaged communities can actually increase segregation.

       Schelling's (1969, 1971) original insight into these issues was that complete segregation
can result even with ubiquitous tastes for some positive level of integration, a result recently
extended by Pancs and Vriend (2007). Consequently, modest changes in preferences are unlike-
ly to reduce segregation. More recently, Bayer et al. (2005) and Sethi and Somanathan (2004)
find that increasing the number of high socio-economic status minorities in a city actually can
increase segregation. They find that such people-based policies have this effect because richer
minorities now have enough mass to form their own high-income communities.

       Our results suggest that place-based policies pose the same dilemma, but for a different
reason: group-based sorting becomes more salient when there is less reason to sort on the ex-
ogenous public good. Taken in the context of the existing literature, our results contribute to a
theme that now appears to be growing by accretion. Apparently, neither changes in tastes nor
changes in income distributions nor changes in the spatial distribution of public goods are likely
to reduce the level of segregation in a society. Little wonder, then, that segregation has been
such a universal part of human history.




                                                                                                    27
References
Arora, Seema, and Timothy N. Cason. 1999. "Do Community Characteristics Influence Envi-
       ronmental Outcomes? Evidence from the Toxics Release Inventory." Southern Economic
       Journal 65(4): 691-716.
Ash, Michael, and T. Robert Fetter. 2004. "Who Lives on the Wrong Side of the Environmental
      Tracks? Evidence from the EPA's Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators Model." So-
      cial Science Quarterly 85: 441–62
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Eleanor McCormick. 2006. "Moving Beyond Cleanup: Identifying the
      Crucibles of Environmental Gentrification." National Center for Environmental Econom-
      ics Working Paper 07-02. http://yosemite.epa.gov/EE/epa/eed.nsf/WPNumberNew/2007-
      02?OpenDocument.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Randall P. Walsh. 2008. "Do People Vote with Their Feet?
      An Empirical Test of Tiebout’s Mechanism." American Economic Review 98: 843-63.
Bayer, Patrick, Hanming Fang, and Robert McMillan. 2005. "Separate When Equal? Racial
       Inequality and Residential Segregation." NBER Working Paper 11507.
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w11507.
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 2000. Social Economics: Market Behavior in a Social
       Environment, Chapter 5. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Been, Vicki. 1994. "Locally Undesirable Land Uses in Minority Neighborhoods: Disproportio-
       nate Siting or Market Dynamics?" Yale Law Journal 103: 1383-1422.
Brooks and Sethi. 1997. "The Distribution of Pollution: Community Characteristics and Expo-
      sure to Air Toxics." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 32: 233-50.
Bullard, Robert. 2000. Dumping in Dixie, 3rd ed. Westview Press.
Cameron, Trudy Ann, and Ian McConnaha. 2006. "Evidence of Environmental Migration." Land
      Economics 82: 273-290.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein. 2007. "Tipping and the Dynamics of Segrega-
       tion." Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 1999. "The Rise and Decline of the
        American Ghetto." Journal of Political Economy 107(3): 455-506.
de Marchi, Scott, and James T. Hamilton. 2006. "Assessing the Accuracy of Self-Reported Data:
      An Evaluation of the Toxics Release Inventory." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 32: 57-
      76.
Debreu, Gerard. 1970. "Economies with a Finite Set of Equilibria." Econometrica 38: 387-92.
Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer. 1984. "Equilibrium among Local Jurisdic-
       tions: Toward an Integrated Approach of Voting and Residential Choice." Journal of
       Public Economics 24: 281-308.
Farley, Reynolds, Howard Schuman, S. Bianchi, Diane Colasanto, and S. Hatchett. 1978. "Choc-



                                                                                              28
       olate City, Vanilla Suburbs: Will the Trend toward Racially Separate Communities Con-
       tinue?" Social Science Research 7: 319-344.
Farley, Reynolds, and Maria Krysan. 2002. "The Residential Preferences of Blacks: Do They
        Explain Persistent Segregation?" Social Forces, 80: 937-80.
Freeman, L. 2005. “Displacement or Succession? Residential Mobility in Gentrifying Neighbor-
      hoods” Urban Affairs Review 40(4): 463-491.
Freeman, L. and F. Braconi. 2004. “Gentrification and Displacement in New York City” Journal
      of the American Planning Association, 70(1): 39-52.
Ford, Richard Thompson. 1994. "The Boundaries of Race: Political Geography in Legal Analy-
       sis." Harvard Law Review 107: 1841-1921.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Jose A. Scheinkman. 2003. "Non-Market Interactions." In Advances in
       Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, 8th World Congress, Vol. 1, ed.
       by M. Dewatripont, L.P. Hansen, and S. Turnovosky. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press, pp. 339-69.
Greenstone, Michael, and Justin Gallagher. 2008. "Does Hazardous Waste Matter? Evidence
       from the Housing Market and the Superfund Program." Quarterly Journal of Economics
       123: 951-1003.
Hoff, Karla, and Arijit Sen. 2005. "Homeownership, Community Interactions, and Segrega-
       tion." American Economic Review 95: 1167-89.
Kiel, Katherine A., and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 1996. "House Price Differentials in US Cities:
        Household and Neighborhood Racial Effects." Journal of Housing Economics 5: 143-
        65.
Kriesel, Warren, Terence J. Centner, and Andrew G. Keller. 1996. "Neighborhood Exposure to
       Toxic Releases: Are there Racial Inequities?" Growth and Change 27: 479-99.
McGuire, Martin. 1974. "Group Segregation and Optimal Jurisdictions." Journal of Political
      Economy 82: 112-32.
McKinnish, Terra, Randall Walsh, and T. Kirk White. 2010. “Who Gentrifies Low-Income
      Neighborhoods?” Journal of Urban Economics, 67(2): 180-193.
Morello-Frosch, Rachel, Manuel Pastor, and James Sadd. 2001. "Environmental Justice and
       Southern California's 'Riskscape': The Distribution of Air Toxics Exposures and Health
       Risks Among Diverse Communities." Urban Affairs Review 36(4): 551-578.
National Environmental Justice Advisory Council (NEJAC). 2006. Unintended Impacts of Rede-
       velopment and Revitalization Efforts in Five Environmental Justice Communities. Report,
       August.
Pancs, Romans, and Nicolaas J. Vriend. 2007. "Schellings’ Spatial Proximity Model of Segre-
       gation Revisited." Journal of Public Economics 91: 1-24.
Rinquist, Evan J. 1997. "Equity and Distribution of Environmental Risk: The Case of TRI Facili-
       ties." Social Science Quarterly 78: 811-829.


                                                                                                29
Sadd, James L., Manuel Pastor, J. Thomas Boer, and Lori D. Snyder. 1999. "'Every Breath You
       Take…:' The Demographics of Toxic Air Releases in Southern California." Economic
       Development Quarterly 13(2): 107-123.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1969. "Models of Segregation." American Economic Review papers and
       proceedings 59: 488-93.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1971. "Dynamic Models of Segregation." Journal of Mathematical Sociol-
       ogy 1: 143-86.
Sethi, Rajiv, and Rohini Somanathan. 2004. "Inequity and Segregation." Journal of Political
        Economy 112: 1296-1321.
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh. 2004. "Estimating the
       General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods."
       International Economic Review 45(4): 1047-1077.
Tiebout, Charles. 1956. "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures." Journal of Political Economy
       64: 416-424.
Vigdor, Jacob L. 2202. “Does Gentrification Harm the Poor?” Brookings-Wharton Papers on
       Urban Affairs: 133-173.
Vigdor, Jacob L. 2009. "Does Environmental Remediation Benefit the Poor?" Paper presented
       at the Lone Mt. Forum on "The Political Economy of Environmental Justice," Big Sky,
       MT, Oct 2008. Revised June 2009.




                                                                                              30
Figure 1: Community Sorting and Bid Functions                                     .
                       Panel 1:Racial Composition                                                             Panel 2: V Functions
         1                                                                                2
                                                                    PROP 1w                                                                                     V 1w
        0.9
                                                                    PROP 2w                                                                                     V 2w
        0.8                                                                            1.95
                                                                    PROP 1b                                                                                     V 1b
        0.7
                                                                    PROP 2b                                                                                     V 2b

        0.6                                                                             1.9

        0.5

        0.4                                                                            1.85

        0.3

        0.2                                                                             1.8

        0.1

         0                                                                             1.75
         0.5   0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9   0.95      1           0.5    0.55   0.6    0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95          1
                             Proportion White Community 1                                                       Proportion White Community 1

                               Panel 3: Y‐Bar                                                                 Panel 4: Bid Functions
        0.7                                                                            0.01
                                                                      ybarw                                                                            Bid ybarw
                                                                                      0.008
        0.6                                                           ybarb                                                                            Bid ybarb
                                                                                      0.006

        0.5                                                                           0.004

                                                                                      0.002
        0.4
                                                                                          0
        0.3
                                                                                      -0.002


        0.2                                                                           -0.004

                                                                                      -0.006
        0.1
                                                                                      -0.008

         0                                                                             -0.01
         0.5   0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9   0.95      1            0.5   0.55   0.6    0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95          1
                             Proportion White Community 1                                                       Proportion White Community 1




                                                                                                                                                                           31
Figure 2: Community Sorting and Bid Functions                                     . ,   .
                       Panel 1:Racial Composition                                                                      Panel 2: V Functions
         1                                                                                    2
                                                                    PROP 1w                                                                                              V 1w
        0.9
                                                                                            1.95
                                                                    PROP 2w                                                                                              V 2w
        0.8
                                                                    PROP 1b                  1.9                                                                         V 1b
        0.7
                                                                    PROP 2b                                                                                              V 2b
                                                                                            1.85
        0.6

        0.5                                                                                  1.8

        0.4
                                                                                            1.75
        0.3
                                                                                             1.7
        0.2

                                                                                            1.65
        0.1

         0                                                                                   1.6
         0.5   0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9   0.95      1                0.5        0.55   0.6    0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95          1
                             Proportion White Community 1                                                                Proportion White Community 1

                               Panel 3: Y‐Bar                                                                          Panel 4: Bid Functions
                                                                                                      -3
                                                                                                   x 10
        0.7                                                                                  20
                                                                      ybarw                                                                                     Bid ybarw

        0.6                                                           ybarb                                                                                     Bid ybarb
                                                                                             15

        0.5


                                                                                             10
        0.4


        0.3
                                                                                              5


        0.2

                                                                                              0
        0.1


         0                                                                                    -5
         0.5   0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9   0.95      1                0.5        0.55   0.6    0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95          1
                             Proportion White Community 1                                                                Proportion White Community 1




                                                                                                                                                                                    32
Figure 3: Impact of Changes in                                             on Bid Functions.
                                     Panel 1                                                                          Panel 2
                                       .25,              1                                                                .5,            1
    0.12                                                                                  0.06
                                                                       Bid ybarw                                                                        Bid ybarw
                                                                       Bid ybarb                                                                        Bid ybarb
     0.1                                                                                  0.05



    0.08                                                                                  0.04



    0.06                                                                                  0.03



    0.04                                                                                  0.02



    0.02                                                                                  0.01



      0                                                                                     0
      0.5         0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95      1        0.5    0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95      1
                                Proportion White Community 1                                                     Proportion White Community 1


                                     Panel 3                                                                          Panel 4
                                         .7,            1                                                                 .8,            1
   0.035                                                                                 0.025
                                                                       Bid ybarw                                                                        Bid ybarw

    0.03                                                               Bid ybarb                                                                        Bid ybarb
                                                                                          0.02


   0.025
                                                                                         0.015

    0.02
                                                                                          0.01
   0.015

                                                                                         0.005
    0.01


                                                                                            0
   0.005


      0                                                                                 -0.005
      0.5         0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95      1         0.5   0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95      1
                                Proportion White Community 1                                                     Proportion White Community 1


                                     Panel 5                                                                          Panel 6
                                         .9,            1                                                                 1,             1
              -3
           x 10
     20                                                                                   0.01
                                                                       Bid ybarw                                                                        Bid ybarw
                                                                                         0.008
                                                                       Bid ybarb                                                                        Bid ybarb
     15                                                                                  0.006

                                                                                         0.004

     10                                                                                  0.002

                                                                                            0

      5                                                                                 -0.002

                                                                                        -0.004

      0                                                                                 -0.006

                                                                                        -0.008

      -5                                                                                 -0.01
       0.5        0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95      1         0.5   0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75    0.8   0.85   0.9     0.95      1
                                Proportion White Community 1                                                     Proportion White Community 1




                                                                                                                                                                        33
Figure 4: Evolution of Equilibria as                                 Improves.

                                                                                                       Stable Integrated
                                   1.2                                                                 Unstable Integrated
                                                                                                       Stable Segregated

                                                                                                                                         Race Segregation
                                   1.1




                                    1


                                           Income
                                           Segregation
                                   0.9
 Proportion White in Community 1




                                   0.8



                                                                                                                                                              Income
                                   0.7                                                                                                                        Segregation
                                                                                                                                       Gentrification



                                   0.6                     "White
                                                           Flight"



                                   0.5




                                                                       Race Segregation
                                   0.4




                                   0.3


                                     0.4                 0.6               0.8                              1                    1.2                    1.4                  1.6
                                                                                          Public Good Level (G) in Community 1




                                                                                                                                                                        34
Figure 5. Sensitivity of Neighborhood Tipping Points to Public Goods Levels.

                      Panel 1                                                                                    Panel 2                                                                         Panel 3
            C1 or C2 when                                             1                        C1 when                0.8,                      1                              C2 when                0.8,                     1
            -3
         x 10
    6                                                                                 -0.015                                                                       0.0195
                                                             Marginal Bid White                                                            Marginal Bid White                                                            Marginal Bid White
                                Tipping                      Marginal Bid Black      -0.0155                                               Marginal Bid Black       0.019                       Tipping                  Marginal Bid Black
    4                           Point                                                                                                                                                           Point
                                                                                      -0.016                                                                       0.0185
                                                                                                                                 Tipping
    2                                                                                -0.0165                                     Point                              0.018

                                                                                      -0.017                                                                       0.0175
    0
                                                                                     -0.0175                                                                        0.017

    -2                                                                                -0.018                                                                       0.0165

                                                                                     -0.0185                                                                        0.016
    -4
                                                                                      -0.019                                                                       0.0155

    -6                                                                               -0.0195                                                                        0.015
     0.18        0.2   0.22    0.24    0.26    0.28   0.3      0.32   0.34    0.36             0.16   0.17   0.18 0.19      0.2  0.21 0.22    0.23   0.24   0.25        0.25   0.26   0.27   0.28 0.29      0.3  0.31 0.32   0.33   0.34   0.35
                              Proportion Black Community 2                                                    Proportion Black Community 1                                                    Proportion Black Community 2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              35
Figure 6: Difference in Difference and Cross Sectional Relationships.
                                                                                              Difference in Differences
                                         0.25

                                                0.2                                                                                   Change in G
                                                                                                                                              .25 to .5
                                         0.15                                                                                                 .5 to .7
                                                                                                                                              .7 to .8
                                                0.1                                                                                           .8 to .9
      Change in Percent Black




                                                                                                                                              .9 to 1
                                         0.05

                                                 0

                                      -0.05

                                            -0.1

                                      -0.15

                                            -0.2

                                      -0.25
                                         -0.05                0                  0.05           0.1                 0.15       0.2     0.25               0.3
                                                                                                      Change in G


                                                                                               Cross Sectional Relationships


                                                0.5
                                                                  G1=.25
                                                                  G1=.5
                                                                  G1=.7
                                                0.4               G1=.8
                                                                  G1=.9
                                Percent Black




                                                0.3



                                                0.2



                                                0.1



                                                  0


                                                      0.2   0.3            0.4          0.5             0.6           0.7      0.8   0.9              1         1.1
                                                                                                           Level of G




                                                                                                                                                                 36
Figure 7. Improvements in TRI Emissions, 1990-2000 (3-year average).

                              3.1e+08
1988-90 to 1998-2000 Change




                              -3.1e+08
                                         0                                                  3.1e+08
                                             1988-90 Average Hazard-Weighted TRI Exposure




                                                                                                      37
Table 1. Estimated Effect of Average TRI Exposure in 1990 and 2000 (and Difference) on
Percent Minority.

Spatial controls L                    Effect in 1990           Effect in 2000           Difference                   R2
Latitude, Dist Coast                        21.3***                   24.3***                 3.0***                0.10

                                             (0.6)                     (0.8)                (1.0)

School Dist dummies                         11.7***                   14.3***                 2.6***                0.45

                                             (0.5)                     (0.7)                (0.8)

Zip Code dummies                              4.2***                    7.0***                2.8***                0.69

                                             (0.5)                     (0.6)                (0.7)

                                              1                    
Estimates are for the effect of  I 
                                                               1990 
                                  t
                                        1( I 1990       
                                                       0) j
                                                             I j
                                                                    
                                                                        Et . That is, they are the effect in year t of the
                                       j j                         
typical exposure experienced in 1990 (if any) compared to no exposure. The effect accounts for the extensive
margin of such "typical exposure" as well as the intensive margin of emission levels.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
***Significant at 1% level, ** 5%, * 10%.




                                                                                                                               38
Appendix.


Proof of Proposition 2

We begin by noting that when public good levels are equal:

(a)                      when PCTwC1 < 1-β,
(b)                      when PCTwC1 > 1-β, and
(c)                        0 when PCTwC1 = 1-β.

(a) is true because Drj is highest in the community with more of type j. With GC1=GC2, it follows
that Vrj is also higher in that community. (b) follows by the symmetric logic. (c) also follows by
similar logic: in this case, DrC1=DrC2 so VC1=VC2. Observation 4 shows that (a) and (b) are
associated with segregated equilibria. As already noted, all segregated equilibria are stable.
Observation 5 shows that (c) is associated with an integrated equilibrium. However, this equili-
brium is unstable because as soon as a single type-w individual in C1 switches with a type-b
individual in C2, then PCTwC1 < 1-β and we are in case (a). Likewise, if a type-w individual in
C2 switches with a type-b individual in C1, we are in case (b).

Proof of Proposition 3

The proposition follows directly from Proposition 2 together with the continuity of the boundary
income bid functions and the implicit function theorem. It states that the single unstable inte-
grated equilibrium and the segregated equilibrium with all type-b individuals in C2 that are
present when public goods are equal continues to hold and are the only possible equilibria for at
least small perturbations in the G’s around this point.

Proof of Proposition 4.

We prove this proposition in four steps.

Part (i).

We begin by re-writing Equation 4 as follows:

                                                                                          1




                                                                                                   39
By assumption, BidY → Y as GC1→-∞. Thus, by the Inada conditions                         →∞. Therefore, for

sufficiently low GC1, the entire term in brackets → 0 and we can focus on the first term                          .

         As shown in the text,

                                                        0.5
                                                                        0

                                                     0.5
                                                                            0
                                                1

whenever               . Therefore,

                                                           0

and

                                                           0.

In other words, the boundary income bid function is monotonically increasing in PCTwC1 for
type w and monotonically decreasing for type b.

Part (ii).
                                                                .
Next, note that at PCTwC1=1-2β,       =    and      =                                1    2    given β<0.5.

Again, since Bidy → y, it follows that      =           and             =        1   2      . Using Equation
(1), we then have         >       . Note that by Observation 4, this cannot be an equilibrium.

Part (iii)
                                                                        .
Similarly, note that at PCTwC1=1,     =     =0 and       =                      > 0. Thus         >       = 0.

Again, by Observation 4, this cannot be an equilibrium.

Part (iv)

We now combine parts (i) to (iii). By part (ii), we have that at PCTwC1=1-2β,                      >          .
By part (i), we know          is monotonically decreasing in PCTwC1 and                       is monotonically
increasing. By part (iii) we have that at PCTwC1=1,                 <           . Therefore, the two boun-


                                                                                                                  40
dary income bid functions cross once, with              crossing        from above. This is a stable
integrated equilibrium. Moreover, as noted above the segregated equilibria are ruled out by
Observation 4.

Therefore, a single equilibrium exists, it is integrated, and it is stable.

Proof of Proposition 5.

By Observation (5), in an integrated equilibrium              =        . Since BidYr → Y as GC1→-∞, it
follows that          = . By first order stochastic dominance, F(             /F(   ≥ 1.

Therefore,

                                                    1
                                                    1

and

                                                          1
                                                                          .
                                1                   1         1

This shows that the ratio of type b to type w is higher in C1 than C2. Adding 1 written as

                                          1         1
                                          1         1

to both sides of the equation and inverting both sides leads to

                       1                                  1        1
                                                                                           ,
                 1                              1         1                    1

which is the desired result.




                                                                                                       41
