                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      UNPACKING NEIGHBORHOOD INFLUENCES ON EDUCATION OUTCOMES:
                SETTING THE STAGE FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

                                           David J. Harding
                                             Lisa Gennetian
                                          Christopher Winship
                                           Lisa Sanbonmatsu
                                            Jeffrey R. Kling

                                          Working Paper 16055
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w16055


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2010




The views expressed here are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as those of the Congressional
Budget Office or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Greg Duncan, Richard Murnane,
Rebecca Blank, Robert Sampson, Steve Raudenbush, Patrick Sharkey, Susan Clampet-Lundquist,
Tama Leventhal, Larry Katz, Robert Moffitt, and participants at the Social Inequality and Educational
Disadvantage conferences and the University of Michigan Robert Wood Johnson Health Policy Seminar
for helpful comments on previous versions of this paper. This paper was prepared for Social Inequality
and Educational Disadvantage, edited by Greg Duncan and Richard Murnane, Russell Sage Foundation
Press.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David J. Harding, Lisa Gennetian, Christopher Winship, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, and Jeffrey
R. Kling. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unpacking Neighborhood Influences on Education Outcomes: Setting the Stage for Future
Research
David J. Harding, Lisa Gennetian, Christopher Winship, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, and Jeffrey R.
Kling
NBER Working Paper No. 16055
June 2010
JEL No. I21

                                              ABSTRACT

We motivate future neighborhood research through a simple model that considers youth educational
outcomes as a function of neighborhood context, neighborhood exposure, individual vulnerabilityWR
neighborhood effects, and non-neighborhood educational inputs -- with a focus on effect heterogeneity.
Research using this approach would require three steps. First, researchers would need to shift focus
away from broad theories of neighborhood effects and examine the specific mechanisms through which
the characteristics of a neighborhood might affect an individual. Second, neighborhood research would
need new and far more nuanced data. Third, more research designs would be needed that can unpack
the causal effects, if any, of specific neighborhood characteristics as they operate through well-specified
mechanisms.


David J. Harding                                     Lisa Sanbonmatsu
Department of Sociology                              NBER
University of Michigan                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue, 3rd Floor
Room 4128 LSA Building                               Cambridge, MA 02138
500 S. State Street                                  lsanbonm@nber.org
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1382
dharding@umich.edu                                   Jeffrey R. Kling
                                                     Congressional Budget Office
Lisa Gennetian                                       3403 Ordway St NW
The Brookings Institution                            Washington, DC 20016
1775 Massachusetts Avenue                            and NBER
Washington, DC 20036                                 jeffrey.r.kling@gmail.com
gennetl@nber.org

Christopher Winship
+DUYDUG8QLYHUVLW\
:LOOLDP-DPHV+DOO
Cambridge, MA 02138
cwinship@wjh.harvard.edu
Summary

       Most existing social science research on neighborhoods conceptualizes neighborhood

effects at the macro level, hypothesizing how general neighborhood characteristics such as the

poverty rate affect a variety of individual and family outcomes. Contemporary research on this

topic has largely failed to recognize the diverse types of families living in poor neighborhoods or

the potentially wide variety of ways that they may respond to a given set of neighborhood

conditions. Our core argument is that future neighborhood research must seriously consider this

diversity both conceptually and methodologically.

        Our hypothesis is that there is considerable heterogeneity in the experiences of youth in

the same neighborhood that might vary by their personal or family resources, their ability to cope

with or navigate neighborhood circumstances, and the decisions youth and their family make

about how, with whom, and where their time is spent. Depending on these and other factors,

different youth may get a different ―dose‖ of their neighborhood. This heterogeneity can generate

substantial variation in how a given neighborhood characteristic affects any one youth. Youth

who live in the same neighborhood may experience it in different ways, leading to “effect

heterogeneity,” neighborhood effects of different direction or magnitude for different youth.

       With a call to pay closer attention to effect heterogeneity as the core of our argument, we

motivate future neighborhood research through a simple model that considers youth educational

outcomes as a function of neighborhood context, neighborhood exposure, individual

vulnerability to neighborhood effects, and non-neighborhood educational inputs. Moving this

research agenda forward requires three steps. First, researchers need to shift focus away from

broad theories of neighborhood effects and examine the specific mechanisms through which the

characteristics of a neighborhood might affect an individual. By ―mechanisms‖ we mean the



                                                 1
social, economic, and cultural processes that create associations between the compositional or

demographic characteristics of neighborhoods, such as neighborhood poverty, and individual

educational outcomes, such as achievement scores or educational attainment.

       Second, neighborhood research desperately needs new and far more nuanced data. In

particular, we need data that measure how individuals and families of different types allocate

their time between different places, the extent of exposure to different people and locations, as

well as the consequent influences on individual behavior.

       Third, we advocate for research designs that can unpack the causal effects, if any, of

specific neighborhood characteristics as they operate through well-specified mechanisms. Much

current neighborhood research, in the language of structural equation models and path analysis,

estimates the reduced form or total neighborhood effect. The bane of this literature has been the

problem of selection—whether differences in outcomes are due to the neighborhoods themselves

or instead reflect differences in the characteristics of individuals who live in different types of

neighborhoods. Rather than trying to assess the overall effect of living in a particular type of

neighborhood, researchers should strive to examine discrete mechanisms in ways that account

for effect heterogeneity.

       Part I of this chapter introduces our conceptual framework. Part II argues for a shift from

general theories to concrete specifications of mechanisms and sources of effect heterogeneity.

Part III describes the need for new, detailed data on social interactions, both neighborhood and

non-neighborhood based (including schools) that will allow for measurement of responses and

exposure to people and places. Part IV discusses the types of research designs that might

profitably be employed to estimate the effects of such interactions on educational outcomes. Part

V presents a substantive example through which we illustrate one possible research design.



                                                  2
I. Introduction

       The goal of this chapter is to set the stage for future research—its opportunities as well as

challenges—to better understand the influence of neighborhood social settings on youth

educational outcomes. For the purposes of this chapter, what we define as a neighborhood social

setting is intentionally broad: settings that are outside of home and school. We differentiate

social settings according to the characteristics of the place, the types of people with whom the

individual interacts, and how time is spent. Our characterization casts a wide net so that

consideration may be given to a range of youth experiences, whether time spent in an after-

school program, hanging out at a basketball court or the local mall, or staying home.

       Because neighborhood context is the most frequently discussed social setting, we ground

our discussion in neighborhood effects on education. Our analysis is motivated by a simple yet

novel conceptual framework in which a youth‘s educational outcome (Y) is a multiplicative

function of the neighborhood context (N), individual exposure to that neighborhood context (E),

and individual vulnerability to the effects of the neighborhood context (V) as well as other

variables, X. Y = f(N,E,V,X) = (N E V)+X, where each quantity potentially has multiple

dimensions. The prior literature has primarily focused on estimating the effects of compositional

measures of N (such as neighborhood poverty rate) and on the methodological challenges of

identifying the effect of N, particularly separating the effects of neighborhood context from the

pre-existing differences between residents of different neighborhoods (X).

       Although selection bias remains a central issue worthy of further research, we argue that

the literature has too often ignored several other key research problems that are captured in our

model. The first is the mechanisms (M), or social processes by which neighborhood context (N)

affects individual outcomes (Y). The second is effect heterogeneity, or differences across


                                                 3
individuals in the effects of N on Y. This heterogeneity is driven by both E and V. Different youth

living in the same neighborhood will have different exposure (E) to the people, places, and

activities that drive neighborhood effects. In other words, E can be thought of as the ―dose‖ of

different neighborhood characteristics that an individual receives. As Sharkey (2006) argues,

individuals to some degree determine their level of exposure to different neighborhood

characteristics through the decisions they (and their parents) make about where, how, and with

whom to spend their time. Though the neighborhood effects literature has focused on the

selection of individuals and families into neighborhoods, the selection of exposure to different

neighborhood characteristics presents a second identification problem, what we might call

―within-neighborhood selection bias.‖ The social and economic processes that create differential

exposure are worthy of study from both a methodological and a substantive perspective. Effect

heterogeneity may also be generated by differences in the vulnerability (V) or susceptibility of

youth to the effects of the neighborhood (N). This variation in vulnerability may be driven by

differences in individual and family characteristics that make some youth more or less

susceptible to neighborhood effects mechanisms.1 For example, consider the possible responses

to neighborhood violence among parents of male adolescents. Some parents may require their

sons to stay inside. For some this will mean more time studying; for others, more time watching

TV. For the first individual, the effect of neighborhood violence will be to increase educational

attainment; for the second, the effect will be neutral or to decrease educational attainment.

Considerably more theorizing is needed to understand the processes behind effect heterogeneity

due to both E and V.

           Although not explicitly addressed in this chapter, we think the agenda put forth here is an

important step toward building evidence to inform public policy. In conceptualizing
1
    V may therefore be a subset of X.

                                                    4
neighborhood effects, it is helpful to differentiate between interventions that are designed to

affect residential mobility and interventions that are designed to directly change a place or

neighborhood. In the former, an individual‘s neighborhood environment changes because his or

her family moves to a new neighborhood, as in the Gautreaux project or Moving to Opportunity

(MTO) housing mobility experiment. In the latter, the characteristics of the social setting or

environment that the neighborhood provides for children is targeted for change (Sampson 2008).

As we think about estimating neighborhood effects on education, we will return throughout the

paper to these two types of policy interventions. In the example study design in Section V, we

describe an intervention that changes individual exposure to the neighborhood.



II. Conceptualizing Effects of Social Settings on Educational Outcomes

       In this section we motivate our critique of traditional neighborhood research by

describing various mechanisms that might affect individual outcomes and in appropriate cases,

why these effects might differ across families or individuals.

       Environment and Health: Some of the processes through which neighborhood context

may impact educational outcomes occur because of geographic location or physical proximity

(rather than through local social interactions). One such mechanism operates through

environmental or health effects. A neighborhood adjacent to a major highway may expose

children to high levels of particulate matter pollution that leads to asthma and therefore to more

school absences.

       Spatial Mismatch: Another mechanism is proximity to jobs, or ―spatial mismatch‖

(Jencks and Mayer 1990b, Mouw 2000). A neighborhood located near an abundance of job




                                                 5
opportunities may affect the way that individual youth thinks about the rewards to their own

education and future opportunities (Anderson 1999).

       Violence: Neighborhood violence may affect the amount of time youth spend on

homework if going outside means risking an experience with violence or victimization.

Witnessing frequent acts of violence may lead to post-traumatic stress disorder or biological

responses to stress that can also interfere with learning (Massey 2001, 2004).

       Neighborhood Resources: Neighborhoods certainly differ in their institutions and other

resources or resource-brokers. For example, one neighborhood may have an after-school

program that provides homework help while another does not. One neighborhood may be near a

community center that provides a safe, supervised space for teens to hang out, while another may

not. We are only beginning to understand which resources are more or less abundant in different

neighborhoods (Small 2006, 2009; Small and McDermott 2006, Small and Stark 2005). Small

and McDermott (2006) find that on average poor neighborhoods actually have slightly more

commercial establishments like pharmacies, grocery stores, and childcare centers, but that poor

black neighborhoods with declining population density have fewer such establishments.

Neighborhood resources can also fluctuate with the residential mobility of middle-class families

who disproportionately sustain community institutions and organizations (Wilson 1987).

       Culture: Cultural mechanisms may also be important. An example is social isolation

theory (Wilson 1996, Massey and Denton 1993). According to this theory, poor inner-city black

neighborhoods are thought to be socially isolated from ―mainstream‖ or middle class individuals

and institutions (particularly the labor market), leading to cultural isolation and the development

of a ―ghetto-specific‖ culture, which orients young people away from schooling by reinforcing

norms and values that denigrate the value of education. A similar formulation is Fordham and



                                                 6
Ogbu‘s (1986) oppositional culture theory. According to Fordham and Ogbu (see also Ogbu

2004), in poor black communities behaviors that promote academic achievement, such as

speaking standard English, doing homework, and engaging in class discussion, become defined

as ―acting white‖ in response to discrimination, inferior schools, and blocked labor market

opportunities (see also Massey and Denton 1993). However, subsequent examinations have

found no evidence for the core claim that black students are disproportionately sanctioned by

their peers for academic effort (Cook and Ludwig 1998, Ainsworth-Darnell and Downey 1998,

Harris 2006, Carter 2005; one exception is Fryer 2006, who finds that black students who get

good grades are less popular than whites who get good grades, but only in racially mixed public

schools). When students‘ experiences with oppositional culture are investigated, we begin to see

why. Carter (2005) finds that notions of ―acting white‖ among poor black and Latino youth have

more to do with musical tastes, fashion, and speech patterns than with academic performance or

effort.

          An alternative perspective on the cultural context of poor neighborhoods emphasizes the

cultural heterogeneity of such neighborhoods. Instead of a distinct subculture, neighborhood

cultural context can be conceptualized as culturally heterogeneous, incorporating competing and

conflicting cultural models, some of which are shared across society more broadly and some of

which are locally developed alternatives (Harding 2007, Harding 2010). For example, Carter

(2005) argues that poor youth have available to them a ―continuum of cultural attachments,‖

which different youth embrace to differing degrees. For young people enmeshed in this

heterogeneous cultural environment, creating and sustaining strategies for career and school

success is a major challenge (Harding 2010). When alternative educational and career pathways

are locally available and socially supported, some adolescents may jump to alternative pathways



                                                 7
when one becomes challenging, whether or not they have full information about the risks and

benefits of new strategies or the financial and cultural resources to successfully implement them.

       Social Organization: Social organization theory, which focuses on the capacity of

neighborhood residents to regulate behavior that occurs within the neighborhood, motivates

another set of neighborhood mechanisms. Such behaviors would include schooling related

behaviors of youth, such as truancy. Much of the current emphasis on the capacity of the

neighborhoods focuses on behavior that occurs in public spaces, particularly crime and violence.

Collective efficacy, defined as the ―social cohesion among neighbors combined with their

willingness to intervene on behalf of the common good,‖ (Sampson et al.1997) mediates the

relationship between compositional neighborhood characteristics (residential instability, ethnic

or racial heterogeneity, and poverty) and crime rates. When parents in a community are

connected to one another, what Coleman (1988) calls ―intergenerational closure,‖ they are

thought to be better able to present adolescents with a consistent set of cultural ideals regarding

education, leading to more school effort, and should be better able to monitor and control their

children‘s education-related behaviors, such as attendance. However, when applied to schools,

intergenerational closure has not always met with consistent empirical support (e.g., Morgan and

Sorenson 1999), raising the question of whether, how, or under what circumstances socially

connected parents can indeed enforce common educational ideals, and whether only pro-

schooling cultural ideals are strengthened by intergenerational closure. It is also unclear what

proportion of parents needs to be well-connected in order for the community to effectively

monitor adolescent behavior. Such tipping-points or thresholds remain relatively unexamined.

       Local Incentives: Finally, an economic perspective on social interactions focuses on

individuals as agents responding to incentives provided by the local environment and shaped by



                                                 8
their time and money resources (Manski 2000). For example, living in a neighborhood in which

many students drop out of high school might reduce the stigma of dropping out and thus increase

one‘s preference for doing so. Such a preference ordering depends on the actions of other

individuals. In another neighborhood, observing neighbors who attend college and obtain a high-

paying job may increase expectations about the benefits of attending college, but one unintended

consequence may be a reduced number of spots in advanced placement courses. This reduces

availability of such courses, but in the long-run it might also stimulate development of additional

courses to meet the new demand. The difficulty is that such empirical patterns can be generated

by many different interaction processes (or, even by individuals acting in isolation). In the

absence of measurement of expectations and preferences, researchers are left to infer the

presence of interactions from observations of outcomes.

       The mechanisms we have discussed often work in tandem. For example, high collective

efficacy neighborhoods may be more effective at securing outside resources, such as police

protection or the resources to build and maintain a community center. Moreover, because

institutions provide social contexts for the creation and maintenance of social ties, they may

affect the nature and extent of neighborhood social interactions. For example, Small‘s research

on child care centers in New York City finds, contrary to social isolation and de-

institutionalization theories, that poor neighborhoods have as many child care centers as

wealthier neighborhoods, that centers in poor neighborhoods have more organizational ties to

key resources, and that centers are key sites for social interaction, the creation of social ties, and

resource brokering in poor neighborhoods (Small et al. 2008, Small 2009).

       We note also that mechanisms often operate through parents rather than directly on

children. The neighborhood environment may affect parental employment, marital decisions,



                                                   9
parenting practices and psychological or physical health, and any of these can influence their

children‘s development (for example, see Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn 2000). Parents coping

with violent environments may be more likely to use physical forms of discipline because of the

heightened dangers that come with misbehavior or due to the stress of living in a violent

neighborhood, or parents may take cues from their neighbors when judging the academic

achievement of their children. Presumably, most of any neighborhood effect on young children

would operate through parenting practices or environmental mechanisms, since their direct

exposure to neighborhood social interactions are likely minimal.



Effect Heterogeneity

       The above theoretical perspectives provide broad outlines of how neighborhood effects

on educational outcomes might work, but none of these frameworks adequately considers how

these effects might differ due to differences in the daily experiences of youth. These differences,

E, in our conceptual model in Section I, are potentially important but largely uninvestigated

sources of effect heterogeneity (see also Small 2004).

       One possible source of neighborhood effect heterogeneity is differences across

individuals in social networks. Though interaction-based neighborhood effects theories implicitly

assume that neighborhoods play some role in structuring the social networks of their residents,

we actually know little about whether—or more importantly for whom—this is the case,

particularly among youth. Social networks are one of the key conduits through which

information and cultural frames or scripts are transmitted (but by no means the only one). Social

networks of youth of a similar age (―peer networks‖) have received considerable attention in the

literature (e.g. Anderson 1999). Such peer networks may play important roles as cultural



                                                10
conduits, as most theories of peer effects assume, but our theories need to be more specific about

who those peers are, which peer attachments are more common among young people in poor

neighborhoods, and what is transmitted through peer networks. Harding (2009a, 2010) argues

that older adolescents and young adults on the street in poor violent neighborhoods have

considerable cultural power and play an important role in socializing younger adolescents by

exposing them to local cultural frames and scripts regarding schooling and sexual behavior.

       A second source of effect heterogeneity is different behavioral adaptations to the

challenges of daily life in poor neighborhoods. A focus on behavioral adaptations explicitly

considers the individual as an actor that can adapt in different ways to mitigate or overcome

challenges faced in different neighborhoods. The distinction developed by Sharkey (2006)

between ―imposed‖ environments (everything present in the neighborhood where an individual

lives) and ―selected‖ environments (the people and institutions with whom he or she interacts)

highlights the idea that youth living in the same neighborhood may choose very different social

environments for themselves. Different choices or adaptations can have different consequences.

For example, violent neighborhoods provide particular challenges to adolescents. In order to feel

safe, some adolescents may spend as little time as possible in public spaces, thus limiting their

exposure to their neighborhood‘s violence. Others, however, may engage in behaviors such as

demonstrating their toughness, forming strong bonds of mutual protection with friends, or

relying on older individuals for protection in order to avoid victimization (Anderson 1999,

Harding 2009a, 2010). For this later group, these same behaviors may have unintended

educational consequences because they can be interpreted as resistant or disruptive by teachers

(Dance 2002). Another example is provided by Carter (2005) who argues that ―cultural

authenticity‖ (in the form of speech styles, clothing, music and other tastes) among ethno-racial



                                                11
minority groups can have positive payoffs in terms of group membership and solidarity (what

Carter calls ―non-dominant cultural capital‖) but also can be misinterpreted by white middle-

class teachers as oppositional or resistant. Parents may also adapt their parenting practices in

response to the neighborhood environment, for example by limiting their children‘s interactions

with neighbors (Furstenberg et al. 1999, Jarrett 1997a, b).

       A third potential source of neighborhood effect heterogeneity is variation in family

characteristics and the interaction between family characteristics and the properties of social

settings. Here effect heterogeneity is driven less by differences in social interactions and more by

differences between individuals and families in their capacity to access resources, and insulate

their children from negative aspects of their neighborhood, and as a result, their susceptibility to

neighborhood effects (or V in our conceptual model). (Our web appendix provides a detailed

example of family-based effect heterogeneity). Finally, differences across cities in economic,

social, and geographic characteristics may also be an important source of heterogeneity in

neighborhood effects (Small 2007).



III. Who, When, Where and What: The Need for New Data and Methods

Measuring Emergent Properties

       In order to incorporate the mechanisms and effect heterogeneity described above into

neighborhood effects research, measures of exposure and vulnerability are required. With the

easy availability of census data, early sociological research on neighborhood effects (e.g.

Brewster 1994a,b; South and Crowder 1999, South and Baumer 2000) often relied on

compositional measures of neighborhood characteristics as indicators of emergent properties

(e.g. the percentage of single-mother families as a measure of cultural norms regarding non-



                                                 12
marital childbearing). Economists drew liberally from these sociological roots continuing the

tradition of using compositional measures. These various compositional measures (e.g. poverty

rate, unemployment rate, rates of welfare receipt) tend to be fairly strongly correlated with one

another. Using compositional measures of neighborhood characteristics as proxies for emergent

cultural characteristics assumes a tight connection between culture and behavior, exposure,

networks and interactions, when (a) this assumption is probably incorrect and (b) the connection

is something we should be investigating. For example, if we observed high rates of high school

dropout in poor neighborhoods, would we assume that neighborhood norms and culture did not

place a high value on education? Research suggests that the poor, particularly African-American

poor, actually place a very high value on education (Solarzano 1992, Goldenberg et al. 2001,

Carter 2005, Young 2004, Newman 1999). More recent research has focused on developing non-

compositional measures using ―ecometric‖ methods (Sampson et al, 1997, Raudenbush and

Sampson 1999). Ecometric methods are an important advance – allowing us to measure the

social and cultural characteristics of neighborhoods.

       Because our theories are often about emergent properties of neighborhoods rather than

neighborhood composition, we need to measure emergent properties. The development of

constructs and methods of data collection should be guided by relatively detailed questions such

as: What are some of the dimensions that determine social interaction exposures? Where is a

youth spending his or her time: inside the home, in the neighborhood, at school, or outside the

neighborhood? When is the youth spending time in this environment? How long is the youth

there, and where could he or she otherwise spend time? Is the youth studying, watching TV,

playing sports, participating in an organized activity, or hanging out with family or friends? Who

is the youth interacting with or observing: family, friends, or unrelated adults? What are the



                                                13
characteristics, experiences, attitudes, and behaviors of the people with whom the youth is

interacting? What is the youth‘s relationship with or attitude toward these individuals (close or

trusted friend, casual acquaintance, authority figure, negatively perceived)?



Qualitative, Time Use and Social Network Methods

       Developing methods for measurement is as important as conceptualizing what to

measure. Qualitative methods are especially well-suited to understanding social processes and

day-to-day behaviors, particularly when the key dimensions the analyst might consider are not

clear at the outset. By interacting with individuals in their natural social contexts or talking to

them at length about their experiences and perceptions of those contexts, the ethnographer or

interviewer can understand in detail how neighborhoods structure the who, when, where, and

what of daily life and the content of the messages or ideas that youth encounter in these contexts.

       We see three roles for qualitative methods in research on contextual effects. First,

ethnographic participant observation or in-depth, unstructured interviews can be used in the pilot

or exploratory phase of a project to generate hypotheses, inform the development of survey

measures, or understand the boundaries of a social context in question. Second, qualitative

methods can be embedded in a mixed-method study in order to understand the mechanisms by

which quantitatively measured effects are operating and to inform the interpretation of estimates

from statistical models. One recent example of the utility of qualitative research is the mixed-

methods work in the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) evaluation. Quantitative data showed that

MTO improved the outcomes of female youth, particularly their mental health, but had

unfavorable effects on male youth (Kling, Liebman and Katz, 2007). The qualitative research

revealed that boys in the experimental group were more socially isolated than girls in their new



                                                  14
low-poverty neighborhoods, that boys in the control group experienced greater contact with

father figures, and that boys generally experienced more negative peer effects. These

mechanisms would have been virtually impossible to uncover with the quantitative data alone,

but because qualitative data collection occurred after the quantitative work, qualitative

researchers had the opportunity to explore through open-ended interviews why MTO had

disparate effects.2

        Third, stand-alone qualitative studies can illuminate social organization and daily life in

poor communities and inform theorizing about how contextual effects operate, develop evidence

for or against hypotheses based on prior research or theorizing, or complicate previous

theoretical accounts. For example, Small (2004) shows that neighborhood poverty does not

always lead to social disorganization and explores the conditions under which poor communities

can develop and deploy social capital. A long history of ethnographic research in urban

sociology has developed the ―stylized facts‖ that now inform much of the current neighborhood

effects research (e.g. Whyte 1943, Suttles 1968, Hannerz 1969, Anderson 1999, Young 2004).

        Time diaries and social network analysis methods are additional tools for gathering data

that can detail how, where and with whom time is spent. These methods hold considerable

potential for measuring an individual‘s involvement in or exposure to neighborhood social

processes (see, for example, Fu 2005, 2007 on network data). Traditional time use measurement

studies (Juster and Thomas 1985, Robinson 1977, Csikszentmihalyi and Reed 1987, Reed 1989,

and The American Time Use Survey [BLS 2009]) ask individuals to report on what they are


2
 In addition to the promise of MTO qualitative research for uncovering potential mechanisms, the MTO follow-up
surveys collected data on items that also provide some supporting evidence for particular pathways by which MTO
affected outcomes. Although the MTO study was primarily designed to answer questions about the causal effects of
housing vouchers and neighborhoods and not to identify specific mechanisms, one method of gleaning possible
mediating mechanisms is to examine the pattern of MTO's experimental effects on outcomes (such as math
achievement) and mediators (such as school discipline) to see if the effects align with hypotheses.


                                                       15
doing either retrospectively using a time diary or at the moment using experience sampling

methods. Often data is also gathered on secondary activities (e.g. monitoring children, watching

television), others present, and where the individual is (home, school, work, store, park, etc), yet

when locations are requested, they are of generic form (e.g. grocery store, friend‘s house) and do

not include geographic information that would allow researchers to measure distances or

locations. We caution that time use and social network data collection can be expensive and

therefore must be weighed against other data collection needs in any particular study. However,

measures of social interaction in and outside of the neighborhood are critical to measuring

neighborhood exposure, and data collection efforts can be efficiently tailored to these purposes.

       Recent work in criminology offers a promising example of how time diary methods can

measure where, how, and with whom adolescents spend their time. Motivated by both a concern

with neighborhoods and crime and also the routine activity theory of crime—which posits that

much crime is based on spur of the moment calculations related to opportunity, potential victims

or targets, and likelihood of apprehension (Cohen and Felson 1973)—criminologist Per-Olof

Wikström collected time use data on a subsample of adolescents in the Peterborough Youth

Study using ―space-time budgets‖ (Wikström and Butterworth 2006). Respondents were asked to

report their primary activity for each hour during the previous seven days. For each activity, they

also reported where they were (including both type of location and geographic location), who

else was present (e.g. number of friends, other peers, family, non-family adults, teachers, etc),

whether they had consumed alcohol or drugs, whether they were engaging in crime, whether they

were carrying a weapon, and whether the situation involved elements that might increase the risk

of offending or victimization, such as threats, arguments, or harassment (Wikström and

Butterworth 2006). Even this relatively simple form of data collection led to new descriptive



                                                 16
information on adolescent criminal involvement and its relation to neighborhood context. For

example, even the most frequent offenders spend very little time during the week offending;

offending most often occurred with peers and in risky situations, and youth in disadvantaged

neighborhoods were exposed to more risky situations. This example suggests that neighborhood

effects researchers might profitably adopt and extend this form of data collection in order to

examine time use and social interactions. For instance, by gathering data on the characteristics of

others with whom a youth spends time, exposure to local socialization can be gauged.



Measuring Institutional Resources

        ―Place‖ can influence who individuals are interacting with, how much time they spend

there (i.e. how desirable or appealing it is to engage in interactions) and can serve as a setting for

the transfer of information and resources. Traditional methods to measure availability of

institutions rely on geographic mapping to construct characteristics such as distance to

supermarkets, or more intensive neighborhood observation check-lists that systematically ask

observers to rate neighborhoods on items like presence of public playgrounds and the condition

of such playgrounds (graffiti, trash, barbed wire, etc). Such methods have grown in

sophistication as technologies such as ―Google Earth‖ have vastly decreased the cost of

assembling this type of information. As a result, these methods have been used to address a

variety of public health questions about the role of social and physical environments in health

outcomes among individuals living in disadvantaged communities (e.g. see Zenk et al 2005,

Ponce et al 2005).

       While mapping or collecting rater-observations (also called ―Systematic Social

Observation‖) is a good strategy for documenting the number and proximity of these types of



                                                  17
neighborhood institutions, these methods, as argued by Sampson, Morenoff and Gannon-Rowley

(2002), do not capture the quality and diversity of available institutions, nor the commonality and

acceptance of their use by residents (gathering places, trusted pharmacies, or safe parks). Recent

work in public health examining supermarket availability in impoverished neighborhoods

concludes, for example, that travel time may be a better indicator of accessibility than physical

distance (Zenk et al 2005). A fuller understanding of institutional resources can complement how

well researchers understand where and how time is spent and how to characterize place.

Retrieving this type of data may require a hybrid model that combines low-cost methods

(mapping and counting) with more resource intensive but tailored methods such as neighborhood

observation check-lists along with individual qualitative assessments of institutions (via a

subsample of survey respondents or respondents to more in-depth open-ended interviews).



IV. Estimation Strategies: Effects of Causes, Effect heterogeneity, and Mechanisms

Selection Bias

       ―Selection bias‖ problems present themselves when families and individuals have some

control over where they live, with whom they interact, and where they spend their time.

Individuals make decisions about the social settings they occupy based on a variety of factors,

from preferences to personal resources and other constraints, and because researchers cannot

always observe or measure these factors, selection bias may result. This means that individual or

family characteristics may confound the estimates of social setting on youth outcomes because

the associations we observe between a social setting such as neighborhood context and

educational outcomes may be due to unobserved differences in individual or family

characteristics across neighborhoods and not to the effects of residing in different



                                                 18
neighborhoods. The magnitude of the bias will depend on two quantities: the association between

the confounder and social setting, and the association between the confounder and the outcome.

        A useful way of conceptualizing this identification problem is to consider the sources of

variation in social settings experienced by different youth. Take, for example, neighborhood

context. One type of variation, endogenous variation, refers to the confounders that produce

selection bias discussed above. The second type of variation is exogenous variation in

neighborhood context, variation that is produced by economic or social processes that do not

directly affect individual outcomes. For example, a change in public policy may move some

families out of public housing into neighborhoods with lower poverty rates without directly

affecting outcomes of interest.

        Solving the selection bias problem requires finding and measuring those exogenous

sources of variation. In searching for such exogenous variation in neighborhood contexts,

researchers have focused on two types of processes that lead to variation in neighborhoods across

individuals: (1) residential mobility, or the movement of families from one neighborhood to

another, and (2) changes in neighborhood conditions over time, i.e. a ―place-based‖ change.

Since both sources of variation can be endogenous or exogenous, both present identification

challenges. In the former, we must understand why some families move to (or stay in)

disadvantaged neighborhoods while others do not. Moreover, we must consider the potential

negative effects of residential mobility itself, which could dilute the positive effects of an

improved neighborhood context (Sampson 2008).3 In the latter, we must understand why some

neighborhoods change and some do not, and we may also worry about why some families move


3
 Sobel (2006) discusses another identification problem in mobility experiments, interference between units that we
do not fully describe here. This is a particular challenge in this context because encouraging and succeeding in
changing residential mobility inherently can have possible confounding effects on the families in the receiving
neighborhood as well as those in the neighborhood left behind.

                                                        19
in response to changes in their neighborhoods and others do not. If these reasons are also

causally related to the outcomes, selection bias is introduced. Finally, note that these two types of

interventions typically will not estimate the same quantity. Residential mobility manipulates an

entire set of linked neighborhood characteristics, while a place-based intervention typically

manipulates a single key feature (or small number of key features) of the neighborhood context.

A place-based intervention will therefore more often provide a narrow test of a specific

neighborhood effects mechanism. For this reason, and because we have already learned much

from residential mobility studies like MTO and Gautreaux, we support the development of place-

based interventions for studying neighborhood effects. Key challenges in developing such

interventions include designing interventions that are strong enough to produce detectable effects

and specific enough to reveal the importance of a single mechanism.



Identifying the effects of specific mechanisms

       Focusing on mechanisms introduces an additional set of complications to research

designs that rely on harnessing exogenous variation in social settings. Though not cast precisely

in terms of mechanisms, it is helpful to start with Manski‘s discussion of identification problems

in neighborhood effects research since his framework is well-known and the fundamental

problems of interpreting associations between contextual characteristics and individual outcomes

are especially relevant in identifying mechanisms (Manski 1993, 1995). Manski describes three

sources of association between neighborhood characteristics and individual outcomes. First,

―endogenous effects‖ are the effects of group level values on individual values on the same

variable. For example, contagion or peer effects theories propose that individuals are more likely

to do what others around them are doing. A child will spend more time studying when he sees



                                                 20
his peers spending more time studying. Endogenous effects generate a social multiplier because

they amplify any direct effect of an intervention. These types of effects are particularly

challenging to identify due to direction of causality, or what Manski calls the ―reflection

problem.‖ Is directionality from the group to the child or vice versa? Second, in ―contextual

effects,‖ individual behavior varies with other characteristics of the group, such as achievement

varying with neighborhood socio-economic composition. A child may spend more time studying

when he observes adults in the neighborhood who have benefitted from high levels of education.

Third are ―correlated effects,‖ which is simply another name for selection bias.

       If we want to identify the total effect of exposure to one neighborhood rather than

another, then it is not necessary to distinguish between endogenous and contextual effects with

respect to the mechanisms that they specify. The main concern is selection bias at the

neighborhood level, as discussed above. (Note, however, that even if we were able to deal with

the selection bias problem and obtain a causal estimate of the effect of, say, neighborhood

poverty on an educational outcome, this would not distinguish between the effects of

neighborhood poverty and other neighborhood characteristics correlated with it.)

       The reflection problem emerges whenever we are interested in endogenous effects of

social settings, but it is not the same identification problem as the selection bias problem

researchers face when trying to estimate total effects. The reflection problem can be understood

as a failure to specify, measure, and manipulate (or find an instrument for) one particular

mechanism, the average value of the outcome among a group with whom one interacts. The only

other option is to draw on theory to invoke strong identifying assumptions that specify the

direction of causality. For instance, perhaps older friends‘ actions affect younger friends‘ actions,

but not the reverse. The key point is that the reflection problem is not an inherent intractable



                                                 21
problem in the estimation of neighborhood effects but rather results from failure to conceptualize

mechanisms and develop strategies for identifying their effects.

         We now return to the selection bias problem, but consider it in the context of identifying

the role of mechanisms. Even if there is a source of random variation in neighborhood context,

the selection bias problem re-emerges when mechanism variables are considered, as self-

selection into the mechanisms may no longer be random with respect to the outcomes.

Identifying the effects of mechanisms on an outcome will require multiple sources of exogenous

variation. Consider Figure 1, which diagrams a simplified research design in which there are

three hypothesized mechanisms (M1, M2, M3) for the effect of N (a neighborhood

characteristic) on Y (the outcome). For example, N might be the amount of violence in the

neighborhood and Y might be educational achievement. The three mechanisms might be (M1)

leveling of educational expectations through a focus on safety, (M2) exposure to violence

affecting cognitive development through Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, and (M3) joining a

gang for protection leading to less time for studying.4 U represents a set of unobserved X

variables that are uncorrelated with Z (since it was randomly assigned) but are correlated with

neighborhood violence (N), the outcome (Y), and the mechanisms (M‘s).5

                                             -- FIGURE 1 HERE --

         If we are interested in the total effect of neighborhood violence (N) on educational

achievement (Y), we can use instrumental variables to estimate the effect. This approach

involves finding another variable, Z, that is correlated with neighborhood violence (N) and

uncorrelated with the unobserved variables (U). Z is the source of exogenous variation in our

4
  Note that one might further theorize mechanisms for these mechanisms. The level of detail in the specification of
mechanisms depends on one‘s substantive and policy goals. See Morgan and Winship (2007, Ch. 8) for discussion
of this issue.
5
  For simplicity we omit the observed X‘s from the figure. The discussion in this section will assume conditioning
on observed X variables.

                                                         22
neighborhood characteristic (N). For example, the city might randomly assign an anti-violence

program to some neighborhoods and not others. Referred to as an instrument, Z is used to purge

N of the portion of its variation that is correlated with the unobservables. The exogenous portion

of N‘s variation—that is, the uncorrelated portion that remains—is then used to estimate the

effect of N on Y. Intuitively, this means that our analysis is using only the variation in

neighborhood violence created by the anti-violence program to identify the effects of violence.

Because the anti-violence program is randomly assigned, the communities that did not get the

anti-violence program are similar in observed and unobserved ways to the communities that did.

       We can use a similar procedure to identify the effect of the neighborhood characteristic

(N) on each of the mechanisms. For example, b1 can be estimated as the association between the

anti-violence program (Z) and educational expectations (M1) divided by the effect of the

program on neighborhood violence (a). The difficulty is that as long as each of the mechanisms

(M‘s) is associated with the outcome Y through the unobserved variables (U), we have no way to

identify the effects of these mechanisms on educational achievement without more instruments,

i.e. without sources of exogenous variation in the mechanisms. Moreover, if the mechanisms are

causally related to one another, then even if we could measure all the U‘s, we would also have to

assume that we have measured all the mechanisms as well, lest our estimate of the effect of any

one mechanism on Y be biased by its association with an unobserved mechanism. If we thought

that violence also directly reduced school attendance and that educational expectations are

correlated with school attendance but we did not observe school attendance, we might attribute

some of the effects that operate solely through school attendance to educational expectations.

One way to create the additional exogenous variation necessary to identify the effects of specific




                                                 23
mechanisms (c‘s) is to design an experiment with multiple treatment arms that produce

exogenous random variation in both N and the M‘s across the treatment arms.

       Another general approach in an experimental setting is to examine patterns of effects on

mediating mechanisms by subgroups. This can be useful when the experiment is not designed

with multiple treatment arms for the various mechanisms, and can be done by dividing the

sample into subgroups for which theory and previous evidence suggest that treatment effects of

N on Y may differ. A review of the overall pattern of results can provide some evidence to

support a theoretical framework by testing, in part, the hypothesized relationships between

mechanisms and outcomes across treatment categories and subgroups. The advantage of this type

of experimental approach is that the source of variation in the social setting (e.g. from something

like randomly assigned rent subsidies that affect residential location) is clear, so we can be

confident that changes in the mechanisms are causally related to residential location. However,

without an exogenous source of variation in the mechanisms, the mechanisms may be spuriously

correlated with the outcomes through unobservables.

       Focusing on mechanisms can also strengthen our confidence in causal claims. Consider

again Figure 1 in which there are three mechanisms (M‘s) and some set of unobserved

confounders (U). If any one of the observed mechanisms is uncorrelated with U, then we can

identify the portion of the effect of the treatment (N) on the outcome (Y) that operates through

that mechanism. For example, if we can assume that the ―joining gangs‖ mechanism (M3) is not

affected by unobservables (U), then the arrow between U and M3 disappears from the diagram.

When M3 is not affected by U, and when we can observe the other mechanisms, both the effect

(b3) of the treatment on joining gangs and the effect (c3) of joining gangs on achievement can

now be identified even if there is no instrument. The effect of the neighborhood violence (N) on



                                                 24
achievement (Y) that operates through joining gangs (M3) can be calculated as the product of b3

and c3. While this does not provide us with an unbiased estimate of the total effect of N on Y, if

b3*c3 is nonzero, it does provide evidence that there is some nonzero effect of N on Y. 6



Complications introduced by effect heterogeneity

         In the above example the subgroups are observed and effect heterogeneity is harnessed to

provide further information. The possibility of heterogeneity in effects also introduces

complications, particularly when the subgroups cannot be identified in the data. The first

complication has already been discussed in the methodological literature on instrumental

variables estimation, that is, unless the treatment effect can be assumed to be the same for all

units of analysis, an instrument identifies the local average treatment effect (LATE) (Angrist,

Imbens and Rubin, 1996; Angrist and Krueger, 2001; and Gennetian et al., 2005, for a less

technical exposition). It answers the question: What is the average effect of the treatment among

those who were actually induced to take the treatment by the instrument? The conventional

solution to the LATE problem is to use multiple instruments (see applications by Kling, Liebman

and Katz, 2007; Gennetian, Magnuson and Morris, 2008). If different LATE estimates from

different instruments operate in the same direction and are of similar magnitude, then we can be

more confident that the effect of the treatment is not specific to particular subgroups.

         A second complication arises because estimating the role of a particular mechanism in

the effect of a neighborhood characteristic (N) on an educational outcome (Y) requires

identifying both the effect of X on the mechanism and the effect of the mechanism on Y. When

there is treatment effect heterogeneity, it is possible to produce an estimate of the role of the

6
This discussion is an example of identification through what Pearl (2000) calls his ―front door‖ criterion. See
Winship and Harding (2008) for an example and further details.


                                                         25
mechanism that applies to none of the cases if some cases experience effects of N on the

mechanism and other cases experience an effect of the mechanism on Y (see also Bullock and

Ha 2010). In technical terms, this means that the LATE for the effect of N has a different group

of compliers than the LATE for the effect of M.

           This problem highlights the importance of specifying and measuring sources of effect

heterogeneity. It is particularly important to choose exogenous family or child characteristics,

lest subgroup membership be a product of the treatment. Ideally one might also purposely

stratify one‘s sample to ensure sufficient sample size in each subgroup. Our discussion thus far

suggests a number of other family or child characteristics on which one might focus. Our

emphasis on family capacity or family resources suggests that family income, family structure,

or number of children, or access to transportation may determine the strength of a neighborhood

effect. Our emphasis on social ties and interactions in the neighborhood suggests that proximity

to extended kin, parents‘ social ties to the neighborhood, or parental employment outside the

neighborhood may determine the strength of the neighborhood effect. Many of these

characteristics are both determinants and effects of the treatment. Further ethnographic work

may be required to better understand these and other sources of effect heterogeneity.7 We

emphasize as well that an exhaustive search for effect heterogeneity may lead to multiple testing

problems through the mining of sample data for statistical significance. Sources of effect

heterogeneity should be closely informed by theory and prior research and any analyses should

be preceded by a clear set of hypotheses limiting the number of subgroups to be examined.



V. An Illustrative Example



7
    One might also consider family type to be a latent class and conduct a latent class analysis.

                                                            26
       Because violence is spatially concentrated in poor neighborhoods, violence may be an

important mechanism linking neighborhood poverty to school outcomes. In this section we

sketch an example study that examines whether the observed correlation between neighborhood

violence and unfavorable youth schooling outcomes (e.g. Harding 2009b) is causal by

manipulating exposure to neighborhood violence through youth time use. Suppose we observe

that youth living in more violent neighborhoods have lower school attendance and graduation

rates, high rates of suspensions, and poorer math achievement. One can try to test the

neighborhood violence hypothesis by estimating the relationship between an individual's time

spent on the streets in a violent neighborhood and educational achievement using a regression

model, but this estimate will be susceptible to within-neighborhood selection bias (different

youth choosing to spend their time in different places, in different ways, and with different

people). An alternative is to identify this effect by generating exogenous variation in youth time

use through random assignment.

       We can manipulate the amount of time youth spend in areas of higher neighborhood

violence under the hypothesis that such time use affects exposure to violence. Randomization

ensures that individuals assigned to different locations are the same across both observed and

unobserved characteristics, except for chance variation, so any differences in outcomes across

groups can be attributed to the planned variation in exposure to violence.

       Details of this example study can be found in the web appendix. Briefly, the design is the

following. In the first stage, we select a target set of neighborhoods with high neighborhood

violence and match each of them to neighborhoods that are comparable in terms of poverty, race,

and educational levels but have lower neighborhood violence (see Seith et al, 2003 on the

feasibility of matched-neighborhood designs). An intervention would be designed that is non-



                                                27
academic, but involves engagement with the neighborhood – such as working on a local clothing

drive. For the study, we would recruit individuals from the neighborhoods with higher levels of

neighborhood violence, so that the neighborhoods where subjects are placed through the

intervention are all less risky than their own neighborhoods. We would randomly assign these

youth to teams in different locations outside of their own neighborhoods, some of which would

have lower neighborhood violence than others.

       With this type of random assignment study design we can learn about the effect of

exposure to neighborhood violence by comparing the educational outcomes of youth in the

different intervention groups. Although we do not directly manipulate exposure to violence, we

can estimate the intervention‘s impact on educational outcomes and the intervention‘s impact on

exposure to violence. For example, we hypothesize that youth working in less violent

neighborhoods would experience more beneficial educational effects than those working in more

violent neighborhoods. The benefits of the interventions may vary at the individual level by pre-

intervention exposure and vulnerability to neighborhood violence, as determined by family

connections to resources outside of the neighborhood, parenting skills, parental motivation and

capacity to seek positive alternative environments for children, and the youth's own social

relationships and decisions about how to use their time.

       Measures of youth time use, neighborhood characteristics and exposure to violence, and a

range of information about families and their youth can be collected through surveys. With these

data, we can also check for any other important differences in youth experiences that arise during

the study which may be correlated with exposure to violence. Survey data can be complemented

by in-depth qualitative interviews with a small subsample of youth in both the experimental and




                                                28
control groups to better understand aspects of youth time use and exposure to violence which are

difficult to detect or measure through a survey.



IV. Conclusion

       Our aim in this chapter has been to set the stage for future research—its opportunities as

well as challenges, both conceptually and empirically—to better understand the influence of

neighborhood social settings on youth educational outcomes. Conceptually, we argue that the

field is ready to move away from estimating the effects of compositional properties of

neighborhoods and toward an analysis of specific mechanisms and effect heterogeneity. A new

focus on mechanisms, exposure, and vulnerability can only be achieved with more nuanced data.

Our recommendation is to build on the successes of prior efforts and invest in new, mixed

methods data collection strategies that can measure individual interactions, networks, and time

use and provide reliable assessments of neighborhood resources, cultural contexts, and physical

conditions. We see particular promise in adapting time use and social network data collection

methods to assess exposure to the social and cultural processes that produce contextual effects.

Finally we point to both across neighborhood and within neighborhood selection biases as long-

standing challenges in identifying neighborhood effects and illustrate some promising

approaches for designing studies to identify mechanisms and assess effect heterogeneity.

Although we tailor our discussion to social settings outside of the school and home, much of

what we discuss might also be applied to school settings or home environments.

       Neighborhoods are not static, nor are individual residential decisions. Our proposed

framework recognizes this to some extent by highlighting the importance of effect heterogeneity.

We have not addressed other forms of neighborhood dynamics. Neighborhoods change over time



                                                   29
as residents move in and out, and community investment increases or decreases. When families

move in response to changes in the neighborhoods around them or in response to the outcomes

experienced by their children as a result of neighborhood context, then more sophisticated

statistical methods, such as marginal structural models or inverse probability of treatment

weighting (Robins, Hernan, and Brumback 2000), are required to estimate unbiased causal

effects, even when all sources of selection bias are accurately measured (Sampson, Sharkey and

Raudenbush 2008, see also Sharkey and Sampson forthcoming).

       We have discussed identification of mechanisms for neighborhood effects without regard

to the absolute magnitude of these effects, to their relative magnitudes compared to the effects of

schools or of families, or to their resulting policy significance. Policy trade-offs between housing

vouchers that offer the opportunity to move compared to place-based neighborhood investment

(such as building a community center or clinic) are best informed by quantifying the size of

effects and comparing costs and benefits. Mechanisms by which neighborhoods can have their

effects are particularly important in considering these types of policy trade-offs. For example, if

mix of peers in neighborhood-based after-school activities is an important predictor of youth

math achievement, then policy makers can evaluate the size of this beneficial peer effect (and

any spillover effects) compared to the cost of busing disadvantaged youth to programs that offer

this same mix of peers, or the cost of offering an equivalent program in the schools attended by

disadvantaged youth. Heterogeneous treatment effects are equally important in considering

policy trade-offs. Policy interventions that primarily benefit only some subgroups may be more

or less appealing. For example, an intervention with a large effect on a small group of youth may

be more or less appealing than an intervention with a small effect on a very large group of youth.




                                                 30
References

Ainsworth-Darnell, James and Douglas Downey. 1998. ―Assessing the Oppositional Culture
      Explanation for Racial/Ethnic Differences in School Performance.‖ American
      Sociological Review 63:536-553.

Anderson, Elijah. 1999. Code of the Street: Decency, Violence, and the Moral Life of the Inner-
      city. New York: W. W. Norton.

Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger 2001. ―Instrumental Variables and the Search for
       Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments.‖ Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 15(4), 69-85.

Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin 1996. ―Identification of Causal Effects Using
       Instrumental Variables.‖ JASA Applications Invited paper, with comments and authors‘
       response. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 444-455.

Brewster, Karin L. 1994a. ―Race Differences in Sexual Activity Among Adolescent Women:
      The Role of Neighborhood Characteristics.‖ American Sociological Review 59: 408-424.

Brewster, Karin L. 1994b. ―Neighborhood Context and the Transition to Sexual Activity among
      Young Black Women." Demography 31: 603-614.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Greg J. Duncan, Pamela K. Klebanov, and Naomi Sealand. 1993. ―Do
      Neighborhoods Influence Child and Adolescent Development?‖ American Journal of
      Sociology 99:353–95.

Browning, Christopher R., Tama Leventhal, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2004. ―Neighborhood
      Context and Racial Differences in Early Adolescent Sexual Activity.‖ Demography 41:
      697-720.

Browning, Christopher R., Tama Leventhal, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2005. ―Sexual Initiation
      in Early Adolescence: The Nexus of Parental and Community Control.‖ American
      Sociological Review 70: 758-778.

Bullock, John G., and Shang E. Ha. 2010. ―Mediation Analysis Is Harder than It Looks.‖ In
       Cambridge Handbook of Experimental Political Science, ed. James N. Druckman,
       Donald P. Green, James H. Kuklinski, and Arthur Lupia. New York: Cambridge
       University Press.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2009. American Time Use Survey User’s Guide.
      http://www.bls.gov/tus/atususersguide.pdf (accessed February 25, 2010).

Carter, Prudence L. 2005. Keepin' It Real: School Success Beyond Black and White. New York:
        Oxford University Press.



                                               31
Cohen, Lawrence E., and Marcus Felson. 1979. "Social Change and Crime Rate Trends: A
       Routine Activity Approach." American Sociological Review 44 (4): 588-608.

Coleman, James S. 1988. ―Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital.‖ American Journal
      of Sociology 94: S95-S120

Cook, Phillip and Jens Ludwig. 1998. ―The Burden of ‗Acting White‘: Do Black Adolescents
       Disparage Academic Achievement?‖ Pp. 375-401 in Christopher Jencks and Meredith
       Phillips (eds) The Black White Test Score Gap. Washington, D.C.: Brookings.

Cook, Tom D., William J. Shadish, and Victor C. Wong. 2008. ―Three Conditions Under Which
       Observational Studies Produce the Same Results as Experiments.‖ Journal of Policy
       Analysis and Management 27(4): 724-750.

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly and Larson, Reed. 1987. "Validity and Reliability of the Experience
       Sampling Method," Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175: 526-536.

Currie, Janet, Eric Hanushek, E. Megan Kahn, Matthew Neidell and Steve Ridkin. 2007. ―Does
        Pollution Increase School Absences?‖ National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper No. 13252.

Dance, L. Janelle. 2002. Tough Fronts: The Impact of Street Culture on Schooling. New York:
       Routledge Falmer Press.

Fordham, Signithia and John Ogbu. 1986. ―Black Students‘ School Success: Coping with the
      Burden of ‗Acting White.‘‖ Urban Review 18(3):176-206.

Fryer, Roland G. 2006. ―Acting White: The Social Price Paid by the Best and brightest Minority
        Students.‖ Education Next (Winter 2006): 53-59.

Fu, Yang-chih. 2005. ―Measuring personal networks with daily contacts: a single-item survey
       question and the contact diary.‖ Social Networks 27: 169-86.

Fu, Yang-chih. 2007. ―Contact diaries: Building archives of actual and comprehensive personal
       networks.‖ Field Methods 19: 194-217

Furstenburg, Frank F. et al (eds). 1999. Managing to Make It: Urban Families and Adolescent
       Success. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gennetian, Lisa, Lisa Sanbonmatsu and Jens Ludwig. 2009. ―Neighborhood Poverty Effects on
      Low Income Youth: A Within Study Comparison Using Data from the Moving to
      Opportunity Study.‖ Working Paper. Presented at 2009 Society For Research in Child
      Development, Denver, Colorado.

Gennetian, Lisa, Katherine Magnuson and Pamela Morris. 2008. ―Statistical Association to
      Causation: What Developmentalists Can Learn from Instrumental Variables Techniques

                                              32
       Coupled with Experimental Data.‖ Developmental Psychology. 44(2): 381-394.

Gennetian, Lisa., Pamela Morris, Johannes Bos and Howard Bloom. 2005. ―Coupling the
      Nonexperimental Technique of Instrumental Variables with Experimental Data to Learn
      How Programs Create Impacts.‖ Chapter 3 in H. Bloom (ed.) Moving to the Next Level:
      Combining Experimental and Non-Experimental Methods to Advance Employment Policy
      Research. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Goldenberg, Claude, Ronald Gallimore, Leslie Reese, and Helen Garnier. 2001. ―Cause or
      Effect? A Longitudinal Study of Immigrant Latino parents‘ Aspirations and Expectations,
      and Their Children‘s School Performance.‖ American Educational Research Journal
      38(3): 547-582.

Grannis, Rick. 1998. ―The Importance of Trivial Streets: Residential Streets and Residential
       Segregation.‖ American Journal of Sociology 103(6): 1530-64.

Hannerz, Ulf. 1969. Soulside: Inquiries into Ghetto Culture and Community. New York:
      Columbia University Press.

Harding, David J. 2007. ―Cultural Context, Sexual Behavior, and Romantic Relationships in
      Disadvantaged Neighborhoods.‖ American Sociological Review 72(3): 341-364.

Harding, David J. 2009a. ―Violence, Older Peers, and the Socialization of Adolescent Boys in
      Disadvantaged Neighborhoods.‖ American Sociological Review 74(3): 445-464.

Harding, David J. 2009b. ―Collateral Consequences of Violence in Disadvantaged
      Neighborhoods.‖ Social Forces 88(2): 757-782.

Harding, David J. 2010. Living the Drama: Community, Conflict, and Culture Among Inner-City
      Boys. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Harris, Angel L. 2006. ―I (Don‘t) Hate School: Revisiting Oppositional Culture Theory of
        Blacks‘ Resistance to Schooling.‖ Social Forces 85: 797-834.

Hollister, Robinson and Elizabeth Ty Wilde. 2007. ―How Close is Close Enough? Evaluating
        Propensity Score Matching Using Data from a Class Size Reduction Experiment.‖
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 26(3): 455-477.

Hoxby, C. M. 2001. ―All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal.‖ The Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 116, 1189-1230.

Jacob, Brian 2004. ―Public Housing, Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement: Evidence
       from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.‖ American Economic Review. 94(1): 233-
       258.




                                               33
Jarrett, Robin L. 1997a. ―African American Family and Parenting Strategies in Impoverished
         Neighborhoods,‖ Qualitative Sociology 20: 275-288.

Jarrett, Robin L. 1997b. ―Bringing Families Back In: Neighborhood Effects on Child
         Development.‖ Pp. 48-64 in Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg J. Duncan, and J. Lawrence
         Aber, eds. Neighborhood Poverty, Vol. 2: Policy Implications in Studying
         Neighborhoods. New York: Russell Sage

Jencks, Chrsitopher and Susan E. Mayer. 1990a. ―The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a
       Poor Neighborhood,‖ p. 111-186 in Lawrence E. Lynn, Jr. and Michael G. H. McGreary,
       eds. Inner-City Poverty in the United States. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Jencks, Chrsitopher and Susan E. Mayer. 1990b. ―Residential Segregation, Job Proximity, and
       Black Job Opportunities: The Empirical Status of the Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis‖ in
       Inner-City Poverty in the United States edited by Lawrence Lynn, Jr. and Michael
       McGeary. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences Press.

Juster, F. Thomas and Stafford, Frank P. (eds.) 1985. Time, Goods, and Well-Being. Ann Arbor,
        Michigan: Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. ―Experimental Analysis of
        Neighborhood Effects.‖ Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.

Krieger N, Chen JT, Waterman PD, Soobader MJ, Subramanian SV, Carson R. 2002.
       ―Geocoding and Monitoring of US Socioeconomic Inequalities in Mortality and Cancer
       Incidence: Does the Choice of Area-Based Measure and Geographic Level Matter?: the
       Public Health Disparities Geocoding Project.‖ American Journal of Epidemiology.
       156:471–482.

LaLonde, Robert J. 1986. ―Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
      Experimental Data.‖ American Economic Review 76:604-20.

Larson, Reed. 1989. "Beeping Children and Adolescents: A Method for Studying Time Use and
       Daily Experience," Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 18: 511-530.

Leventhal, Tama and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn 2000. ―The Neighborhoods they Live In: The Effects
      of Neighborhood Residence Upon Child and Adolescent Outcomes.‖ Psychological
      Bulletin, 126, 309-337.

Manski, Charles F, 1993. "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
      Problem," Review of Economic Studies 60(3):531-42.

Manski, Charles F. 1995. Identification Problems in the Social Sciences. Cambridge, MA:
      Harvard University Press.




                                              34
Manski, Charles. 2000. Economic Analysis of Social Interactions. Journal of Economic
      Perspectives (14)3: 115-136.

Massey, Douglas S. 2001. ―Segregation and Violent Crime in Urban America.‖ Pp. 317-345 in
      Elijah Anderson and Douglas S. Massey, eds. Problem of the Century: Racial
      Stratification in the United States. New York: Russell Sage.

Massey, Douglas S.. 2004. ―Segregation and Stratification: A Biosocial Perspective,‖ Du Bois
      Review 1: 7-25.

Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making
      of an Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Michalopoulos, Charles, Howard S. Bloom and Carolyn J. Hill. 2004. ―Can Propensity-Score
      Methods Match the Findings from a Random-Assignment Evaluation of Mandatory
      Welfare-to-Work Programs?‖ Review of Economics and Statistics. 86(1): 156-179.

Moffitt, Robert. 2004. ―Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions.‖ Pgs
       45-82 in Steven N. Durlauf and H. Peyton Young (eds) Social Dynamics. Washington,
       DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Morgan, Stephen L. and Aage B. Sørensen. 1999. ―Parental Networks, Social Closure, and
      Mathematics Learning: A Test of Coleman's Social Capital Explanation of School
      Effects.‖ American Sociological Review 64:661-681.

Morgan, Stephen L. and Christopher Winship. 2007. Counterfactuals and Causal Inference:
      Methods and Principles for Social Research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mouw, T. 2000. "Job Relocation and the Racial Gap in Unemployment in Detroit and Chicago,
      1980 to 1990." American Sociological Review 65 5:730-753.

Newman, Katherine S. 1999. No Shame in My Game: The Working Poor in the Inner-city. New
     York: Vintage and Russel Sage.

Ogbu, John U. 2004. ―Collective Identity and the Burden of ‗Acting White‘ in Black History.
       Community, and Education.‖ The Urban Review 36: 1-35.

Pearl, Judea. 2000. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
        University Press.

Ponce, Ninez A. Katherine J. Hoggatt, Michelle Wilhelm, and Beate Ritz. Preterm Birth: The
       Interaction of Traffic-related Air Pollution with Economic Hardship in Los Angeles
       Neighborhoods American Journal of Epidemiology, 162(2): 140-148.




                                               35
Raudenbush, Stephen W, and Sampson, Robert J. 1999. ―Ecometrics: Toward a Science of
      Assessing Ecological Settings, with Application to the Systematic Social Observation of
      Neighborhoods.‖ Sociological Methodology 29: 1-41.

Robins, James A., Miguel A. Hernan, and Babette Brumback. 2000. "Marginal structural models
       and causal inference in epidemiology." Epidemiology 11 5:550-560.

Robinson, John P. 1977. How Americans Used Time in 1965. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Institute for
      Social Research.

Sampson, Robert, Stephen Raudenbush, and Felton Earls. 1997. ―Neighborhoods and Violent
      Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.‖ Science. 227:918-924.

Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff and Thomas Gannon-Rowley. 2002. ―Assessing
      Neighborhood Effects: Social Processes and New Directions in Research.‖ Annual
      Review of Sociology 28:443-478.

Sampson, Robert J. and Steve Raudenbush. 1999. ―Systematic Social Observation of Public
      Spaces: A New Look at Disorder in Urban Neighborhoods.‖ American Journal of
      Sociology 105: 603-651.

Sampson, Robert J., Patrick Sharkey, and Stephen Raudenbush. 2008. ―Durable Effects of
      Concentrated Disadvantage on Verbal Ability among African-American Children.‖
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105:845-852.

Sampson, Robert J. 2008. ―Moving to Inequality: Neighborhood Effects and Experiments Meet
      Social Structure‖ American Journal of Sociology 114: 189-231.

Sharkey, Patrick T. 2006. ―Navigating Dangerous Streets: The Sources and Consequences of
      Street Efficacy.‖ American Sociological Review 71: 826-846.

Sharkey, Patrick T. and Robert J. Sampson. Forthcoming. ―Destination Effects: Residential
      Mobility and Trajectories of Adolescent Violence in a Stratified Metropolis.‖
      Criminology.

Sieth, David C., Verma, Nandita, Bloom, Howard S. and George C. Galster. 2003. ―Exploring
        the Feasibility and Quality of Matched Neighborhood Research Designs.‖ MDRC.
        Working Papers on Research Methodology.

Solorzano, Daniel G. 1992. ―An Exploratory Analysis of the Effects of Race, Class and Gender
       on Student and Parent Mobility Aspirations.‖ Journal of Negro Education 61: 30-44.

Small, Mario L. 2004. Villa Victoria: The Transformation of Social Capital in a Boston Barrio.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                              36
Small, Mario L. 2006. ―Neighborhood Institutions as Resource Brokers: Childcare Centers,
       Inter-Organizational Ties, and Resource Access among the Poor.‖ Social Problems
       53:274-92.

Small, Mario L. 2007. ―Is There Such a Thing as ‗The Ghetto‘? The Perils of Assuming that the
       South Side of Chicago Represents Poor Black Neighborhoods.‖ City 11(3):413-21.

Small, Mario L. 2009. Unanticipated Gains: Origins of Network Inequality in Everyday Life.
       New York: Oxford University Press.

Small, Mario Luis, Erin M. Jacobs, and Rebekah P. Massengill. 2008. "Why Organizational Ties
       Matter for Neighborhood Effects: A Study of Resource Access through Childcare
       Centers." Social Forces 87(1).

Small, Mario L. and Monica McDermott. 2006. ―The Presence of Organizational Resources in
       Poor Urban Neighborhoods: An Analysis of Average and Contextual Effects.‖ Social
       Forces. 84: 1697-1724.

Small, Mario L. and Laura Stark. 2005. ―Are Poor Neighborhoods Resource-Deprived? A Case
       Study of Childcare Centers in New York.‖ Social Science Quarterly 86:1013-36.

Stack, Carol. 1974. All Our Kin. New York: Basic Books.

Sobel, Michael. 2006. ―What Do Randomized Studies of Housing Mobility Demonstrate? Causal
       Inference in the Face of Interference.‖ Journal of the American Statistical Association
       101 (476): 1398-1407.

South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 1999. ―Neighborhood Effects on Family Formation:
       Concentrated Poverty and Beyond.‖ American Sociological Review 64: 113-132.

South, Scott J. and Eric P. Baumer. 2000. ―Deciphering Community and Race Effects on
       Adolescent Premarital Childbearing.‖ Social Forces 78: 1379-1407.

Suttles, Gerald. 1968. The Social Order of the Slum: Ethnicity and Territory in the Inner City.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Whyte, William. 1943. Streetcorner Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wikström, P-O and Butterworth D. 2006. Adolescent Crime : Individual Difference and
       Lifestyles, Willan Publishing.

Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner-City, the Underclass, and
      Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wilson, William Julius. 1996. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor. New
      York: Knopf.

                                               37
Winship, Christopher and David J. Harding. 2008. ―A General Strategy for the Identification of
      Age, Period, Cohort Models: A Mechanism Based Approach,‖ Sociological Methods and
      Research 36(3): 362-401

Young, Alford A, Jr. 2004. The Minds of Marginalized Black Men: Making Sense of Mobility,
      Opportunity, and Life Chances. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Zenk S, Schulz AJ, House JS, Benjamin A, Kannan S. 2005b. ―Application of Community-
       Based Participatory Research in the Design of an Observational Tool: the Neighborhood
       Observational Checklist,‖ in Methods in Community-Based Participatory Research for
       Health (Israel BA, Eng E, Schulz AJ, Parker E, eds). San Francisco:Jossey-Bass, 167–
       187.

Zenk, Shannon N, Amy J Schulz; Barbara A Israel; Sherman A James 2005. ―Neighborhood
       Racial Composition, Neighborhood Poverty, and the Spatial Access.‖ American Journal
       of Public Health 95(4): 660-667.




                                              38
Figure 1. Identifying the Effects of Multiple Mechanisms

                               U



                                    M1
                          b1
                                             c1
            a               b2                             Y
     Z           N                  M2
                                                 c2
                           b3
                                                      c3
                                   M3




                                            39
                                    Appendix
            Unpacking Neighborhood Influences on Education Outcomes:
                      Setting the Stage for Future Research

Table of Contents

           A. Effect Heterogeneity

           B. Further Random Assignment Research Design Considerations



In this web appendix we include a more detailed description of effect heterogeneity and

an expanded discussion of our illustrative example introduced in Section V.



A. Effect Heterogeneity

   The theoretical perspectives in Section II of our chapter provide broad outlines of

how neighborhood effects on educational outcomes might work, but none of these

frameworks adequately considers how the daily experiences of youth differ within

neighborhoods, i.e. how they spend their time, where they spend their time, with whom

they spend their time, and how such exposure influences attitudes, frames, expectations,

etc. These differences are a potentially important but largely uninvestigated source of

effect heterogeneity. Here we provide further discussion to motivate the importance of

effect heterogeneity in a conceptual framework as well as in the design of studies and

subsequent empirical analysis.

       We begin with differences across individuals in social networks as one possible

source of neighborhood effect heterogeneity. Though most neighborhood effects theories

implicitly assume that neighborhoods play some role in structuring the social networks of

their residents, we actually know little about whether—or more importantly for whom—



                                            40
this is the case, particularly among youth. Social networks are one of the key conduits

through which information and cultural frames or scripts are transmitted, but by no means

the only one. Social networks of youth of a similar age (―peer networks‖) have received

considerable attention in the literature (e.g. Anderson 1999). Such peer networks may

play important roles as cultural conduits, as most theories of peer effects assume, but our

theories need to be more specific about who those peers are, which peer attachments are

more common among young people in poor neighborhoods, and what is transmitted

through peer networks. Harding (2009, 2010) argues that older adolescents and young

adults on the street in poor violent neighborhoods have considerable cultural power and

play an important role in socializing younger adolescents by exposing them to local

cultural frames and scripts regarding schooling and sexual behavior.

       A second source of effect heterogeneity is different behavioral adaptations to the

challenges of daily life in poor neighborhoods. A focus on behavioral adaptations

explicitly considers the individual as an actor who can adapt in different ways to mitigate

or overcome challenges faced in different neighborhoods. The distinction developed by

Sharkey (2006) between ―imposed‖ environments (everything present in the

neighborhood where an individual lives) and ―selected‖ environments (the people and

institutions with whom he or she interacts) highlights the idea that youth living in the

same neighborhood may choose very different social environments for themselves.

Different choices or adaptations can have different consequences. For example, violent

neighborhoods provide particular challenges to adolescents. In order to feel safe, some

adolescents may engage in behaviors such as demonstrating toughness, altering daily

travel routines, forming strong bonds of mutual protection with friends, or relying on



                                             41
older individuals for protection in order to avoid victimization (Anderson 1999, Harding

2009, 2010). These same behaviors may have unintended educational consequences

because they can be interpreted as resistant or disruptive by teachers (Dance 2002).

Another example is provided by Carter (2005) who argues that ―cultural authenticity‖ (in

the form of speech styles, clothing, music and other tastes) among ethno-racial minority

groups can have positive payoffs in terms of group membership and solidarity (what

Carter calls ―non-dominant cultural capital‖) but also can be misinterpreted by white

middle-class teachers as oppositional or resistant. Parents may also adapt their parenting

practices in response to the neighborhood environment, for example by limiting their

children‘s interactions with neighbors (Furstenberg et al. 1999, Jarrett 1997ab).

       A third potential source of neighborhood effect heterogeneity is variation in

family characteristics and the interaction between family characteristics and the

properties of social settings. Here effect heterogeneity is driven less by differences in

social interactions and more by differences between individuals and families. We

illustrate some of the complexities inherent in this type of effect heterogeneity through

the example in Appendix Table 1. This relatively simple example focuses on one type of

neighborhood mechanism, a neighborhood resource, and two sources of effect

heterogeneity: family capacity and access to non-neighborhood opportunities.




                                             42
   Appendix Table 1: Effect Heterogeneity by Family Capacity for Neighborhood

                                         Resource


                          High Family Capacity                  Low Family Capacity
                    High Access to    Low Access to       High Access to   Low Access to
                       Outside           Outside             Outside          Outside
                    Opportunities      Opportunities      Opportunities     Opportunities
High                      +                  +                   ?                     _
Neighborhood
Resources
Low                       +                   -                  ?                     _
Neighborhood
Resources




       The two rows in the above table represent different types of neighborhoods –

neighborhoods with either high or low resources. Without loss of generality,

neighborhood resources might include different types of social services and non-school

educational programs. Examples would be a neighborhood health center, an after-school

program, or summer day camp. Such resources can remove youth from the physical and

social dangers of the street by providing safe venues as well as positive socialization, for

example through well-designed and supervised community centers with an array of age-

appropriate social activities. We assume, however, that these resources are not abundant

enough to serve all children in the neighborhood. We also assume that such resources

might be acquired elsewhere, should an individual or family be able to access non-local

resources. Alternatively, this model could be developed to consider how families of

different types were affected by neighborhood deficits, e.g. a lack of safe streets.

Presumably, high capacity families would be more capable of minimizing the effects of

deficiencies.


                                             43
       The four columns represent different types of families. Particular differences are

discussed below. The cell in each column represents a prediction of whether the outcome

on some generic variable of interest would be positive or negative. Examples might be

educational attainment, presence of behavioral problems, adolescent pregnancy or gang

problems. In this scheme, a neighborhood effect only occurs in a particular column (that

is for a particular family type) when the outcome differs depending on whether the

neighborhood has a high versus low level of resources.

       Our table distinguishes families along two dimensions. First is the capacity of the

family. By this we simply mean the ability of a family to take advantage of resources if

they are available to them. High capacity families are those that will capitalize on the

opportunities available to their children. Low capacity families will not. The level of

capacity might be the result of family structure, parental education, family income, the

number of children, or parental health.

       The second dimension distinguishes families in terms of their access to

opportunities outside their neighborhood. These opportunities might have to do with

family members or friends. A single mother might send her child each weekend to play

with her sister‘s children in a safer neighborhood. Alternatively, because a neighborhood

has good access to public transportation or a family has a car, a parent might well be able

to access resources for their children outside the neighborhood that are not available in

their own neighborhood, such as a higher quality school.

       The above typology results in four types of families: high capacity-high outside

opportunities, high capacity-low outside opportunities, low capacity-high outside




                                             44
opportunities, low capacity-low outside opportunities families. Now consider why the

level of resources in a neighborhood does or does not affect a particular type of family:

High/High              Families are able to provide necessary resources for their children
                       whether or not those resources are available in their neighborhood.
                       Example: Wealthy family living in the downtown of a large city
                       whose children attend private schools.

High/Low               Because these families have low access to outside opportunities,
                       they only can provide those opportunities to their children if they
                       are available in their neighborhood. Example: A high capacity, but
                       relatively poor family living in a neighborhood with many social
                       services. This is the one family type where neighborhood resources
                       make a difference. Example: A low-income family taking the
                       initiative to enroll their child in a specially tailored school
                       program, like that offered in the Harlem Children‘s Zone.

Low/High               What the prediction should be here is unclear, though the low
                       capacity of the family means that they will not take advantage of
                       neighborhood resources even when they are present. What is
                       unclear is whether the presence of outside opportunities results in a
                       positive outcome. For example, as Carol Stack argued in
                       All Our Kin (1974), the presence of high capacity extended kin
                       members results in positive outcomes for the children of a low
                       capacity parent.

Low/Low                These are families that are low capacity and do not have good
                       outside opportunities. Even if their neighborhood has considerable
                       resources, they are unable to take advantage of them. Example: a
                       single parent addicted to drugs who has alienated her extended
                       family.


It is important to remember that this model is meant to represent a set of ideal types.

Obviously, it is quite simplistic. Despite its simplicity, it provides at least two important

insights. First, of the four types of families, the resources of the neighborhood only make

a difference for one type of family—the high capacity family that does not have good

access to opportunities outside the neighborhood. All other families are not affected by

neighborhood resources because either they do not need them (they have high access to



                                              45
opportunities outside the neighborhood) or they are unable to use them (they are low

capacity).

       Second, our schema, if correct, would suggest that policy interventions that seek

to enhance place-based resources should focus on three aims. First is providing good

neighborhood resources to high capacity families. This might mean either investing in

their neighborhoods or moving them from a low to a high resource neighborhood.

Second, policy interventions should be developed to help low capacity families access the

resources in their neighborhoods. This means getting local social service organizations to

reach out to the most troubled families as opposed to simply helping those who actively

seek assistance. Third, our model demonstrates the appreciable difficulties in improving

the lives of low capacity families in low resource neighborhoods. To help these families,

one needs to get them access to resources generally and, just as importantly, to help them

to take full advantage of those resources.



B. Further Random Assignment Design Research Considerations

       In Section V of our chapter we very briefly sketched a study design to examine

one potential neighborhood effects mechanisms, neighborhood violence. The goal of the

hypothetical study was to estimate the effects of neighborhood violence on youth

educational outcomes. Here we discuss features of the research design in greater detail.

Our aim is not to present a complete research design (or even one that is clearly feasible

without vast resources), but rather to discuss aspects of the research design that illustrate

ways to apply the ideas discussed in the main text.




                                             46
       Consider first the various approaches to identifying the effect of neighborhood

violence. Handled through a standard multivariate regression analysis, any estimate of

neighborhood violence on youth educational achievement might be biased by

confounding characteristics of the youth, his or her family, and other aspects of the

neighborhood environment that influence school performance and that are also correlated

with neighborhood violence. This situation leaves researchers in a dilemma: Where can a

researcher find exogenous sources of variation to identify the effects of a neighborhood

characteristic like exposure to violence? We need one or more variables that produce

variation in exposure to violence but do not otherwise affect the outcome of interest. We

can think about this by considering two sources of plausible exogenous variation:

variation that is planned and variation emerging from a natural experiment. Planned

variation can arise from random assignment or experimental designs. Randomization

ensures that individuals (or whatever unit is randomized) assigned to the treatment and

control groups are the same across both observed and unobserved characteristics, except

for chance variation. One strategy is for the researcher to indirectly manipulate

neighborhood conditions by encouraging residential mobility, for example, by offering a

housing voucher (such as in the Moving to Opportunity mobility experiment). A second

strategy is to directly alter neighborhood characteristics through a place-based

intervention. In a placed-based intervention, a random subset of neighborhoods would

experience a direct intervention such as newly built after school clubs or the addition of

street workers to reduce gang violence, and a random subset of otherwise comparable

neighborhoods would not receive the intervention. A third strategy, the one we use in this

example, is to randomly manipulate exposure to the neighborhood characteristic.



                                            47
       Well-conceived and properly implemented random assignment studies have high

potential for unraveling causal effects, but researchers are faced with trade-offs. Practical

and ethical considerations may make the manipulation of certain processes difficult or

undesirable no matter how important these processes may be from an explanatory

perspective. However, mechanisms that involve, for example, gangs, drugs, or violence

can still be examined through experimental manipulations as long as the manipulation

focuses on increasing the safety of the treated group and leaves the control group no

worse off. Further, a number of circumstances can dilute the intended treatment effects

(often described as issues of noncompliance). For example, participants may not take up

the offer of a new opportunity, service or program and ethical considerations often

preclude requiring or mandating participation. Researchers also cannot prevent study

participants from accessing a similar service on their own, or unintentionally receiving

the experimental treatment even if initially assigned to the control group. Second,

depending on the mechanisms and outcomes of interest, experiments can be expensive

and may require a very long follow-up before meaningful outcomes are measurable. The

costs of experiments may limit sample sizes and statistical power to detect effects that are

small or moderate in magnitude. Third, a series of practical constraints must be carefully

weighed: implementation and noncompliance may mean that not everyone in the

treatment group receives the intended intervention, the study population may be narrowly

defined and thus results may not be generalizable to full-scale or mandatory programs,

and well-done experiments can only focus on a limited number of interventions. As a

result, while experiments are useful for identifying causal effects once leading hypotheses

have been identified, they may not be as useful for generating hypotheses. In fact, the



                                             48
power of randomized designs to make contributions to the literature may not be fully

leveraged until after researchers have analyzed observational and/or qualitative data to

generate a narrow set of hypotheses. For more on random assignment study designs, we

refer readers to Orr (1999).

       The second type of study design that harnesses exogenous variation in the

treatment is a ―natural experiment‖ in which policy manipulations or other social or

economic processes not directly related to the outcome create exogenous variation in

either residential mobility or neighborhood characteristics. Examples include the

residential mobility created by demolition of public housing projects (Jacob 2004), and

the use of natural boundaries that determine public school districts (Hoxby 2001). Here

researchers must be opportunistic and leverage naturally occurring exogenous variation in

the neighborhoods that youth experience. The challenge is that such variation must be

known a priori and must be measured. Moreover, any claim that such variation is truly

exogenous is based on assumptions about social and economic processes and subject to

skepticism from other researchers. The neighborhood effects literature has produced few

if any natural experiments whose identification strategies have not been met by

significant skepticism.

       In the illustrative example in Section V of the chapter, we focus on planned

variation through a random assignment design. We propose manipulating the amount of

time youth spend in their neighborhood under the assumption that out-of-school time use

affects exposure to violence which affects educational performance. Note that there are

multiple ways in which exposure to violence may affect educational outcomes (see

Section II in the main text) and that many, such as stress or trauma, require long-term



                                            49
cumulative exposure to violence. Since in this example the change in exposure to

violence is short term, we focus on outcomes that are more likely to respond immediately

to a reduction in exposure to violence, such as school attendance, tardiness, and

engagement in school. These responses to exposure to violence can ultimately contribute

to achievement.

        Our proposed study design is individual random assignment embedded within a

matched-neighborhood design. The matched neighborhoods allow us to place youth into

neighborhoods that are similar to their own on demographic and economic characteristics

but have lower levels of violence. In the first stage, selected high violence neighborhoods

are matched to neighborhoods comparable on poverty, race, and education that have

lower rates of violence (see Seith et al, 2003 on the feasibility of matched-neighborhood

designs). An intervention could be designed that is non-academic and that involves

engagement with the neighborhood – such as working on a local clothing drive. For the

second stage of the study, we could recruit youth from the neighborhoods with higher

levels of neighborhood violence, so that the neighborhoods where subjects are assigned

by the intervention are all less risky than their home neighborhoods. We would randomly

assign these youth to teams in different locations outside of their own neighborhoods,

some of which would have lower neighborhood violence than others. Some type of

financial incentive might be designed to encourage participation in the intervention

activity.

        The first important piece of data collection is baseline information through a

survey measuring the characteristics of the individuals and their families prior to the

intervention (including a variety of indicators to gauge family capacity as described in the



                                             50
first section of this appendix) and baseline characteristics of the neighborhoods through

census or comparable community-level data including crime rates. During the

intervention, monitoring of program implementation verifies treatment fidelity and

identifies any unintended consequences. To assess the impact of the intervention, data

collection would include a follow-up survey to document youth time use (hours spent

engaged in certain activities, where and with whom); longitudinal school records to track

youth attendance, disciplinary actions taken by the school, and school grades over the

course of the intervention; follow-up information on the characteristics of the

experimental and control neighborhoods; and open ended qualitative interviews to

capture more nuanced aspects of time use and participation in the program as well as

subjects‘ experiences with schooling and with neighborhood violence both prior to and

during the intervention.

       Our proposed randomized design to manipulate time use can test the hypothesis

that spending time in a lower violence neighborhood results in lower exposure to

violence and increases youth school attendance, reduces tardiness and school disciplinary

action. Under this hypothesis, we would expect, for example, the difference between

post-intervention attendance rates and pre-intervention attendance rates to be larger in

groups assigned to lower violence neighborhoods. The intervention manipulates exposure

to neighborhoods that differ in their levels of violence but does not directly manipulate

exposure to violence itself. We can use survey data and qualitative data to measure the

intervention‘s impact on exposure by asking youth about their experiences with violence

in their day-to-day activities and traveling to and from school, and we can consider

measures of anxiety or stress that can be captured through survey reports.



                                            51
         Stratification of the sample based on pre-intervention youth characteristics – such

as measures of their vulnerability – or family characteristics -- such as family capacity --

could be used to explicitly test hypotheses about effect heterogeneity. For example, we

might expect that only highly vulnerable youth in a high violence neighborhood would be

affected by exposure to violence. The sample would be stratified by youth vulnerability

and then the youth in each stratum would be randomized to the control or intervention

group.

         Although this research design is appealing in its simplicity, it is important to note

its limitations. The randomized experiment will not allow for testing of other

neighborhood effects mechanisms unless one is willing to make very strong assumptions

about selection on observables and independent mechanisms. As we discuss in the main

text, examining multiple mechanisms requires multiple sources of exogenous variation.

Moreover, even well-thought out simple designs can generate perplexing findings that

might be due to the unanticipated effects of treatment assignment, and this sometimes

necessitates a reconsideration of the initial study design. Nevertheless, when designed

well, randomized experiments and natural experiments, such as the one described here

focused on neighborhood violence, offer promise for uncovering mechanisms.




                                              52
Appendix References


Anderson, Elijah. 1999. Code of the Street: Decency, Violence, and the Moral Life of the
      Inner-city. New York: W. W. Norton.

Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Don Rubin. 1996. Identification of Causal Effects
       Using Instrumental Variables. Journal of American Statistical Association
       91(343): 444-55.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Greg J. Duncan, Pamela K. Klebanov, and Naomi Sealand. 1993.
      ―Do Neighborhoods Influence Child and Adolescent Development?‖ American
      Journal of Sociology 99:353–95.

Carter, Prudence L. 2005. Keepin' It Real: School Success Beyond Black and White. New
        York: Oxford University Press.

Dance, L. Janelle. 2002. Tough Fronts: The Impact of Street Culture on Schooling. New
       York: Routledge Falmer Press.

Furstenburg, Frank F. et al (eds). 1999. Managing to Make It: Urban Families and
       Adolescent Success. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Grannis, Rick. 1998. ―The Importance of Trivial Streets: Residential Streets and
       Residential Segregation.‖ American Journal of Sociology 103(6): 1530-64.

Harding, David J. 2009. ―Violence, Older Peers, and the Socialization of Adolescent
      Boys in Disadvantaged Neighborhoods.‖ American Sociological Review 74(3):
      445-464.

Harding, David J. 2010. Living the Drama: Community, Conflict, and Culture Among
      Inner-City Boys. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hoxby, C. M. 2001. ―All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal.‖ The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1189-1230.

Jacob, Brian 2004. ―Public Housing, Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement:
       Evidence from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.‖ American Economic
       Review. 94(1): 233-258.

Jarrett, Robin L. 1997a. ―African American Family and Parenting Strategies in
         Impoverished Neighborhoods,‖ Qualitative Sociology 20: 275-288.

Jarrett, Robin L. 1997b. ―Bringing Families Back In: Neighborhood Effects on Child
         Development.‖ Pp. 48-64 in Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg J. Duncan, and J.



                                           53
       Lawrence Aber, eds. Neighborhood Poverty, Vol. 2: Policy Implications in
       Studying Neighborhoods. New York: Russell Sage

Krieger N, Chen JT, Waterman PD, Soobader MJ, Subramanian SV, Carson R. 2002.
       ―Geocoding and Monitoring of US Socioeconomic Inequalities in Mortality and
       Cancer Incidence: Does the Choice of Area-Based Measure and Geographic Level
       Matter?: the Public Health Disparities Geocoding Project.‖ American Journal of
       Epidemiology. 156:471–482.

Orr, Larry L. (1999). Social Experiments: Evaluating Public Programs with
       Experimental Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Sampson, Robert J. and Steve Raudenbush. 1999. ―Systematic Social Observation of
      Public Spaces: A New Look at Disorder in Urban Neighborhoods.‖ American
      Journal of Sociology 105: 603-651.

Seith, David C., Verma, Nandita, Bloom, Howard S., and George C. Galster. (2003).
        Exploring the Feasibility and Quality of Matched Neighborhood Research
        Designs. MDRC.

Sharkey, Patrick T. 2006. ―Navigating Dangerous Streets: The Sources and
      Consequences of Street Efficacy.‖ American Sociological Review 71: 826-846.

Stack, Carol. 1974. All Our Kin: Strategies for Survival in a Black Community. New
       York: Harper & Row.




                                          54
