                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          AGGREGATE IDIOSYNCRATIC VOLATILITY

                                             Geert Bekaert
                                            Robert J. Hodrick
                                             Xiaoyan Zhang

                                          Working Paper 16058
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w16058


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2010




A previous version of this article circulated under the title “Is there a trend in idiosyncratic volatility?”
We are very grateful to Tim Vogelsang who provided code for the linear time trend test. We have
benefited from the comments of the referee and the editor (Stephen Brown) as well as from discussions
with Lieven Baele, Ian Cooper, Rob Engle, Cheol Eun, Mardi Dungey, Chris Jones, Federico Nardari,
Tim Simin, Geert Rouwenhorst, Tim Simin and from presentations at the AFA in San Francisco, the
EFA in Bergen, Cornell, Rutgers, NYU, the Wharton International Finance Workshop, the Queen’s
University International Finance Conference, University of Toronto, University of Washington, University
of Colorado, Boston College, Purdue, University of Texas at Dallas, Indiana University, University
of California at Riverside, University of Houston, and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
The authors thank NETSPAR for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Geert Bekaert, Robert J. Hodrick, and Xiaoyan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate Idiosyncratic Volatility
Geert Bekaert, Robert J. Hodrick, and Xiaoyan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 16058
June 2010, Revised July 2011
JEL No. G12

                                                ABSTRACT

We examine aggregate idiosyncratic volatility in 23 developed equity markets, measured using various
methodologies, and we find no evidence of upward trends when we extend the sample until 2008.
Instead, idiosyncratic volatility appears to be well described by a stationary autoregressive process
that occasionally switches into a higher-variance regime that has relatively short duration. We also
document that idiosyncratic volatility is highly correlated across countries. Finally, we examine the
determinants of the time-variation in idiosyncratic volatility. In most specifications, the bulk of idiosyncratic
volatility can be explained by a growth opportunity proxy, total (U.S.) market volatility, and in most
but not all specifications, the variance premium, a business cycle sensitive risk indicator.


Geert Bekaert                                           Xiaoyan Zhang
Graduate School of Business                             Johnson Graduate School of Management
Columbia University                                     366 Sage Hall
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall                            Cornell University
New York, NY 10027                                      Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER                                                xz69@cornell.edu
gb241@columbia.edu

Robert J. Hodrick
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

        Much recent research in finance has focused on idiosyncratic volatility1 . Morck, Yeung and

Yu (2000) suggested that the relative importance of idiosyncratic variance in total variance is

a measure of market eﬃciency. The level of idiosyncratic volatility clearly is also an important

input in the study of diversification benefits. Here, a growing literature attempts to explain the

trend in idiosyncratic volatility first documented by Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001),

CLMX henceforth. Aktas, de Bodt and Cousin (2007) and Kothari and Warner (2004) study

how this permanent increase aﬀects the use of one of the most powerful empirical techniques

in finance, the event study. Comin and Mulani (2006) examine how and why trends in the

macro-economy seem to diverge from the “micro-trend”.2

       Our first contribution is to expand the study of the time-series behavior of aggregate idiosyn-

cratic volatility to international data. This is not only important for purely statistical reasons,

but it also helps to inform the debate about the determinants of the time-variation in idiosyn-

cratic volatility. Our results are in fact startling: there are no significant trends in idiosyncratic

volatility for non-U.S. developed countries. For the 1980-2008 sample, we estimate negative

trend coeﬃcients for 9 countries. For the full sample of U.S. data, we also find no support for

the hypothesis of a trend in idiosyncratic volatility. This finding is consistent with the results in

Brandt, Brav, Graham and Kumar (2010) who argue that the increase in idiosyncratic volatility

in the 1990s was temporary3 .
   1
       We use the terms volatility and variance interchangeably.
   2
       A rapidly growing literature considers the pricing of idiosyncratic risk. See Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang

(2006, 2009) and the references therein. We do not address expected return issues here.
   3
       In a study focusing on the predictive relation between idiosyncratic volatilities and aggregate returns, Guo



                                                          2
    The results in CLMX appear quite robust to alternative methodologies to compute idiosyn-

cratic volatility and to the use of alternative trend tests within their sample. Nevertheless, we

show that the test results are sensitive to the sample period: ending the sample in the 1988-

1998 decade is key to finding a trend. Of course, when a time series exhibits apparent time

trends over part of its sample, it is likely characterized by near non-stationary-behavior. We

show that average idiosyncratic volatility is well described by a relatively stable autoregressive

process that occasionally switches into a higher-variance regime that has relatively low dura-

tion. Hence, our evidence does not support permanent changes in idiosyncratic volatility. We

also document a new empirical fact: idiosyncratic volatility is highly correlated across countries,

and these correlations have increased over time.

    Our findings provide a challenge for some of the explanations for the “trend” in aggregate

idiosyncratic variance proposed in the literature. Successful theories should capture the low

frequency changes in the idiosyncratic volatility time series data and the correlation across

countries. The literature has identified roughly three types of determinants. A first set focuses

on the changing composition of stock market indices. Fink, Fink, Grullon and Weston (2010)

ascribe the trend to the increasing propensity of firms to issue public equity at an earlier stage in

their life cycle, while Brown and Kapadia (2007) argue that the trending behavior is due to the

listings of more riskier firms over the years. The second and largest set of explanations focuses

on what we call “corporate variables”: firm-specific characteristics that ultimately determine

idiosyncratic cash flow variability. These articles include Guo and Savakis (2007) (changes in
and Savickas (2008) point out there is no significant trend in idiosyncratic volatility for the G7 countries, and

that these volatilities are highly correlated with US idiosyncratic volatility.




                                                         3
the investment opportunity set), Cao, Simin and Zhao (2007) (growth options), Comin and

Philippon (2005) (research and development spending and access to external financing), and

Wei and Zhang (2008) (earnings quality). Gaspar and Massa (2006) and Irvine and Pontiﬀ

(2008) point to increasingly competitive product markets as a potential “deeper” explanation

of increased idiosyncratic cash flow variability. Financial development has made stock markets

more informative and increased idiosyncratic variability, relative to total market variability (see

Chun, Kim, Morck and Yeung 2007). The third set of articles is more “behavioral” in nature

and relies on changes in the degree of market ineﬃciency to generate changes in idiosyncratic

variability. Xu and Malkiel (2003) and Bennett, Sias, and Starks (2003) ascribe the rise in

idiosyncratic volatility to an increase in institutional ownership, and especially the increased

preferences of institutions for small stocks. Brandt, et al. (2010) attribute the temporary in-

crease to “speculative behavior”, as evidenced by retail traders in the Internet Bubble. They

find that the period between 1926 and 1933 exhibited a similar temporary increase in idiosyn-

cratic volatility, which they also ascribe to speculative behavior.

   Our time series characterization of idiosyncratic volatility immediately excludes certain

variables as important determinants. For example, because institutional ownership exhibits a

clear trend, it cannot fully explain the evidence. However, it is possible that the propensity to

issue public equity is not trending upward but also shows regime-switching behavior. The final

part of our article runs horse races between the various determinants, in addition to exploring

the links between idiosyncratic volatility and market volatility and the business cycle, which

have not been studied before. This turns out to be an important omission: together with growth

opportunities, market volatility and a cyclical risk aversion indicator appear to drive most of



                                                4
the variation in idiosyncratic volatility, both in the U.S. and internationally.

      The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3

contains the main results for trend tests. Section 4 characterizes the time-series properties of

aggregate idiosyncratic volatility. Section 5 examines the explanatory power of a large number

of potential determinants. In the conclusions, we summarize our findings.




2. Data

2.1 The U.S. Sample

       In order to replicate and extend the CLMX study, we first collect daily U.S. stock returns

between 1964 and 2008 from CRSP. We calculate excess returns by subtracting the U.S. T-bill

rate, which is obtained from the CRSP riskfree file. We calculate the idiosyncratic volatility of

a firm’s return using two methods. First, we compute the idiosyncratic variance as in CLMX.

The model for individual firm  for day  is:

                                           =  + 
                                                                                                       (1)

Here,  is the return on a corresponding industry portfolio  to which firm  belongs.4

The firm’s idiosyncratic variance is then the variance of the residual 
                                                                          , computed with

one month of daily return data. Value-weighting the firm-level idiosyncratic variances produces

the CLMX aggregate idiosyncratic variance. That is,
                                                    X
                                                    
                                     2   =           2 (
                                                                       )                               (2)
                                                    =1

  4
      We use 26 industries by merging SIC codes for U.S. firms and FTSE industry codes for foreign firms, as in

Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2009).


                                                          5
where day  belongs to month  Here the weight  is computed using firm ’s previous

month market capitalization, and  is the number of firms. Implicitly, CLMX assume that

systematic risks are captured by the industry return and that firms have unit betas with respect

to the industry to which they belong.

   Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2009), BHZ henceforth, show that the unit beta restrictions

in the CLMX approach severely limit the factor model’s ability to match stock return co-

movements. We therefore also consider the Fama-French (1996) model, which fits stock return

comovements better:


                  = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  +                (3)


where day  belongs to month  Here, the variable  represents the excess return on the

market portfolio,  is the size factor, and  is the value factor. This model is more

in line with standard methods to correct for systematic risk. Data on the Fama-French factors

are obtained from Kenneth French’s website. To allow the betas to vary through time, we

re-estimate the model every month with daily data. The idiosyncratic variance for firm  is the

variance of the residual of the regression, that is, 2 ( ). We again compute the idiosyncratic

variance at the country level using value weighting:

                                                  X
                                                  
                                    2    =           2 ( )                      (4)
                                                  =1


where day  belongs to month .




                                                        6
2.2 The Developed Countries Sample

    We study daily excess returns for individual firms from 23 developed markets, including

the U.S. The sample runs from 1980 to 2008. All returns are U.S. dollar denominated. Our

selection of developed countries matches the countries currently in the Morgan Stanley Devel-

oped Country Index. Data for the U.S. are from Compustat and CRSP; data for the other

countries are from DataStream. In the DataStream data, it is likely that new and small firms

are increasingly more represented in the sample. This could bias our tests towards finding a

trend. We estimate domestic models, such as the CLMX model in equation (1) and the FF

model in equation (3), for each developed country, where the industry, size and value factors

are constructed in the corresponding national market. In section 3.2, we conduct a robustness

check using a model which explicitly allows for both global and local factors.



2.3 Summary Statistics

    Table 1 presents summary statistics for the time-series of annualized idiosyncratic vari-

ances. Panel A focuses on the long U.S. sample where we have 540 monthly observations.

The mean of the annualized CLMX idiosyncratic variance is 0.0800 with a time-series stan-

dard deviation of 0.0592, and the mean of the annualized Fama-French idiosyncratic variance

is 0.0697 with a time-series standard deviation of 0.0484. Hence, the Fama-French risk adjust-

ments lower both the mean and the volatility of the idiosyncratic variance series relative to the

CLMX-idiosyncratic variance. The correlation between the two idiosyncratic variance series is

nonetheless 98%.

   Panel B of Table 1 reports idiosyncratic variance statistics computed for 23 countries, using


                                               7
the CLMX model on the left and the FF model on the right. Among the G7 countries, Japan,

the U.S. and Canada have the highest idiosyncratic variances, and Germany and the U.K. have

the lowest idiosyncratic variances. Among the other countries, the idiosyncratic volatility is the

highest for Greece at 0.0901 when using the CLMX model, and it is 0.0798 when using the FF

model. The idiosyncratic variance is the lowest for Switzerland at around 0.03.5

       Panel C of Table 1 presents correlations among the idiosyncratic variances of the G7 coun-

tries. No matter which model we use, the idiosyncratic variances are highly correlated across

countries. Using Pearson’s test, we find that all correlation coeﬃcients are significant at the

5% level. This is an important new fact, as it suggests that there might be a common driving

force for idiosyncratic variances across countries.

       Figure 1 presents the time-series of the various idiosyncratic variance measures. There are

periods of temporarily higher volatility in the U.S., including 1970, 1974, 1987, a longer-lasting

increase in 1998, which seems to reverse after 2003, and the recent crisis period. In other

countries, the most obvious high variance periods are again 1998-2001, and the recent crisis

period. However, periods of higher volatility are apparent earlier in the sample as well; for

instance, around 1987 for a number of countries and in the early 1980s, for France and Italy.
   5
       Bartram, Brown, and Stulz (2009) find that a typical U.S. firm has higher idiosyncratic risk than a compa-

rable foreign firm and explore the cross-sectional determinants of this diﬀerence.




                                                         8
3. Trend Tests

3.1 Main Results

    One of the main results in CLMX is that the average idiosyncratic variance in the U.S.

exhibits a positive time trend. To formally test for trends, we follow CLMX and use Vogelsang’s

(1998) linear time trend test. The benchmark model is


                                         = 0 + 1  +                                     (5)


where  is the variable of interest, and  is a linear time trend. We use the PS1 test in Vogelsang

(1998) to test 1 = 0. The conditions on the error terms under which the distributions for the

test statistics are derived are quite weak and accommodate most covariance stationary processes

(such as regime switching models) and even I(1) processes. In all of the ensuing tables, we report

the trend coeﬃcient, the t-statistic and the 5% critical value derived in Vogelsang (1998) (for

a two-sided test). In addition, Bunzel and Vogelsang (2005) develop a test that retains the

good size properties of the PS1 test, but it has better power (both asymptotically and in finite

samples). We denote this test with a “dan” subscript, as the test uses a “Daniell kernel” to

non-parametrically estimate the error variance needed in the test. In fact, tests based on this

kernel maximize power among a wide range of kernels. We use an AR(1) model to prewhiten

the data because Bunzel and Vogelsang (2005) show that pre-whitening improves the finite

sample properties of the test. Vogelsang generously provided us with the code for both the

t-ps1 and t-dan tests.

   Table 2 reports the trend test results. Panel A considers the same U.S. sample as in CLMX,

which is 1964-1997, and we find a significant trend in the idiosyncratic variance, no matter

                                                 9
whether we use the FF or CLMX model. Panel B includes 11 more years of data, and the

idiosyncratic variance does not display a significant trend in any of the cases. Clearly, the trend

documented in CLMX is time-period dependent. Since the pre-whitened and non-pre-whitened

results are very similar, we only report the pre-whitened results for the t-dan test in later

sections.

   Panel C of Table 2 reports trend test results for the 23 developed countries, country by

country. Using  2 , we fail to detect a significant positive time trend for all countries, either

using the t-dan test or the t-ps1 test. France, Italy, Australia, Belgium, Finland, Greece, New

Zealand, Portugal and Spain have negative trend coeﬃcients, which are significantly diﬀerent

from zero for Italy and Portugal. Because the results for  2  are entirely similar, we do not

report them to save space. In summary, positive trending behavior is simply not visible in

idiosyncratic volatility across the developed world.



3.2 Robustness and Further Tests

    Whereas the two models deliver highly correlated idiosyncratic variance series, the de-

pendence of the idiosyncratic variance on a risk model remains an issue of concern. Here we

consider several robustness checks. First, we compute the model free measure proposed by Bali,

Cakici and Levy (2008, BCL hereafter), 2 henceforth:
                                 Ã                 !2
                                  X
                       2 =        ( ) −  2 ( )                             (6)
                                       =1

   Here the various  0  are simply the monthly volatilities of individual stocks and therefore

the measure does not require the computation of any risk exposures. Intuitively, the measure

subtracts systematic risk, measured by the market variance, from the square of the average

                                                 10
volatility. When all risk is systematic (that is, when stocks are perfectly or very highly corre-

lated), the measure goes to zero. With equal standard deviations across stocks, the measure

equals the  2 measure, but the BCL measure will generally be smaller than the CLMX

measure, with the diﬀerence increasing in the cross-sectional dispersion of individual volatilities

(see BCL).

   Table 2 also contains trend estimates using the BCL measure. The BCL measure delivers

exactly the same inference as our other measures do. There is a trend in US idiosyncratic

variance over the CLMX sample, but not over the full sample, and there are no trends in

international data, except for a negative trend in Portugal.

   Another drawback of the models used so far is that they may not adequately capture global

risks. In the Online Appendix, we produce results using the risk model advocated by BHZ

(2009). The model has global and local Fama French factors, and is estimated using weekly

data every six months. Nevertheless, the results remain similar, and we again fail to detect a

significant time trend for any country.

   A final concern is that the trend results are due to a small subset of stocks. For example,

one of the reasons suggested for the trend in aggregate idiosyncratic variance is that small

firms may have sought public funding at an earlier stage in their life cycle than before (see

Fink, Fink, Grullon and Weston 2010). This would imply that small firms would have a large

eﬀect on the results, which is less likely with the value-weighted measures we consider than it

is with equally weighted measures. In the Online Appendix, we consider trend tests for equally

weighted idiosyncratic variances for the US. We do not find a significant trend, even for the

1964-1997 period (consistent with CLMX in fact).



                                                11
   Various authors have proposed looking at sub classes of stocks and we come back to such

explanations for trend behavior in Section 5. Here we follow BCL in considering tests for NYSE

and NASDAQ stocks, large and small stocks, old and young stocks and high price and low price

stocks. BCL find weaker trends for NYSE stocks and for older stocks. The Online Appendix

shows that for our expanded sample, there are no meaningful diﬀerences in trend results for

any of these sub-groups.




4. Characterizing the Dynamics of Idiosyncratic Volatility

    The results in Section 3 fail to support the presence of a gradual permanent increase

in idiosyncratic variances, as captured by a deterministic time trend. Other forms of non-

stationary behavior remain a possibility, however. We first examine the presence of stochastic

trends. Using the Dickey and Fuller (1979) and Phillips and Perron (1988) tests, we invariably

reject the null hypothesis of a unit root, consistent with the evidence in Guo and Savickas

(2008).

   We also examine models with structural breaks, adopting the methodology in Bai and

Perron (1998). For all countries, we identify a relatively large number of breaks, with the

break dates highly correlated across countries. In particular, the tests consistently reveal the

end of 1997/1998 and 2001/2002 as break dates, thus selecting a temporary period of higher

idiosyncratic volatility associated with what many economists have called the Internet or Tech

Bubble. For the U.S. long sample, the BIC selection criterion is minimized at 5 (3) breaks, when

the minimum sub-sample size is 5% (15%) of the total sample. Generally, the “break tests”

identify periods of temporarily higher volatility that may occur more than once during the

                                              12
sample period. We consequently estimate a regime-switching model to capture such behavior.



4.1 Country Specific Regime Switching Model

4.1.1 The Model


     Let  represent the original aggregate idiosyncratic variance. Following Hamilton (1994),

we allow  to follow an AR(1) model where all parameters can take on one of two values,

depending on the realization of a discrete regime variable,  . The regime variable follows a

Markov Chain with constant transition probabilities. Let the current regime be indexed by .


                               = (1 −  ) +  −1 +      ∈ {1 2}                       (7)


with  ˜(0 1) In estimation, we force regime 1 (2) to be the lower (higher) idiosyncratic

variance regime, and the mean levels of idiosyncratic variances in both regimes to be non-

negative, that is, we constrain 2  1  0.

   The transition probability matrix, Φ, is 2x2, where each probability represents  [ =

|−1 = ], with   ∈ {1 2}:
                                           ⎛                       ⎞
                                       ⎜         11   1 − 11 ⎟
                                     Φ=⎜
                                       ⎝
                                                               ⎟
                                                               ⎠                                      (8)
                                               1 − 22   22

The model is parsimonious, featuring only 8 parameters, {1  2  1  2   1   2  11 22}.


4.1.2 Estimation Results


In Table 3 (left panel), we report the estimation results for both  2 and  2  for the long

U.S. sample. The standard errors are computed using the robust White (1980) covariance


                                                     13
matrix. The annualized idiosyncratic variance level for regime 1, 1 , is 0.062 for  2 , and

0.055 for 2  , but the level increases dramatically for regime 2, with 2 equal to 0.181 for

 2 and 0.155 for 2  . Using a Wald test, the level diﬀerences between the two regimes

are highly statistically significant. It seems likely that a regime with high mean volatility also

has high innovation volatility, and that is indeed what we find. Regime 2 has much higher

volatility than regime 1, as  1 is 0.011 but 2 is 0.082 for  2 , with similar results when we

use  2  . It is also typical for a high-variance regime to show more mean-reverting behavior,

and we also find this to be the case for the point estimates for both 2 and  2  . The

diﬀerence between the two autocorrelation coeﬃcients is statistically significant.

   Figure 2 presents time-series of the smoothed probabilities of being in regime 2, which are

computed using information from the whole time-series. The high-variance regime is a short-

lived regime, but it occurs several times during the sample period with some consistency across

the two risk models. High variance episodes that occur in both cases include 1970, 1974, 1987,

1996, 1998-2002 and 2007-2008. If we define  to be in regime 2 if the probability of being in

regime 2 is higher than 0.5, and vice versa for regime 1, then there are 13(11) regime switches

over the 45 year sample for  2 ( 2  ), and  is in regime 2 14% of the time. On average,

regime 2 lasts about 10 to 11 months.

   It is not diﬃcult to give some economic content to the regimes. The shaded areas in Figure

2 are NBER recessions. Clearly, the high-level idiosyncratic variance regimes mostly coincide

with periods of recessions, although recessions are neither necessary nor suﬃcient to have a

high volatility regime. It is well-known that market volatility tends to be high in recessions

(see Schwert, 1989). We also find that our high idiosyncratic variance regimes coincide with



                                                14
market volatility being about twice as high as in normal regimes. We come back to this finding

in a later section. The link between high idiosyncratic variance regimes and recessions appears

stronger for 2 than for  2  

   The results for the shorter sample period of G7 countries are in the right panel of Table 3.

The levels of idiosyncratic variances diﬀer across countries, but not dramatically. In the low

variance regime, the means vary between 0.033 (Germany) and 0.072 (Japan). For the high

variance regime, the means vary between 0.121 (Germany) and 0.198 (U.S.). The persistence

parameters are mostly lower in regime 2, but not significantly in Japan, the U.K. and the U.S.

The results using the FF model are very similar, and we do not report them to save space. In

the Figure A1 of the Online Appendix, the smoothed probabilities in regime 2 (high volatility

regime) using the CLMX model are presented. Essentially, the idiosyncratic variances of all

6 countries are mostly in regime 2 around 1997 to 2002 and back again in the recent crisis

period. They are also likely to be in regime 2 around the 1987 crash. Most countries experience

additional transitions into the higher variance regime.

   We also consider an extensive set of specification tests for the regime switching model

for all countries, comparing it to a number of simpler models and also to models applied to

the logarithm of the variance. The regime switching models discussed here outperform the

alternative models and most specification tests fail to reject, with the model performing least

well for Canada, Germany and the UK. The Online Appendix describes the specification tests

and contains detailed results.




                                              15
4.1.3 Regime Switches and the CLMX Results


These results help us interpret the CLMX finding of a trend. Essentially, the idiosyncratic

variance process does not exhibit a trend, but it exhibits covariance stationary behavior with

regime switching. Of course, trend tests, despite having good finite sample properties, may

perform much worse in an environment that starts the sample in a low level regime and ends

in a high level regime.

       The CLMX sample starts during a “normal” idiosyncratic variance regime in the 1960’s

and ends in 1997. While 1997 is not classified as a high variance regime, it is in the middle

of a period with frequent shifts into the high variance regime. As Figure 2 shows, the proba-

bility that  2 is in the high-level, high-variance regime increased briefly around October

19876 , increases slightly several times in the following years, before increasing substantially but

briefly in June and July of 1996. In April 1998, a longer lasting high variance regime starts.

Conditioning on such a sample selection, a trend test may be more likely to reject than the

asymptotic size of the test indicates.

       To see the eﬀect more concretely, Figure 3 shows the recursively computed values of the

t-dan test, starting the sample in 1964:01 but varying the end point between 1970:04 and the

end of the sample (2008:12). The date 1970:04 is not chosen arbitrarily, it is in the first high

variance regime selected by the regime switching model, and it is striking that the trend test

would have rejected when dates around that time were chosen as sample end points. The

trigger date for finding an upward trend was the crash of October 1987, and an upward trend
   6
       Schwert (1990) shows how stock market volatility, during and after the crash, was very unusual but returned

to normal levels relatively quickly.




                                                         16
would have been found all the way until 2000:4. Using the less powerful t-ps1 test, actually

employed by CLMX, this period of “false rejections” would have lasted about two years less

long. This analysis has two important implications: first, the level of idiosyncratic volatility has

been high over the 1990s; second, if the time-series starts in a low volatility period, and ends

in a high volatility period, the trend test tends to be significant, even though the time-series

follows an overall stationary process. The recent data reinforce the regime-switching nature of

the idiosyncratic variance process. By 2004, the level of idiosyncratic variance had dropped

back to pre 1970 levels, only to rise starkly (and most likely temporarily) in the financial crisis

that started in 2008.



4.2 Commonality in Idiosyncratic Volatilities

    The fact that idiosyncratic volatility has a large common component across countries de-

serves further scrutiny. This fact may have implications for the analysis of issues such as

international diversification and contagion. Table 4 reports the correlations of the aggregate

idiosyncratic variances in the G7 countries with respect to the aggregate U.S. idiosyncratic

variance. Across the panels, the correlations with the U.S. vary between 0.20 (Italy) and 0.81

(UK). Table 4 also shows these correlations over the first and second halves of the sample. The

increase in the correlation with the U.S. over time is remarkable.

   It is possible that the phenomenon is also related to the regime switching behavior of

idiosyncratic variances. In the last two columns of the table, we report the bivariate correlations

with the U.S., conditioning on the idiosyncratic variance in the U.S. being either in the low

level/low variance or high level/high variance regime. Perhaps not surprisingly, we find that


                                                17
the correlations are generally higher in the high-level/high variance regime7 .

       Because a missing common risk factor is a potential explanation of the commonality in

idiosyncratic variances, we verified that our results are robust to using the international factor

model with local and global factor mentioned in section 3.2. BHZ (2009) show that the idiosyn-

cratic return correlations of country portfolios, computed using this risk model, are essentially

zero. Using the BHZ risk model to compute idiosyncratic variances, the equally weighted cor-

relation between the idiosyncratic variances of the G7 countries is 57% over the whole sample;

24% over the 1980-1994 period, but 75% over the 1995-2008 period.




5. Determinants of Idiosyncratic Volatility Dynamics

Section 4 documents that idiosyncratic variances follow a stationary regime switching process,

characterized by relatively low frequency changes in regime, in which they become temporarily

higher, more variable, and more mean-reverting. These patterns are apparent in all countries.

Moreover, there is a strong common component in idiosyncratic variances across countries that

has increased in importance over time. These facts have significant implications for the rapidly

growing literature trying to explain the time variation in idiosyncratic volatility.

       In this section, we attempt to determine which prevailing explanation best fits the time
   7
       In a previous version of the article, we actually estimated a joint regime-switching model over the G7

countries, where the U.S. regime variable functions as the standard regime variable and the regime variables in

other countries depend on the U.S. variable. Results are available upon request. The joint model shows that

when the U.S. is in the high level/high variance regime, the other G7 countries are more likely to be in this

regime as well.




                                                      18
series movements of idiosyncratic variances in the U.S. and in other countries. Because we have

more data available in the U.S., we start there in section 5.1. Table 5 lists all the independent

variables we use in the analysis and the acronyms we assign to them.

   We distinguish three diﬀerent types of variables: variables aﬀecting changes in the index

composition, “corporate” variables correlated with cash flow volatility, and finally, business

cycle variables and market wide volatility, a category new to this literature. The first three

sub-sections in 5.1 discuss these three groups of variables in more detail. Section 5.1.4 runs

a statistical horse race to determine which variables best capture the time series variation in

U.S. aggregate idiosyncratic volatility. Section 5.1.5 then examines whether the determinants

can account for the time series behavior discovered in section 4. Specifically, we assess whether

accounting for these determinants leads to residuals that are well-behaved and no longer exhibit

regime switching behavior. In Panel B of Table 5, we list the variables that are available

internationally, which is a subset of the variables available for the U.S. Section 5.2 then conducts

an analysis of the determinants of aggregate idiosyncratic volatility in the G7 countries. Given

the more limited nature of our data, this analysis should be viewed as a preliminary first look

at the data.



5.1 Analysis of U.S. Data

    Most of the literature has focused on U.S. data. Our general approach is to regress the

idiosyncratic variance time series on a set of explanatory variables, mostly constructed exactly

as in the extant literature. The reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity consistent and

always allow for 12 Newey-West (1987) lags.


                                                19
5.1.1 Index Composition and Behavioral Variables


One possible explanation oﬀered for a potential increase in idiosyncratic variances over time

is that the composition of the index has changed towards younger, more volatile firms. Fink,

Fink, Grullon and Weston (2010) show that the age of the typical firm at its IPO date has fallen

dramatically from nearly 40 years old in the early 1960s to less than 5 years old by the late

1990s. Since younger firms tend to be more volatile, this systematic decline in the average age

of IPOs, combined with the increasing number of firms going public over the last 30 years, may

have caused a significant increase in idiosyncratic risk. Brown and Kapadia (2007) also ascribe

increases in firm-specific risk to new listings by riskier companies (although not necessarily

solely related to age), whereas Xu and Malkiel (2003) argue that the increase can be partly

attributed to the increasing prominence of the NASDAQ market. We proxy for the age eﬀect

using the percentage of market cap of firms which are less than 10 years old since foundation

(pyoung).

   A related possibility is that small capitalization stocks, which tend to have higher idiosyn-

cratic volatilities, have become relatively more important (see Bennett, Sias and Starks, 2003).

It is possible such a trend is a fundamental response to markets becoming more eﬃcient over

time, making it possible for smaller firms to list and be priced eﬃciently. Bennett, Sias and

Starks (2003) explicitly ascribe the trend to institutional investors becoming more actively in-

terested in small capitalization stocks over time, which could increase trading in these stocks

and make these markets more liquid and consequently more eﬃcient, thereby providing higher

valuations. Xu and Malkiel (2003) also argue that an increase in institutional ownership is

associated with higher idiosyncratic volatility. To measure the eﬀect of the relative impor-


                                              20
tance of small capitalization firms on idiosyncratic variability, we use the proportion of market

capitalization represented by the smallest 25% of all listed firms (psmall).

       Such an explanation is hard to distinguish from certain “behavioral explanations”. Brandt,

Brav, Graham and Kumar (2010) ascribe episodic shifts in idiosyncratic volatility to speculative

behavior. While diﬃcult to measure, they argue that the 1990s episode of high and increasing

idiosyncratic volatility is concentrated primarily in firms with low stock prices and limited

institutional ownership. Their explanation is hence quite diﬀerent, and almost contradictory

to the arguments made by Bennett, Sias and Starks (2003) and Xu and Malkiel (2003), but

it nonetheless also gives a primary role to small stocks. We use two variables to imperfectly

measure the “speculative trading” channel: the percentage of market cap of firms with a stock

price lower than $5 (plow), and the average turnover of firms with a stock price lower than $5

(lowto).

       More generally, retail investors can potentially act as noise traders and increase trading vol-

ume and volatility (see also Foucault, Sraer and Thesmar 2008). We also use a general measure

of turnover, computed as total dollar volume over total market capitalization. A positive eﬀect

of turnover on volatility could also reflect increased turnover indicating a more developed, more

eﬃcient stock market, which in turn may be associated with higher idiosyncratic variability,

see Jin and Myers (2006)8 .

       The first column on the left hand side of Table 6 runs a regression of our CLMX measure of

idiosyncratic variances onto the 5 variables described above. While the fraction of young firms
   8
       Ferreira and Laux (2007) suggest corporate governance policy as a concrete channel promoting informational

eﬃciency and higher idiosyncratic volatilty.




                                                        21
is positively associated with aggregate idiosyncratic variability, the eﬀect is not statistically

significant. Both the proportions of small stocks and low priced stocks are negatively associated

with aggregate idiosyncratic risk; with the eﬀects significant at 10% level. The turnover in low

priced stocks is negatively associated with idiosyncratic risk, yet overall turnover is positively

associated with idiosyncratic risk. Neither eﬀect is significant. In summary, the variables that

provide some marginal explanatory power have the wrong sign. The 2 of the regression is

35%.

   Introducing institutional ownership would help to distinguish the Bennett, Sias and Starks

(2003) explanation from that of Brandt et al. (2010). Unfortunately, the fraction of shares

owned by institutional investors is only available from 1981 onwards, eliminating 17 years from

the sample period. Over this shorter sample period, institutional ownership is univariately

positively related with idiosyncratic variability, but the coeﬃcient is insignificantly diﬀerent

from zero. When we run a regression including our five other variables, the coeﬃcient on in-

stitutional ownership becomes significantly negative, which is not consistent with the Bennett,

Sias and Starks (2003) hypothesis. The results are somewhat hard to interpret, because insti-

tutional ownership is quite highly correlated with the 5 variables included in our analysis. In

fact, these five variables explain 77% of the variation in institutional ownership. The fact that

institutional ownership shows a clear upward trend also implies that it cannot really be a major

factor driving the time-series variation in idiosyncratic variability.




                                                22
5.1.2. Corporate variables


    Another part of the literature argues that the movements in idiosyncratic variances reflect

fundamental (idiosyncratic) cash flow variability. The various articles diﬀer in what aspects of

fundamental variability they focus on, and how they interpret their results. Details about how

to construct those variables can be found in the Online Appendix.

   Building on theoretical work by Pastor and Veronesi (2003), Wei and Zhang (2006) argue

that the upward trend in average stock return volatility is fully accounted for by a downward

trend in the return-on-equity, indicating poorer earnings quality, and an upward trend in the

volatility of the return-on-equity. To mimic their results, we create three empirical measures:

the value-weighted average of the firm level return on equity (vwroe); the value-weighted firm

level time-series variance of the return on equity computed using the past 12 quarters of data

(vwvroe), and the cross-sectional variance of the return on equity at each point in time (cvroe).

   Irvine and Pontiﬀ (2008) attribute the increases in idiosyncratic return volatility to an

increase in the idiosyncratic volatility of fundamental cash flows. We mimic their procedure

to construct idiosyncratic cash flow volatility by first using a pooled AR(3) model for firms’

earnings per share to create earnings innovations. Then, we define the cross-sectional variance

of these innovations (veps). Both Irvine and Pontiﬀ (2008) and Gaspar and Massa (2006)

ascribe increases in fundamental idiosyncratic variability to more intense economy wide product

competition. To proxy for “competition”, we use a measure of industry turnover computed by

first taking the percentage of market cap of firms entering and exiting the same industry at the

industry level each month and then assigning this percentage to individual firms in the various

industries. We use the value-weighted average of firm level industry turnover (indto).


                                               23
   Cao, Simin and Zhao (2007) show that both the level and variance of corporate growth

options are significantly related to idiosyncratic volatility. A bigger menu of projects presumably

makes it easier for managers to increase idiosyncratic risk, which in turn increases equity value.

We therefore use two variables: the value-weighted firm level market value of assets over the

book value of assets (maba), as a proxy for growth options, and the value-weighted variance of

the firm level’s maba, vmaba, computed using data over the past three years. Finally, following

the spirit of cvroe, we also compute the cross-sectional variance of maba at each point in time

(cvmaba).

   Finally, Chun, Kim, Morck and Yeung (2008) argue that a more intensive use of information

technology and faster production growth created a wave of creative destruction, leading to

higher idiosyncratic volatility. Chun et al. (2008) and Comin and Philippon (2008) therefore

link idiosyncratic volatility to research intensity and spending. Following Comin and Mulani

(2006), for each firm, we first compute its fiscal year R&D expenditure divided by the quarter’s

total revenue. We then construct two R&D related variables: the value-weighted average of

the scaled R&D expenditure (rd), and the cross-sectional variance of firm level scaled R&D

expenditure (cvrd).

   The second column of Table 6 reports results for a regression of CLMX idiosyncratic variance

onto the 10 corporate variables described above. The total adjusted 2 is 56%, so these variables

explain more of the time-series variation in aggregate idiosyncratic variances than the index

variables did. We expect positive coeﬃcients for all of these variables. Of course, many of them

are highly correlated, causing some multicollinearity. Of the return on equity variables, only the

level is significant. Both earnings per share variability and industry turnover are significant. In



                                                24
addition, the growth option variable, maba, and both research spending variables are significant,

but the volatility of R&D has a surprisingly negative eﬀect on idiosyncratic volatility.


5.1.3 Business Cycles and Market Wide Volatility


    This section examines a number of potential determinants that the extant literature has not

yet considered, namely business cycle variables and aggregate market volatility. Business cycle

variables could aﬀect aggregate idiosyncratic variability through a variety of channels. A first

channel is simply that recessions are associated with increases in macro-economic uncertainty,

which in turn drives up both systematic and idiosyncratic risk. In principle, the corporate

variables we have used so far should pick up this eﬀect, but it is possible they do not, or do so

imperfectly.

   Another possibility is that there is discount rate volatility that somehow was missed in

the systematic factor measurement and causes idiosyncratic volatility fluctuations that may

even be correlated across countries. This could be a missing risk factor, or the functional

form of systematic risk measurement could be incorrect (e.g. the true factor model is really

non-linear). For example, if aggregate stock return predictability reflects variation in discount

rates, the evidence in Henkel, Martin and Nardari (2008) suggests it is concentrated in certain

periods, particularly recessions.

   We use 7 variables to analyze business cycle eﬀects. The first variable is the variance

premium, mvp, which is the diﬀerence between the square of the VIX index, an option based

measure of the expected volatility in the stock market, and the actual physical expected variance

of stock returns (see also Carr and Wu (2009)). We take this measure from Baele, Bekaert and



                                               25
Inghelbrecht (2010), who show that it is an important determinant of stock market volatility.

Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009) show that mvp is an important predictor of stock returns,

and hence constitutes an aggregate discount rate factor. Bali and Hovakimian (2009) find a

significant link between variance risk premiums and the cross-section of expected stock returns.

Theoretically, a variance premium can arise through stochastic risk aversion and nonlinearities

in fundamentals (see Bekaert and Engstrom (2009), and Drechschler and Yaron (2008)) or

through Knightian uncertainty (see Drechschler (2009)). Next, the regime switching model

indicated an important link between market volatility (mkttv) and idiosyncratic volatility. We

use this variable as the second business cycle variable in the regression. Note that idiosyncratic

and aggregate volatility need not be automatically correlated, as long as the index is suﬃciently

well-diversified9 . We also include growth in industrial production variable, dip, computed as

industrial production minus its own two year moving average. We include two market-driven

indicators of business cycle conditions, the term spread (term) and the default spread (def).

Default spreads have long been used to predict economic activity (see e.g. Harvey (1988));

and more recently, the links between default spreads and future economic activity have been

explored, by Mueller (2009) and Gilchrist, Yankov and Zakrejsek (2009). We also use a survey

measure of consumer confidence (confi), from the conference board.

       The last business cycle variable, disp, is a measure of uncertainty about corporate profits.
   9
       We actually checked the source of correlations between aggregate total and aggregate idiosyncratic variance

for the G7 countries, by splitting up the aggregate total variance in two components, a variance component

(which should converge to zero in well-diversified indices as the number of firms get large) and a systematic

component (which only depends on covariances). We find that the bulk of the correlation is accounted for by

the systematic component, with the lowest proportions being 88% for Germany and Italy.



                                                         26
The Survey of Professional Forecasters provides forecasts of nominal corporate profits for the

previous quarter, the current quarter and the next four quarters. We calculate the forecasted

growth rate for each forecaster by dividing the fourth quarter forecast by the current quarter

forecast. We then compute the standard deviation across the diﬀerent growth forecasts, ob-

taining a quarterly time series of the dispersion of the survey forecasts.10 This time series may

be correlated with true macro-economic uncertainty and the variability of cash flows, or it may

reflect diﬀerent beliefs of diﬀerent forecasters. In Anderson, Ghysels and Juergens (2009) these

forecasts are used to construct a measure of Knightian uncertainty that should be a key factor

driving the aggregate market risk premium.

       The 7 business cycle variables explain 57% of the total variation in aggregate idiosyncratic

volatility. Thus, business cycle variables are slightly more important than the corporate vari-

ables, and much more important than compositional variables. The significant variables include

the variance premium, the market variance, industrial production growth (albeit marginally),

and the default spread. However, the sign of the default spread is surprisingly negative.
  10
       There are a minimum of 9 forecasters and a maximum of 76 forecasters. We also experimented with the

methodology in Anderson, Ghysels and Juergens (2009) to downweight the extreme forecasts, which generated

highly analogous results. To make the time series monthly, we take the weighted average of the previous and

current quarter observations (eg. for January, 2/3 the December observation and 1/3 the March observation,; for

February, 1/3 the December observation and 2/3 the March observation). Using the past quarterly observation

yields analogous results.




                                                      27
5.1.4 What drives idiosyncratic variability?


    We now run a horse race between the various determinants. Unfortunately, a regression

model using all variables together would be plagued by extreme multi-collinearity and would

include many useless and insignificant variables. Our first methodology to pare down the

regression model simply uses all the variables that are significant at the 10% level from the

previous subgroup regressions. This regression has 13 regressors. We then eliminate regression

variables yielding coeﬃcients that are not significant at the 10% level and re-run the regression.

The result is reported in the fourth section of Table 6. We find that 7 independent variables

explain 80% of the variation in the aggregate idiosyncratic variance. No compositional variables

survive this procedure, but four corporate variables and three business cycle variables survive.

The cash flow variables are industry turnover and the growth option variable, the variables

stressed by, respectively, Irvine and Pontiﬀ (2008) and Cao, Simin and Zhao (2009); and the

research and development spending variables stressed by Chun et al. (2000) and Comin and

Philippon (2005). The business cycle variables are the total market variance, the growth in

industrial production and the default spread, with the default spread now having the correct

sign, indicating higher idiosyncratic variability when credit conditions are bad.

   To gauge the relative importance of the various variables in explaining the time variation in

idiosyncratic variances, the last column reports a simple covariance decomposition of the fitted

value of the regression. Let independent variable  have a regression coeﬃcient of b  and

denote the fitted value of the regression by b . Then, for each variable, we report the sample
                        (b  b )
analogue of the ratio     (b )
                                           .   These ratios add up to one by construction. Clearly, the most

important variables are the growth option variable, maba, and market wide volatility. Research


                                                            28
and development expenditure also explains a non-negligible part of the variation of aggregate

idiosyncratic variability.

   When applied to the idiosyncratic variances, computed using the FF model, the final “sub-

group” model is similar, but it includes four more variables: vwroe, veps, cvmaba and mvp.

Qualitatively, the results for the FF model are largely similar, with maba, mkttv and rd ac-

counting for most of the variation in idiosyncratic volatility. We do not report these results to

save space.

   Research on model reduction techniques by Hendry and Krolzig (2001), among many others,

suggests that starting from the most general model yields better specified parsimonious models.

We therefore also apply a model reduction technique close in spirit to the PCGets (“general-

to-specific”) system, proposed and commercialized by Hendry and his associates. The model

starts from a regression using all regressors, eliminating insignificant variables, while making

sure that the eliminated variables are not jointly significant. We refer to the Online Appendix

for more details.

   The alternative model selects a less parsimonious model than the model resulting from

the subgroup regressions, but the qualitative results are largely the same. The few additional

variables retained increase the R2 to 86%, yet, the key variables of before, the growth option

variable and market volatility, now also are the most important variables. Of the additional

variables, very few are both statistically and economically significant. The main exception is the

variance premium which is highly statistically significant and contributes 10% to the predicted

variance.

   Our results shed new light on the debate regarding the determinants of the time-variation



                                               29
in U.S. aggregate idiosyncratic volatility. We find that compositional and behavioral variables

are relatively unimportant, failing to survive in our first multivariate model, and barely ac-

counting for 10% of the total in the second (unreported) model. Corporate variables account

for 55-60% of the explained variation, leaving a significant part of the variation to business

cycle variables. The addition of these latter variables, not examined before, helps increase the

explained variation to over 80%.


The Role of Business Cycle Variables           Why are these business cycle variables so impor-

tant? There are two main possibilities. First, the business cycle variables may reflect cash flow

variability not accounted for by our corporate variables. Second, they may reflect discount rate

variation not accounted for in our factor model. Let’s start with the cash flow channel. When

regressing the aggregate idiosyncratic variance time series onto a NBER recession indicator, we

obtain a highly significant positive coeﬃcient. It is possible that true cash flow variability is

counter-cyclical, but that measurement error in our variables implies that business cycle vari-

ables capture this counter-cyclicality better. The evidence seems largely inconsistent with this

interpretation, as most of our cash flow variables either show no significant relation with the

NBER recession dummy variable, or a significantly negative relation (e.g. all return on equity

variables).

   In a more direct analysis, we orthogonalize the corporate variables with respect to all of our

business cycle variables and repeat the regression of Table 6, regressing idiosyncratic variability

on “pure” cash flow variables. The 2 drops from 56% to 25%, but the coeﬃcients on some of

the most important variables, including maba, hardly change. The coeﬃcients on the return

on equity variables and veps do become significantly smaller in absolute magnitude. When we

                                                30
reverse the exercise, the 2 of the business cycle variables is also cut in half, but importantly, the

coeﬃcient on the total market variance hardly changes. These results (available upon request)

suggest that some of the explanatory power of the business cycle variables may run through

cash flow variability and is related to the corporate variables we use, but a significant part is

totally independent of it.

   One obvious candidate for the independent explanatory power of business cycle variables

is the presence of discount rate variation not accounted for in our factor model. To assess the

validity of this interpretation, we replace our business cycle variables by a risk premium proxy

extracted from these variables. Specifically, we run a regression of market excess returns at time

 + 1 onto the 7 variables at time t. The fitted value of this regression is an estimate of the risk

premium on the market, which naturally varies through time. We then repeat our explanatory

analysis of aggregate idiosyncratic variance, but we replace the business cycle variables by this

risk premium proxy. Consequently, in this regression the business cycle variables only enter to

the extent that they can predict market excess returns. Despite using only one business cycle

variable, the explanatory power of the regression, pared down using the Hendry approach, only

drops from 86% to 69%. The risk premium variable is highly significant, and it accounts for

26% of the explained variation. This suggests that more than half of the explanatory power

of the business cycle variables is related to these variables capturing discount rate variation

not accounted for by standard risk models. The current literature on return predictability

suggests that most of the predictable variation is concentrated in recession periods (see e.g.

Henkel, Martin and Nardari (2009)), and it is this time-variation in discount rates that standard

models of risk may not quite capture, leading to common risk factors contaminating estimates



                                                 31
of idiosyncratic variance.

   Our analysis is related but more comprehensive than the recent work by Zhang (2010), who

also runs a horse race between explanatory variables for aggregate U.S. idiosyncratic variability,

but with a more limited set of variables. He uses the return on equity and maba, but he uses

one variable we do not use: institutional ownership (see our discussion above and note that this

variable is highly correlated with our “dto” variable). Zhang (2010) finds the “fundamentals”

variables to be the more robust determinants of idiosyncratic variability. He also notes that

there is a trend upward in idiosyncratic volatility from 1980 till 2000, and a trend downward

after 2000. In his empirical analysis, he allows for diﬀerent coeﬃcients in the two periods and

finds some evidence in favor of coeﬃcient changes. We examine the possibility of shifts in

the relationship between idiosyncratic variance and its determinants in more detail in the next

sub-section.


5.1.5 Explaining Regime Switches and Regression Fit


    Specification tests, applied to the residuals of the regression models, reveal that they do not

fully fit the time series dynamics of the aggregate idiosyncratic variances. To conserve space,

all results referred to in this section are reported in a detailed table in the Online Appendix.

   To explore this further, we estimate a regime-switching model for the regression residuals,

using the exact same specification as in Section 3. However, because the residuals ought to

have mean zero, we identify the two regimes by their variability rather than their mean. The

mean level of residuals is not significantly diﬀerent across regimes, but the regression residuals

exhibit significant autocorrelation. There is, of course, still some regime switching behavior left



                                                32
in the variance, and the variances in two regimes are significantly diﬀerent.

   Finally, we investigate whether the coeﬃcients in the regression models vary with the regime.

We therefore let each coeﬃcient (including the intercept) in the two final models depend on

a regime 2 dummy variable, which takes the value of 1 if the smoothed probability of being

in regime 2 is higher than 0.5 and 0 otherwise. Across the two regressions, roughly half of

the dummy coeﬃcients are significantly diﬀerent from zero. When significant, the coeﬃcients

mostly become larger in magnitude in regime 2. This is true for the two most important deter-

minants, namely maba and aggregate market volatility. Overall, allowing for this non-linearity

improves the 2 in both models by about 10%, making it nearly perfect. It is conceivable

that this non-linear dependence reflects a “crisis” eﬀect, where in turbulent times all volatility

measures increase dramatically. We further reflect on this in the conclusions.



5.2 International Analysis

    As Table 5 Panel B shows, our international data are much more limited than the U.S. data.

First, we do not construct compositional variables. DataStream gradually increased its coverage

of international firms over time, which makes the time-series of compositional variables diﬃcult

to interpret. Fortunately, the U.S. analysis suggests these variables are far less important than

corporate and business cycle variables. Moreover, many of our variables are only available at

the annual frequency. With such limited data, the best we can do is run a panel analysis. We

create country specific variables for the fundamentals and the business cycle variables, except

for the variance premium where we simply use the U.S. values as an indicator of global risk

appetite. We consider two diﬀerent models for the international analysis.


                                               33
   In a first model, we simply take the same model as we applied to the U.S., using country-

specific explanatory variables, but pooling the coeﬃcients across the G7 countries. The panel

model uses country dummies and clusters the standard errors on year, so that correlations be-

tween countries are taken into account. The assumption of pooled coeﬃcients is restrictive, but

because the sample only starts in 1983, we have only 26 time series observations. Thus, impos-

ing such restrictions is necessary. Table 7 reports the results from the sub-group regressions;

an Online Appendix contains the Hendry model results. For the sub-group analysis, we end

up with 7 significant variables, indto and the three maba variables, among the fundamentals;

and market volatility, the term spread and the U.S. variance premium, among the business

cycle variables. Market wide variability is now the most important determinant accounting for

31% of the predictable variation. The business cycle variables jointly account for about 55%

of the predictable variation, the corporate variables for about 45% with maba still being the

most important cash flow variable. This decomposition reverses the relative importance of the

corporate versus business cycle variables relative to the U.S. results, but it is at the same time

rather similar. A surprising result is the importance of the U.S. market variance premium as a

determinant of time series movements in international idiosyncratic variances. Note that this

decomposition excludes the eﬀect of the country dummies. The country dummies by themselves

account for about 14% of the 69% 2 of the model.

   When we consider the Hendry model, the results are largely similar. In the decomposition,

it is again “maba”, the growth option proxy, consistent with the U.S. results, that is by far

the most important corporate variable. Among the business cycle variables, the decomposition

again reveals that about 30% of the total explained variation is accounted for by the total market



                                               34
variance, and about 20% by the variance premium. The split between corporate variables and

business cycle variables is now about 50-50.

       One interesting question to be addressed, is how much of the strong international common-

ality in idiosyncratic variances these models can explain. Table 8 provides the answer. We first

report the correlation for the original raw data and then for the residuals of the two regression

models we just discussed. With few exceptions, the correlations drop rather substantially, of-

ten becoming negative. While the correlations do not seem negligible in many cases, they are

statistically much closer to zero than the original, raw correlations. Of the 21 correlations, 16

were originally statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero. Using regression residuals, only

9(6) significant correlations remain when we use the subgroup (Hendry) model11 .

       The second model we consider recognizes the strong correlation between idiosyncratic volatil-

ities across countries, and investigates whether country-specific determinants of idiosyncratic

variability are still important once we control for a “U.S. factor” in idiosyncratic variances. The

model is as follows:

                                       2 =    2  +  0 ( −  ) +  

That is, we allot each country a beta relative to the U.S., and then see if diﬀerences in the usual

explanatory variables,  −   , further explain time-variation in the idiosyncratic variance.

The results are reported in the Online Appendix. We find that all betas with respect to the
  11
       It is diﬃcult to dismiss the possibility of a missing common factor. In that scenario, country residuals should

still show significant correlations. In the CLMX model these residuals are by construction zero. When we use

the FF model, the average correlation among the residuals is 23% , but when we employ the international BHZ

model, the average correlation becomes 12%. This indicates that the domestic risk models do omit important

systematic variation.



                                                              35
U.S.’s variance are highly statistically significant, and economically account for most of the

explained variance. While most of the explanatory variables surviving remain similar to what

we found in the first model12 , their explanatory power has become very limited, compared to the

first model. The contribution to the explained variance only remains economically significant for

the variance premium. In other words, the joint comovement with the U.S. captures most of the

explained variance and the economic importance of market volatility in explaining idiosyncratic

volatility seems to be primarily U.S. driven. Of course, such a conclusion may change if we had

better international data, but it again confirms the importance of the common component in

idiosyncratic variances.




6. Conclusions

        This article first documents a simple fact: there is no upward trend in idiosyncratic volatil-

ity anywhere in the developed world. Instead, we find that idiosyncratic volatility is well de-

scribed by a stationary regime-switching, mean-reverting process with occasional shifts to a

higher-mean, higher-variance regime. While a substantial literature has attempted to explain

trending behavior in idiosyncratic volatilities, because of the findings of a trend in CLMX, such

explanations should be redirected to explain regime switching behavior.

       Such explanations include the increasing propensity of firms to issue public equity at an

earlier stage in their life cycle, and more volatile cash flows / fundamentals. We conduct a com-

prehensive horse race using the variables proposed in the literature regarding index composition
  12
       This would not be surprising if the betas were all close to one, as then the second model is implied by the

first model we estimated.



                                                         36
and cash flow variability, but we added business cycle variables and market wide variability to

the mix. We find that the cash flow variables (especially a growth option proxy, market to book

value of assets), various business cycle variables and market wide volatility are the most impor-

tant determinants of the time variation in U.S. aggregate idiosyncratic variability. However, a

linear regression model does not eliminate the regime switching characteristics of the idiosyn-

cratic variability, and we find a significant regime dependence of the regression coeﬃcients.

   One potential explanation is that in times of crisis, all risk variables increase disproportion-

ately in ways that are hard to capture by simple linear models. It may be that a correlated and

therefore undiversifiable tail risk exposure of firms that is present in deep crises such as the re-

cent financial crisis may be driving the common movement in aggregate idiosyncratic volatility

across countries. To provide some initial exploration, we define a crisis or bear market to be a

market return two standard deviations below the mean for the U.S. sample series over 1980-2008

(to be consistent with our international sample). Aggregate idiosyncratic volatility is 22.2% in

crises, much higher than the sample average of 9.3%, just as aggregate market volatility is also

considerably higher in bear markets. Using the U.S.-based definition of a crisis to investigate

idiosyncratic variance in other countries, we find that idiosyncratic variance is uniformly higher

in these crisis periods than in normal periods, typically by a large margin. On average, the aver-

age idiosyncratic variance over the G7 countries is 16.4% in crises, much higher than the sample

average of 7.5%. Note that these U.S. crises also represent local crises, as the mean return is

-12.1% over the G7 countries. In a nice analogy with findings regarding international return

correlations (see Longin and Solnik, 2001; Ang and Bekaert, 2002), idiosyncratic variances are

also much more highly correlated across countries during crises. In fact, the diﬀerence between



                                                37
normal and bear market correlations is much larger for idiosyncratic volatilities than it is for

actual returns. For actual returns, the G7 correlation is on average 52%, and the bear market

correlation is 60.9%; for idiosyncratic volatilities, the average correlation across G7 countries

is 56%, but the bear market correlation is 80.3%. While extreme movements in discount rates

may be part of the story here, a full explanation of this phenomenon is beyond the scope of the

article13 .

       Consequently, the crisis interpretation may also partially explain another new finding in

this article: idiosyncratic variability is highly correlated across countries, and this correlation

has increased over time. Preliminary work with a linear model for annual data also detected

some significant explanatory power for corporate variables, the business cycle and market wide

volatility, and the model did succeed in significantly reducing the correlation across countries,

suggesting part of the comovement may have a fundamental explanation.




  13
       We performed some preliminary work with a regime switching model for the US long sample accommodating

three regimes. The third regime captures periods of extremely high idiosyncratic volatility, and such periods,

apart from a short period during the “Tech bubble”, mostly coincide with periods of market stress and low stock

returns, such as the October 1987 crisis, the bear market in 1998-2002, and the recent crisis period in 2008.




                                                      38
   References

   Aktas, N., E. De Bodt, and J. Cousin, 2007, Assessing the Power and the Size of the Event

Study Method through the Decades, working paper.

   Anderson, E. W., E. Ghysels, and J. L. Juergens, 2009, The Impact of Risk and Uncertainty

on Expected Returns, Journal of Financial Economics, 94, 233-263.

   Ang, A. and G. Bekaert, 2002, International asset allocation with regime shifts, Review of

Financial Studies, 15(4), 1137-1187.

   Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing and X. Zhang, 2006, The Cross-Section of Volatility and

Expected Returns, Journal of Finance, 61, 259-299.

   Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing and X. Zhang, 2009, High Idiosyncratic Volatility and Low

Returns: International and Further U.S. Evidence, Journal of Financial Economics, 91, 2-23.

   Baele, L., Bekaert, G., and K. Inghelbrecht, 2010, The Determinants of Stock and Bond

Return Comovements, Review of Financial Studies, 23, 2374-2428.

   Bai, J. and P. Perron, 1998, Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple Structural

Changes, Econometrica, 66, 47-78.

   Bali, T. G., N. Cakici, and H. Levy, 2008, A Model-Independent Measure of Aggregate

Idiosyncratic Risk, Journal of Empirical Finance, 15, 878-896.

   Bali, T. G., and A. Hovakimian, 2009, Volatility Spreads and Expected Stock Returns,

Management Science, 55, 1797-1812.

   Bartram, S., G. Brown and R. Stulz, 2009, Why Do Foreign Firms Have Less Idiosyncratic

Risk than U.S. Firms? Working paper.

   Bekaert, G., and E. Engstrom, 2009, Asset Return Dynamics under Bad Environment-Good



                                              39
Environment Fundamentals, working paper.

   Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick and X. Zhang, 2009, International Stock Return Comovements,

Journal of Finance, 64, 2591-2626.

   Bennett, J. A., R. W. Sias, and L. T. Starks, 2003, Greener Pastures and the Impact of

Dynamic Institutional Preferences, Review of Financial Studies, 16, 1203-1238.

   Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G. E., and Zhou, H., 2009, Expected Stock Returns and Variance

Risk Premia, Review of Financial Studies, 22, 4463-4492.

   Brandt, M. W., A. Brav, J. Graham, and A. Kumar, 2010, The Idiosyncratic Volatility

Puzzle: Time Trend or Speculative Episodes? Review of Financial Studies, 23, 863-899.

   Brown, G., and N. Kapadia, 2007, Firm-Specific Risk and Equity Market Development,

Journal of Financial Economics, 84, 358-388.

   Bunzel, H. and T. J. Vogelsang, 2005, Powerful Trend Function Tests That Are Robust to

Strong Serial Correlation, with an Application to the Prebisch-Singer Hypothesis, Journal of

Business and Economic Statistics, 381-394.

   Campbell, J. Y., M. Lettau, B. G. Malkiel and Y. Xu, 2001, Have individual stocks become

more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance, 56, 1-43.

   Cao, C., T. Simin and J. Zhao, 2007, Can Growth Options Explain the Trend in Idiosyncratic

Risk? Review of Financial Studies, 2599-2633.

   Carr, P., and L. Wu, 2009, Variance Risk Premiums, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1311-

1341.

   Chun, H., J. Kim, R. Morck and B. Yeung, 2007, Creative Destruction and Firm-Specific

Performance Heterogeneity, Journal of Financial Economics, 109-135.



                                               40
   Comin, D. and S. Mulani, 2006, Diverging Trends in Macro and Micro Volatility: Facts,

Review of Economics and Statistics, 374-383.

   Comin, D. and T. Philippon, 2005, The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and Conse-

quences, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, 20, NBER, MA, in (eds.) M. Gertler and K.

Rogoﬀ.

   Dickey, D. and W. Fuller, 1979, Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series

with a unit root. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 427-431.

   Drechsler, I. 2009, Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices, working paper

   Drechsler, I., and A. Yaron, What’s Vol Got to Do With It, forthcoming, Review of Financial

Studies.

   Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies,

Journal of Finance 51, 55-84.

   Ferreira, M. and P. Gama, 2005, Have world, country and industry risks changed over time?

An investigation of the developed stock market volatility, Journal of Financial and Quantitative

Analysis, 40, 195-222.

   Ferreira, M. and P. Laux, 2007, Corporate governance, idiosyncratic risk, and information

flow, Journal of Finance, 62, 951-990.

   Fink, J., K. Fink, G. Grullon, and J. Weston, 2010, What Drove the Increase in Idiosyncratic

Volatility during the Internet Boom?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 1253-

1278.

   Foucault, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar, 2008, “Individual Investors and Volatility”, Work-

ing paper.



                                               41
   Gaspar, J. and M. Massa, 2006, Idiosyncratic Volatility and Product Market Competition,

Journal of Business, 3125-3152.

   Gilchrist, S., V. Yankov and E. Zakrajsek, 2009, Credit Market Shocks and Economic Fluc-

tuations: Evidence from Corporate Bond and Stock Markets, working paper.

   Guo, H., and R. Savickas, 2008, Average Idiosyncratic Volatility in G7 Countries, Review

of Financial Studies, 21, 1259-1296.

   Hamilton, J. D., 1994, Time-Series Analysis, Prentice Hall.

   Harvey, C., 1988, The Real Term Structure and Consumption Growth, Journal of Financial

Economics 22, 305-334.

   Henkel, S., J. C. Martin and F. Nardari, 2009, Time-varying Short Horizon Return Pre-

dictability, forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

   Hendry, D. F., and H.-M. Krolzig, 2001, Automatic Econometric Model Selection, London.

   Irvine, P. J., and J. Pontiﬀ, 2008, Idiosyncratic Return Volatility, Cash Flows, and Product

Market Competition, Review of Financial Studies, 1149-1177.

   Jin, L. and S. C. Myers, 2006, “R2 Around the World: New Theory and New Tests,” Journal

of Financial Economics, 71, 257-292.

   Kothari, S. P. and Warner, J. B., 2004, The Econometrics of Event Studies, unpublished

working paper.

   Longin, F. and B. Solnik, 2001, Extreme Correlation of International Equity Markets, Jour-

nal of Finance, 56, 649-676.

   Morck, R., B. Yeung and W. Yu, 2000, The Information Content of Stock Markets: Why Do

Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements? Journal of Financial Economics



                                              42
59, 215-260.

   Mueller, P., 2009, Credit Spreads and Real Activity, working paper.

   Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi, 2003, Stock Valuation and Learning about Profitability, Journal

of Finance, 58, 1749-1789.

   Phillips, P. and P. Perron, 1988. Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series Regression, Bio-

metrika 75, 335-346.

   Schwert, G. W., 1989, Why does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time, Journal of

Finance, 44 (5), 1115-1153.

   Schwert, G. W., 1990, Stock Volatility and the Crash of ’87, Review of Financial Studies,

3 (1990) 77-102.

   Timmermann, A., 2000, Moments of Markov Switching Models, Journal of Econometrics,

96, 75-111.

   Vogelsang, T., 1998, Trend function hypothesis testing in the presence of serial correlation,

Econometrica 66, 123-148.

   Wei, S. X., and C. Zhang, 2006, Why Did Individual Stocks Become More Volatile?, Journal

of Business, 79, 259-292.

   White, H., 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct

Test for Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.

   Xu, Y., and B. G. Malkiel, 2003, Investigating the Behavior of Idiosyncratic Volatility,

Journal of Business, 76, 613-644.

   Zhang, C., 2010, A Re-examination of the Causes of Time-varying Stock Return Volatilities,

Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 663-684.



                                              43
Table 1. Idiosyncratic variance summary statistics

Panel A provides summary statistics for the U.S. sample of January 1964 to December 2008.
Panel B reports summary statistics for the developed countries sample of January 1980 to
December 2008. Panel C presents correlations between G7 idiosyncratic variances. We use bold
font if the correlation is significantly different from zero at the 5% level. The U.S. return data are
obtained from CRSP, and the return data for other countries are obtained from DataStream. All
the returns are denominated in U.S. dollars. The variables  CLMX2
                                                                     and  FF
                                                                           2
                                                                               are the aggregate firm
level idiosyncratic variances, as defined in equations (2) and (4), respectively. All variance time-
series statistics are annualized.

Panel A. U.S. sample, 1964 – 2008

                                 CLMX
                                  2
                                                                           FF
                                                                            2


      N              Mean                  Std                 Mean                 Std
     540             0.0800              0.0592                0.0697             0.0484

Panel B. Developed countries sample, 1980 – 2008

                                                     CLMX
                                                      2
                                                                                  FF
                                                                                   2


                               N           Mean                Std      Mean              Std
 CANADA                       342          0.0880            0.0476     0.0844          0.0433
 FRANCE                       342          0.0692            0.0377     0.0696          0.0386
 GERMANY                      342          0.0537            0.0655     0.0492          0.0426
 ITALY                        342          0.0758            0.0536     0.0727          0.0485
 JAPAN                        342          0.0912            0.0487     0.0815          0.0426
 U.K.                         342          0.0529            0.0429     0.0550          0.0459
 U.S.                         342          0.0931            0.0661     0.0814          0.0544
 AUSTRALIA                    342          0.0745            0.0482     0.0712          0.0455
 AUSTRIA                      342          0.0413            0.0503     0.0433          0.0422
 BELGIUM                      342          0.0487            0.0584     0.0459          0.0367
 DENMARK                      342          0.0473            0.0297     0.0523          0.0365
 FINLAND                      288          0.0547            0.0527     0.0711          0.0529
 GREECE                       251          0.0901            0.0701     0.0798          0.0480
 HK                           342          0.0792            0.0564     0.0710          0.0454
 IRELAND                      342          0.0474            0.0598     0.0683          0.0683
 NETHERLANDS                  342          0.0292            0.0303     0.0369          0.0322
 NEW ZEALAND                  275          0.0404            0.0311     0.0518          0.0252
 NORWAY                       342          0.0800            0.0526     0.0859          0.0537
 PORTUGAL                     251          0.0677            0.0958     0.0597          0.0385
 SINGAPORE                    342          0.0656            0.0556     0.0591          0.0388
 SPAIN                        275          0.0435            0.0406     0.0457          0.0361
 SWEDEN                       342          0.0568            0.0425     0.0664          0.0403
 SWITZERLAND                  342          0.0312            0.0292     0.0326          0.0262



                                                  43
Panel C. Correlations between the idiosyncratic variances of the G7 countries, 1980 – 2008

          CLMX
           2


           Canada           France      Germany         Italy        Japan         U.K.
 France      56%
 Germany     62%             57%
 Italy       31%             51%          20%
 Japan       56%             54%          57%           23%
 U.K.        74%             68%          81%           31%          72%
 U.S.        75%             65%          68%           20%          70%           80%

             FF
              2


              Canada        France      Germany         Italy        Japan         U.K.
 France        63%
 Germany       77%           67%
 Italy         32%           53%          19%
 Japan         65%           62%          71%           31%
 U.K.          68%           62%          74%           33%          70%
 U.S.          76%           71%          81%           27%          72%           71%




                                              44
Table 2. Trend tests

Panel A and Panel B reports trend test results for the U.S. idiosyncratic variance time-series, and
Panel C reports trend test results for the idiosyncratic variance time-series of all developed
countries. All panels use Vogelsang’s (1998) t-PS1 test and Bunzel and Vogelsang’s (2008) t-
dan test. The 5% critical value (two sided) for t-dan is 2.052, and for t-ps1 is 2.152. We report
both pre-whitened results using AR (1) and non-pre-whitened results for the t-dan test in Panel A
and B, and for Panel C, we only use the pre-whitened results. Variables  CLMX     ,  FF and  BCL are
                                                                              2        2        2


the aggregate firm level idiosyncratic variances, as defined in equations (2), (4) and (6),
respectively. All variance time-series statistics are annualized. All coefficients are multiplied by
100.

Panel A. Idiosyncratic variances over 1964-1997, daily data

                    Pre-whitened              Not pre-whitened
                 b-dan        t-dan          b-dan        t-dan          b-ps1         t-ps1
    2
     CLMX        0.011          4.84         0.011          4.97         0.011          3.89
    2
     FF          0.009          4.35         0.009          4.72         0.009          3.36
    2
     BCL         0.007          3.27         0.007          3.37         0.007          2.51

Panel B. Idiosyncratic variances over 1964-2008, daily data

                    Pre-whitened              Not pre-whitened
                 b-dan        t-dan          b-dan        t-dan          b-ps1         t-ps1
    2
     CLMX        0.015          0.95         0.015          1.04         0.016          1.35
    2
     FF          0.013          0.76         0.013          0.87         0.014          1.15
    2
     BCL         0.012          0.93         0.012          1.00         0.014          1.18




                                                  45
Panel C. Idiosyncratic variances over 1980-2008, daily data

                                    CLMX
                                     2
                                                                        BCL
                                                                         2


                     b-dan     t-dan b-ps1      t-ps1    b-dan    t-dan b-ps1    t-ps1
 CANADA               0.059     0.35 0.097       0.48    0.014     0.31 0.014     0.46
 FRANCE              -0.090    -0.28 -0.004     -0.01    0.001     0.06 0.005    0.23
 GERMANY              0.290     0.48 0.346       0.73    0.020     0.66 0.021     0.84
 ITALY               -0.414    -2.62 -0.375     -1.86    -0.014   -1.21 -0.014   -0.95
 JAPAN                0.016     0.07 0.050       0.23     0.006    0.29 0.009     0.40
 U.K.                 0.070     0.06 0.053       0.08    0.012     0.27 0.012    0.38
 U.S.                 0.053     0.03 0.141       0.15    0.013     0.32 0.020    0.51
 AUSTRALIA           -0.055    -0.27 -0.125     -0.81    -0.001   -0.03 -0.010   -0.57
 AUSTRIA              0.496     0.93 0.543       0.82    0.017     0.45 0.012    0.79
 BELGIUM             -0.052    -0.06 -0.058     -0.13     0.006    0.21 -0.001   -0.04
 DENMARK              0.065     0.37 0.126       0.50    0.011     0.46 0.011     0.52
 FINLAND             -0.514    -0.21 -0.584     -0.41    -0.023   -1.01 -0.024   -0.97
 GREECE              -0.323    -1.57 -0.377     -1.77    -0.017   -0.83 -0.021   -1.02
 HK                   0.030     0.14 0.001       0.00     0.000   -0.02 -0.003   -0.14
 IRELAND              0.077     0.08 -0.008     -0.02    0.017     0.14 0.004     0.11
 NETHERLANDS          0.198     0.31 0.253       0.45    0.012     0.52 0.013     0.56
 NEW ZEALAND         -0.019    -0.04 -0.089     -0.20    -0.010   -1.15 -0.014   -1.33
 NORWAY               0.017     0.06 0.060       0.18     0.003    0.21 0.002     0.11
 PORTUGAL            -0.651    -4.33 -0.773     -4.93    -0.015   -1.94 -0.022   -2.76
 SINGAPORE            0.049     0.42 0.002       0.01    0.008     0.79 0.008    0.58
 SPAIN               -0.298    -1.38 -0.350     -1.61    -0.011   -0.75 -0.010   -0.60
 SWEDEN              -0.013     0.03 0.028      0.07     0.008     0.44 0.013     0.65
 SWITZERLAND         0.120      0.41 0.159      0.51     0.008     1.21 0.008     1.15




                                              46
Table 3. Regime switching model estimation results.

This table reports the regime switching model results for the idiosyncratic variance time-series computed using daily data, where the
model is described as follows:
yt  (1  bi ) i  bi yt 1   i et , i  1, 2.
                                       p11 1  p11
Transition probability matrix   
                                                    p 22 
                                                            .
                                      1  p 22
The transition probability parameters, p11 and p22 are constrained to be in (0,1) during estimation. We also re-parameterize to ensure
0 < 1 <  2 . The left half panel reports results for the U.S. The sample period is 1964-2008. The variables  CLMX
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                     and  FF
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                              are the
aggregate firm level idiosyncratic variances, as defined in equations (2) and (4), respectively. The right half panel reports results for
the aggregate idiosyncratic variance time-series of the G7 countries. The sample period becomes 1980-2008. All variance time-series
statistics are annualized.

               long sample: 1964-2008                                          short sample: 1980-2008
                        U.S.                      CA           FR           GE            IT          JP          U.K.         U.S.
                CLMX
                 2
                                  FF
                                   2
                                                  CLMX
                                                   2
                                                               CLMX
                                                                2
                                                                            CLMX
                                                                             2
                                                                                         CLMX
                                                                                          2
                                                                                                     CLMX
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                   CLMX
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                               CLMX
                                                                                                                                2


           coef.     std.    coef.     std.      coef.        coef.        coef.        coef.        coef.        coef.        coef.
   1      0.062    0.003    0.055    0.003      0.071        0.051        0.033        0.049        0.072        0.036        0.070
   2      0.181    0.023    0.155    0.020      0.160        0.125        0.121        0.139        0.156        0.122        0.198
   b1      0.823    0.028    0.813    0.027      0.604        0.628        0.761        0.681        0.639        0.735        0.686
   b2      0.585    0.090    0.677    0.080      0.226        0.273        0.316        0.431        0.564        0.584        0.512
   1      0.011    0.001    0.010    0.001      0.013        0.012        0.008        0.016        0.018        0.009        0.013
   2      0.082    0.007    0.057    0.005      0.073        0.048        0.113        0.061        0.055        0.058        0.086
   p11     0.981    0.008    0.987    0.007      0.934        0.904        0.933        0.927        0.952        0.940        0.984
   p 22    0.900    0.061    0.935    0.044      0.672        0.593        0.750        0.804        0.830        0.716        0.934




                                                                   47
Table 4. The common component in idiosyncratic variances across countries

For each panel, the table reports the correlations of G7 countries’ idiosyncratic variance with the
U.S. idiosyncratic variance. The different panels use different models to compute idiosyncratic
variances. We also report the average correlations in the two regimes identified for the U.S.,
using smoothed regime probabilities in regime 2.

Panel A. Daily CLMX model

  CLMX
   2
                     Correlation with U.S.              Correlation with U.S.
              1980-2008 1980-1994 1995-2008              Regime 1     Regime 2
 Canada         80%          63%           86%             53%           82%
 France         66%          45%           74%             51%           68%
 Germany        77%          49%           79%             37%           57%
 Italy          20%          14%           47%             25%           60%
 Japan          66%          23%           76%             28%           79%
 U.K.            81%          73%           81%            57%           70%
 U.S.           100%         100%          100%           100%          100%

Panel B. Daily FF model

  FF
   2
                     Correlation with U.S.              Correlation with U.S.
              1980-2008 1980-1994 1995-2008              Regime 1     Regime 2
 Canada         82%          64%           84%             56%           68%
 France         73%          34%           83%             41%           76%
 Germany        82%          40%           82%             27%           73%
 Italy          34%          26%           57%             28%           58%
 Japan          69%          18%           77%             24%           77%
 U.K.            84%          65%           86%            17%           73%
 U.S.           100%         100%          100%           100%          100%




                                                48
Table 5. Explanatory variables

Panel A. For the U.S. analysis

 variable                      description
 I. Index composition/behavioral variables
 pyoung                        the % of market cap of firms less than 10 years old since
                               foundation
 psmall                        the % of market cap of firms smaller than 25% of all
                               firms listed
 plow                          the % of market cap of firms with share price lower than
                               $5
 lowto                         the average volume turnover for firms with share price
                               lower than $5
 dto                           aggregate dollar volume over aggregate market
                               capitalization
 II. Corporate variables
 vwroe                         the value weighted average of firm level return on equity
 vwvroe                        the value weighted average of 12-quarter time-series
                               variance of firm level return on equity
 cvroe                         the cross-sectional variance of firm level return on equity
 veps                          the cross-sectional variance of shocks to earnings per
                               share
 indto                         the average industry turnover
 maba                          the value weighted average of firm level market assets
                               over book assets
 vmaba                         the value weighted average of 12-quarter time-series
                               variance of firm level market assets over book assets
 cvmaba                        the cross-sectional variance of firm level market assets
                               over book assets
 rd                            the value weighted average of firm level R&D
                               expenditure scaled by sales
 cvrd                          the cross-sectional variance of firm level R&D
                               expenditure scaled by sales
 III. Business cycle variables
 dip                           the first order difference in industrial production
 confi                         the conference board’s index of consumer confidence
 def                           the yield spread between BAA and AAA corporate bonds
 term                          the yield spread between 10 year and 1 year government
                               bond
 mvp                           the market variance premium
 mkttv                         the market index realized variance
 disp                          the dispersion of survey forecasts of aggregate corporate
                               profits growth




                                                49
Panel B. For the international analysis

 variable                       description
 I. Corporate variables
 vwroe                          the value weighted average of firm level return on equity
 vwvroe                         the value weighted average of 12-quarter time-series
                                variance of firm level return on equity
 cvroe                          the cross-sectional variance of firm level return on equity
 veps                           the cross-sectional variance of shocks to earnings per
                                share
 indto                          the average industry turnover
 maba                           the value weighted average of firm level market assets
                                over book assets
 vmaba                          the value weighted average of 12-quarter time-series
                                variance of firm level market assets over book assets
 cvmaba                         the cross-sectional variance of firm level market assets
                                over book assets
 II. Business cycle variables
 mkttv                          the market index realized variance
 usmvp                          the U.S. market value premium
 dgdp                           the first order difference in each country’s annual GDP
 def                            the yield spread between each country’s corporate debt
                                and government bonds
 term                           the yield spread between each country’s long term and
                                short term government bonds




                                                 50
Table 6. What drives U.S. idiosyncratic volatility?

OLS regressions of aggregate idiosyncratic variances in the U.S. over 1964-2008, computed
using the CLMX model, on various determinants, labeled on the left. We show 4 regressions,
one for each group of variables, and a final one based on a paring down technique picking
significant variables from the previous regressions, discussed in the text. All p-values are based
on a standard error, using 12 Newey-West lags. The last column reports the covariance
decomposition described in the text.

           I. Behavioral and    II. Corporate       III. Business IV. Significant variables from
             compositional        cash flow        cycle variables             I-III
                                                                                         Cov
            coef.   p-value    coef.    p-value    coef. p-value coef.       p-value
                                                                                       decomp
 pyoung 0.783        0.154
  psmall -12.380     0.084
   plow   -3.903     0.072
  lowto -0.007       0.750
     dto  0.043      0.216
  vwroe                         1.342   0.020
 vwvroe                        -5.053   0.380
  cvroe                        -0.564   0.311
   veps                         0.014   0.028
   indto                        0.006   0.010                        0.006     0.003      2%
  maba                          0.083   0.013                        0.091     0.000      42%
  vmaba                        -0.006   0.559
 cvmaba                         0.001   0.071
     rd                        0.251    0.029                         0.140    0.034      26%
    cvrd                       -0.008   0.002                        -0.006    0.000      -10%
   mvp                                             1.405   0.001
  mkttv                                            0.697   0.000      0.726    0.000      40%
     dip                                          -0.664   0.053     -0.842    0.008       1%
     def                                          -0.025   0.021      0.019    0.001      -2%
   term                                           -0.004   0.176
   confi                                          0.0002   0.446
    disp                                          -0.604   0.473
 Adj. R2 35%                   56%                 57%                80%




                                                  51
Table 7. Idiosyncratic volatility across G7 countries?

OLS regressions of aggregate idiosyncratic variances in the G7 countries over 1983-2008,
computed using the CLMX model, on various determinants, labeled on the left. The annual data
time series for idiosyncratic variance are average over monthly observations in the year. More
details about data are in Appendix B. We show 3 regressions, one for each group of variables,
and a final one based on a paring down technique picking significant variables from the previous
regressions, discussed in the text. All regressions include country dummies. All p-values are
based on a standard error using 12 Newey-West lags and they are adjusted by clustering on
years. All regressions include country dummies. The last column reports the covariance
decomposition described in the text.


                   I. Corporate             II. Business
                     cash flow             cycle variables        III. Significant variables
                                                                                          Cov
                 coef.      p-value      coef.         p-value   coef.       p-value decomp
   vwroe        -0.129       0.299
  vwvroe        0.129        0.918
   cvroe        0.232        0.234
    veps        0.042        0.153
   indto        0.133        0.007                               0.062      0.033     0.3%
   maba         0.024        0.000                               0.022      0.000     25.2%
  vmaba         0.004        0.000                               0.002      0.036      7.2%
  cvmaba        0.003        0.088                               0.003      0.001     11.3%
   mkttv                                  0.455        0.000     0.459      0.000     31.1%
    dgdp                                 -0.035        0.225
     def                                 -0.001        0.702
    term                                 -0.004        0.094     -0.002     0.061     0.4%
  usmvp                                  1.180         0.001     0.916      0.002     24.4%
  Adj. R2        41%                      56%                     69%
Adj. R2 (w/o
  country
 dummies)        27%                      41%                    55%




                                                  52
Table 8. Correlations for the annual idiosyncratic volatility data

This table reports correlations for annual data of aggregate idiosyncratic variance time-series.
Panel A reports correlation coefficients for the original annual idiosyncratic variance data. Panels
B and C report correlation coefficients for the residuals from the final regression in the subgroup
model and Hendry model, respectively. The bold font indicates that the correlation is significant
at the 5% level using a Pearson test.

Panel A. Correlation for original annual idiosyncratic variances

                CANADA        FRANCE       GERMANY           ITALY        JAPAN            UK
 FRANCE            77%
GERMANY            85%           67%
  ITALY            14%           55%             2%
  JAPAN            75%           78%            74%           29%
    UK             87%           74%            90%           19%           86%
    US             92%           81%            82%           21%           84%           89%

Panel B. Correlation for regression residuals from the subgroup model

                CANADA        FRANCE       GERMANY           ITALY        JAPAN            UK
 FRANCE            65%
GERMANY            35%           -26%
  ITALY            20%           71%            -52%
  JAPAN            49%           42%             44%          16%
    UK             67%            32%            53%          -8%           76%
    US             34%            28%            27%          26%           16%           15%

Panel C. Correlation for regression residuals from the Hendry model

                CANADA        FRANCE       GERMANY           ITALY        JAPAN            UK
 FRANCE            38%
GERMANY            52%           -22%
  ITALY             3%           66%            -37%
  JAPAN            34%           37%            47%           22%
    UK             71%           33%            54%            2%           63%
    US             30%           27%            37%           20%           13%           12%




                                                 53
Figure 1. Idiosyncratic variances over time

In Panel A, we plot the time-series idiosyncratic variance for the U.S. sample. The sample period
is January 1964 to December 2008. In Panels B and C, we plot the time-series idiosyncratic
variances for G7 countries. The aggregate idiosyncratic variance measures using CLMX and FF
are defined in equations (2) and (4), respectively. The U.S. return data are obtained from CRSP,
and the return data for other countries are obtained from DataStream. All the returns are
denominated in U.S. dollars. All variance time-series statistics are annualized.

Panel A. U.S. (daily data)
  0.6


  0.5


  0.4


  0.3


  0.2


  0.1


   0
   196401     197101     197801           198501          199201              199901        200601

                                      clmx firmivvw      ff idiovw

Panel B. G7 (daily data, CLMX)
  0.6


  0.5


  0.4


  0.3


  0.2


  0.1


   0
   198006      198506        199006             199506               200006            200506

                        CA     FR         GE       IT      JP        UK        US




                                                           54
Figure 2. Regime probabilities for U.S. idiosyncratic variances
This figure reports the smoothed probability of being in regime 2 for the U.S., using a regime
switching model defined in equations (6) and (7). The model is estimated over sample period
1964 – 2008. The variables  CLMX
                              2
                                    and  FF
                                          2
                                              are the aggregate firm level idiosyncratic variances,
as defined in equations (2) and (4), respectively.

Panel A.  CLMX
           2



   1

  0.9

  0.8

  0.7

  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

   0
   196402   196902   197402   197902   198402     198902        199402   199902       200402

                     NBER recession    vw smoothed probability in regime 2 for CLMX



Panel B.  FF
           2



   1

  0.9

  0.8

  0.7

  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

   0
   196402   196902   197402   197902   198402     198902        199402   199902       200402

                     NBER recession    vw smoothed probability in regime 2 using FF




                                                           55
Figure 3. Recursive trend tests for the U.S.

This figure reports the t-dan test statistics for the U.S., which is estimated for a sample period
starting in 1964:01 and ending between 1970:04 (the first high variance regime) and 2008:12.
The variable  CLMX
                 2
                      is the annualized aggregate firm level idiosyncratic variance computed using
daily data, as defined in equation (2). The horizontal line at 2.05 represents the critical value for
the trend test (t-dan test) to be significant at 5%.

  6


  5


  4


  3


  2


  1


  0
  197004   197404   197804   198204   198604      199004      199404   199804   200204   200604

                                               t-dan       2.05




                                                                  56
   Appendix

1. Robustness

1.1 Weekly International Data and Alternative Risk Specification

    We consider an alternative risk model using both global and local factors. Since the global
factors are constructed with data from diﬀerent countries, and due to the well-known non-
synchronous trading problem, we estimate this model using weekly data.
   We calculate firm idiosyncratic volatilities according to a modified Fama-French type model
that we call WLFF (for Fama-French model with world and local factors), as in BHZ (2009). The
model has six factors, a global market factor (   ), a global size factor (  ), a global
value factor (  ), a local market factor (  ), a local size factor ( ) and a local
value factor ( ):

                = 0 + 1    + 2    + 3                   (1)

                         +4   + 5   + 6   + 
                                                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                    

where week  belongs to a six-month period  To allow for time-varying betas, the above model
is re-estimated every six months with weekly data. The combination of local and global factors
with time-varying betas makes the model flexible enough to fit stock market comovements in
an environment where the degree of global market integration may change over time. The local
factors are in fact regional factors, where we consider three regions: North America, Europe and
the Far East. The global market factor,    , is calculated as the demeaned value-weighted
sum of returns on all stocks. To calculate   , we first compute  () for each country ,
which is the diﬀerence between the value-weighted returns of the smallest 30% of firms and the
largest 30% of firms within country . Factor    is the demeaned value weighted sum of
individual country  ()s. Factor    is calculated in a similar manner as the demeaned
value weighted sum of individual country  ()s using high versus low book-to-market values.
The local factors (     ) are all orthogonalized relative to the global factors
(        ). BHZ (2009) show that this model fits the comovements between
country-industry portfolios and country-style portfolios very well, and it also captures firm level
comovements well.


                                                 1
   We calculate the idiosyncratic variance for stock  as the variance of the residual of the
regression, that is, 2 (
                          
                                ), and we then aggregate to the country level:


                                                 
                                                 X
                                  2   =           2 (
                                                                  
                                                                       
                                                                           )                     (2)
                                                 =1

where week  belongs to the six-month period . The weight  is computed from firm ’s relative
market capitalization at the end of the last six-month period, and  represents the number of
firms within one country.
   Table A1 Panel A reports trend test results for the 23 developed countries. We fail to detect
a significant time trend for any country, using either the t-dan test or the t-ps1 test.


1.2 Equal Weighting

    In Panels B and C of Table A1, we examine the time-series behavior of equally weighted
idiosyncratic variances. We focus on the U.S. idiosyncratic variance over 1964 - 2008, computed
from daily data. Since the results for the other developed countries are very similar, we do not
report those to save space. In Panel B, the time-series mean of the equal-weighted CLMX (FF)
idiosyncratic variance is 0.4308 (0.3530), which is much larger than its value-weighted counterpart
of 0.0800 (0.0697). Obviously, the returns of smaller firms are much more volatile. In Panel C, we
report the Vogelsang trend test results. Interestingly, the equally weighted idiosyncratic variance
time series shows a larger trend coeﬃcient than the value-weighted time series, but the coeﬃcient
is now insignificantly diﬀerent from zero for all cases, even for the 1964-1997 period. This, in fact,
confirms the results in CLMX. Equally weighted idiosyncratic variances are too noisy to allow
strong statistical inference.


1.3 Subsamples

    In Panel D, we report trend test results for diﬀerent groups of stocks. We first separate firms
based on the listing exchange: NYSE/AMEX vs. Nasdaq. Next, we separate large/small firms
using the median NYSE market cap; we separate old/young firms using the median firm age; and
we separate high price/low price stocks using $10 as a benchmark.
   For the 1964-1997 samples, we mostly confirm the results in BCL, finding trends for most
sub-groups but not for the NYSE stocks. For the longer sample, we fail to reject the null of “no
trend” for all subgroups.

                                                       2
2. Residual specification tests

2.1 The tests

We apply the specification test to three models:

                        (1)     :    = 0 + 1 −1 + 
                                                                                               (3)

               (1 1)        :     = 0 + 1 −1 + 
                                                                                               (4)

                             =  2|−1 (
                                                 ) =  + 0 −1 + 1 (
                                                                         −1   )2               (5)

                                :    = (1 −  ) +  −1 +   
                                                                           = 1 2            (6)

where  is the variable of interest. In the estimation, all error terms are assumed to be normally
distributed. We examine specification tests for the residuals,   which should have the following
first order moment conditions:

                                                 ( ) = 0                                     (7)

                                           ( −1 ) = 0                                      (8)

Because  is forced to have mean zero in the autoregressive specification, but may not have zero
mean in other specifications, we work with demeaned residuals. For second order moments, we
have
                                        (2 ) −  2|−1 ( ) = 0

where 2|−1 = ( ) for the AR(1) model, and  2|−1 =  for the GARCH(1,1) model. More-
over, the serial correlation of the squared residuals also ought to be zero, for which we use

                                [(2 −  2|−1 )(2−1 −  2−1|−2 )] = 0                   (9)

Finally, we test the correct specification of the higher order moments for the residuals. For
skewness, we have
                                        [3 − ( 2|−1 )32 ] = 0;                           (10)

for kurtosis, we have
                                          [4 − [ 2|−1 ]2 ] = 0                           (11)

   The calculations are more complicated for the RS model. We start by computing the residuals
conditioning on the  − 1 information in an obvious manner:

                                                      3
         
            =  − ( | − 1) =  − 1 [(1 − 1 )1 + 1 −1 ] − 2 [(1 − 2 )2 + 2 −1 ]         (12)

where 1 denotes the probability of being in regime 1, and 2 the probability of being in regime
2. We compute residuals using ex-post (smoothed) probabilities.
   To shorten future formulas, we define

                    |−1 = ( | − 1)

                             = 1 [(1 − 1 )1 + 1 −1 ] + 2 [(1 − 2 )2 + 2 −1 ]

                        1 = (1 − 1 )1 + 1 −1 − |−1 

                        2 = (1 − 2 )2 + 2 −1 − |−1 

   The conditional variance is as follows,

                                    2|−1 = 1  21 + 2  22 + 1 12 + 2 22                         (13)

Now we can compute the moment conditions (7) through (9) as before.
   The formulas for the unscaled skewness and kurtosis are in Timmermann (2000) and become,
for our model:

           |−1 = [1 (3 21 1 + 13 ) + 2 (3 22 2 + 23 )]                                      (14)

            |−1 = [1 (3 41 + 14 + 6 21 12 ) + 2 (3 42 + 24 + 622 22 )] − 3( 2|−1 )2    (15)

Consequently, the last two moment conditions are,

                                       [( 3
                                            ) − |−1 ] = 0                                          (16)

                                        [( 4
                                             ) − |−1 ] = 0                                         (17)

   To test all moment conditions jointly, we always use a Newey-West (1987) covariance matrix
with 12 lags.


2.2 Empirical Results

It is important to verify that a RS model indeed fits the data well, and that it fits the data better
than simpler alternative models. We conduct a number of specification tests on the residuals of
various RS models, and we report tests for two alternative benchmark models: an AR(1) model in


                                                          4
levels with Gaussian shocks, and an AR(1) model with a GARCH(1,1) volatility process. Our tests
examine 6 moment conditions: the mean and one auto-correlation of the residuals; the variance and
one auto-correlation of the squared residuals; and the third and fourth order moments. Section 2.1
of this appendix details the tests. While we use asymptotic critical values, it is quite likely that
our tests over-reject in small samples. This is particularly true if the data are actually generated
from a non-linear RS model (see e.g. Baele, Bekaert and Inghelbrecht (2010)).
   Table A.2 reports the results. The three panels investigate, respectively, the mean and variance
specification; the higher moments conditions; and finally in Panel C, a joint test. For the RS
models, we use smoothed ex-post probabilities to infer residuals and model moments. We present
both the long sample for U.S. for the two risk models and the short sample for all countries.
Focusing on the joint test first, the regime switching model clearly outperforms the two other
models. Over the 9 tests, there is not a single 1% rejection, and only three 5% rejections (for
Canada, Germany and the UK). The AR model on the other hand is always rejected at the 1%
level, whereas the GARCH model features only two cases for which it is not rejected at the 5%
level (short sample U.S., and long sample U.S. when the FF model is used). The sources of the
rejections diﬀer across countries, and in some cases the joint test simply adds power to the two
sub-tests.
   In unreported work, we also apply the three models to the logarithm of the variance. Such a
model keeps the variance everywhere positive and the non-linear transformation may suﬃciently
reduce the outliers in the data to make the idiosyncratic variance process more amenable to linear
modeling. However, none of the models performs better in logarithmic form, so that we restrict
further analysis to the untransformed variances.


3. Accounting Data Details

In this appendix, we describe how we construct the accounting data variables as in Table 5.
   All return on equity (ROE) related variables are computed as in Wei and Zhang (2006), where
the variable “vwroe” is the value weighted average of firm level return on equity; the variable
“vwvroe” is the value weighted average of the 12-quarter time-series variance of firm level return
on equity, and the variable “cvroe” is the cross-sectional variance of the firm level return on equity.
   Irvine and Pontiﬀ (2008) focus on competition measures. We follow their procedure and
compute “veps” as the cross-sectional variance of shocks to earnings per share (EPS). The shocks


                                                  5
to EPS are computed using a pooled auto-regressive regression of year-to-year changes in quarterly
EPS. To be more specific, the dependent variable is the annual diﬀerence in earnings per share,
 () −  ( − 4) at the firm level, where  is current quarter, and the independent variables
are  ( − 1) −  ( − 5),  ( − 2) −  ( − 6), and  ( − 3) −  ( − 7). This
regression attempts to adjust for seasonality in the EPS data. By computing the cross-sectional
variance, this approach implicitly adjusts for the market average level of shocks to EPS, in the
same spirit of “cvroe”. We also compute industry turnover as the cross-sectional average at firm
level for industry entries and exits each month.
   Cao, Simin and Zhao (2007) consider growth options as an explanation. The most successful
variable in their paper is “maba”, the value weighted average of firm level market assets over
book assets. We also compute “vmaba” as the value weighted average of the 12-quarter time-
series variance of firm level market assets over book assets. Following the same reasoning as for
“cvroe” and “veps”, we also compute “cvmaba” as the cross-sectional variance of firm level market
assets over book assets.
   For the R&D expenditure variables, quarterly data on R&D is not reported by the majority
of firms in U.S. So we rely on annual data on R&D. Following Comin and Mulani (2006), for
each quarter, we take the corresponding fiscal year R&D, and then divide by the quarter’s total
revenues (sales). We also compute the cross-sectional dispersion in R&D (denoted cvrd) across
firms each quarter, and it has a correlation of 80% with R&D expenditures.
   Notice that all U.S. accounting data are from Compustat, and thus they are quarterly data
on a firm-by-firm basis. However, because firms have diﬀerent fiscal year end’s, the data are
spread out over the year. To ensure that each month represents the full sample of firms, we follow
the procedure in Irvine and Pontiﬀ (2008) and for each month average the accounting measures
of that month and the previous two months. We apply the same methodology to all quarterly
accounting data.
   For the international data, we compute ROE, maba, and competition related variables as we
do for U.S. firms. The variable “vwroe” is the value weighted average of the annual firm level
return on equity; the variable “vwvroe” is the value weighted average of the 3-year time-series
variance of the annual firm level return on equity, and one variable “cvroe” is the cross-sectional
variance of the firm level return on equity each year. We compute “veps” as the cross-sectional
variance of shocks to annual earnings per share, where the shocks are estimated using a pooled



                                                   6
regression within each country. To be more specific for the pooled regression, the dependent
variable becomes  () −  ( − 1) where  is current year, and the independent variable is
 ( − 1) −  ( − 2). The variable “maba” is the value weighted average of the annual firm
level market assets over book assets. We also compute “vmaba” as the value weighted average of
the 3-year time-series variance of annual firm level market assets over book assets, and “cvmaba”
as the cross-sectional variance of annual firm level market assets over book assets.


4. Hendry Regressions

We also use a model reduction techniques inspired by Hendry and Krolzig’s (2001) PCGets
(“general-to-specific”) system. We first run a regression using all possible regressors (21 in to-
tal). We then verify the joint significance of all the variables that are not significant at the 10%
level. The joint test also uses a 10% significance level. If the joint test fails to reject that a set
of variables is insignificant, we eliminate these variables from the regression and then run one
final regression with the remaining variables. However, if the set of variables is jointly significant,
we increase the significance level by 5% for both the individual and joint tests. The results are
reported in Table A3. We end up using a 10% significance level.
   The model is less parsimonious than the subgroup model reported in the paper, as it retains
14 variables, all significant at the 1% level except for industry turnover, which is significant at
5% level. After eliminating the useless variables, the adjusted 2 remains unchanged at 86%,
and the coeﬃcients of the retained variables remain similar to what they were in the full model.
Interestingly, the signs for the compositional variables “psmall” (the relative importance of small
firms) and “pyoung” (the relative importance of young firms) are now as expected. However,
psmall contributes a negative 13% to the explained variation, whereas psmall’s contribution is
about 12%. Together, they explain nothing. General turnover does enter significantly and explains
about 10% of the total explained variation. The four corporate variables retained in the subgroup
model survive here too with about the same economic and statistical significance. Two additional
corporate variables are retained as well (earnings variability, veps, and the cross-sectional variance
of the return on equity, cvroe). While veps explains 7% of the variation in idiosyncratic variances,
cvroe’s contribution is a negative 11%. Maba (growth options) remains very important with a
44% contribution to the overall variance of the fitted value. As for the business cycle variables, the
variance premium, the term spread and the confidence index are the additional business variables


                                                  7
in the final model. The term spread and confidence index are not economically important, but
the variance premium accounts for 10% of the explained variation. Its coeﬃcient is in line with
expectations. The default spread is no longer significant, but industrial production and the total
market variance still are. They have similar coeﬃcients as they do in the subgroup model, and
similar economic significance as well, with the market variance now contributing 32% of the total
explained variation.


5. Other Tables

    The Tables A4 to A6 and Figure A1 depict results and analysis that is adequately summarized
in the main text.




                                                8
Table A1. Robustness checks: global model idiosyncratic volatilities and equal weighted
idiosyncratic variances

Panel A reports trend test results for 23 countries idiosyncratic volatilities time series, using the
Vogelsang (1998) t-PS1 test and the Bunzel and Vogelsang (2008) t-dan test. The 5% critical
value (two sided) for t-dan is 2.052, and for t-ps1 is 2.152. The variable  WLFF
                                                                               2
                                                                                     is the aggregate
firm level idiosyncratic variances, as defined in equation (1) in the appendix. In Panel B, we
report summary statistics for equally weighted aggregate idiosyncratic volatilities for the U.S.
sample, and the sample period is January 1964 to December 2008. In Panel C, we report trend
test results for U.S. idiosyncratic variance time-series, using the trend tests described above. We
report results for both  CLMX
                           2
                               and  FF
                                      2
                                         . In Panel D, we report trend test results for different
groups of stocks, using  CLMX
                          2
                               . We separate large/small firms using median NYSE market cap;
we separate old/young firms using median firm age; and we separate high price/low price stocks
using $10 as a benchmark. We compute idiosyncratic variances using the CLMX and FF model.
In Panels A, C and D, we use a pre-whitened model for the t-dan test. Coefficients in Panels A, C
and D are multiplied by 100. All variance time-series statistics are annualized.

Panel A. Trend test for WLFF model idiosyncratic volatilities

                                                         WLFF
                                                          2


                           b-dan              t-dan               b-ps1             t-ps1
 CANADA                     0.218              0.07              0.234               0.16
 FRANCE                    -1.495             -0.18              -1.294             -0.44
 GERMANY                    1.019              0.01               1.089              0.10
 ITALY                     -2.566             -0.91              -2.212             -1.08
 JAPAN                      0.234              0.02               0.223              0.07
 U.K.                      -0.154             -0.01              -0.120             -0.04
 U.S.                       0.003              0.00              0.255              0.03
 AUSTRALIA                 -0.732             -0.03              -1.089             -0.36
 AUSTRIA                    1.533              0.47              1.756              0.66
 BELGIUM                   -0.705              0.00              -0.866             -0.06
 DENMARK                   -0.693             -0.04              -0.682             -0.16
 FINLAND                   -1.951             -0.01              -1.909             -0.07
 GREECE                    -1.877             -0.05              -1.673             -0.19
 HK                        -0.669             -0.36              -0.778             -0.55
 IRELAND                    0.180              0.01              -0.337             -0.06
 NETHERLANDS                0.261              0.01               0.295              0.06
 NEW ZEALAND               -1.683             -0.33              -1.798             -0.82
 NORWAY                    -0.805             -0.59              -0.975             -1.33
 PORTUGAL                  -3.383             -0.12              -4.344             -0.77
 SINGAPORE                  0.049              0.01              -0.001             0.00
 SPAIN                     -2.733             -0.16              -3.007             -0.71
 SWEDEN                    -0.748             -0.40              -0.514             -0.35
 SWITZERLAND               0.526               0.04              0.759               0.19



                                                  9
Panel B. Summary statistics for the U.S. equally weighted idiosyncratic variances

                                   CLMX
                                    2
                                                                             FF
                                                                              2


        N              Mean                  Std                Mean                     Std
       540             0.4308              0.3036               0.3530                 0.2436

Panel C. Trend test for the U.S. equally weighted idiosyncratic variances

                             1964-1997                                  1964-2008
               b-dan      t-dan    b-ps1         t-ps1      b-dan    t-dan    b-ps1        t-ps1
      2
       CLMX    0.154       1.20       0.135      0.87       0.109    0.23          0.142    0.71
       2
        FF     0.132       0.52       0.116      0.59       0.088    0.17          0.118    0.60

Panel D. Trend test for the U.S. subsamples using  CLMX
                                                    2




                                   1964-1997                             1964-2008
                  b-dan         t-dan    b-ps1      t-ps1    b-dan    t-dan    b-ps1        t-ps1
 Nasdaq           0.051          4.32    0.053      2.93     0.025     0.54    0.047        0.96
 NYSE/AMEX        0.002          0.79    0.003      0.67     0.007     0.52    0.006        0.71
 Large            0.006          2.68    0.006      1.77     0.012     0.82    0.012        1.02
 Small            0.039          3.54    0.031      1.51     0.047     0.71    0.054        1.01
 Old              0.007          3.14    0.008      2.26     0.009     0.81    0.010        1.24
 Young            0.031          5.23    0.028      3.74     0.034     0.81    0.043        1.22
 High price       0.008          3.45    0.007      2.43     0.012     0.94    0.013        1.19
 Low price        0.080          3.68    0.064      1.27     0.068     0.79    0.085        1.07




                                                  10
Table A2. Regime switching model specification tests

AR stands for a first-order autoregressive model with homoskedastic errors. GARCH is the AR model with the variance of the error
term following a GARCH(1,1) process. RS stands for the regime switching model discussed in the text. The moment conditions for
RS models are computed following Timmermann (2000). We use smoothed ex-post regime probabilities to compute moments. In
Panel A, we use 4 moments: mean, variance, and first order autocorrelations for both. In Panel B, we consider 2 moments: skewness
and kurtosis. In Panel C, we combine the 6 moments in Panels A and B. To compute the p-values of the Wald tests, we always use 12
Newey-West lags to adjust for serial correlation.

Panel A. Mean, variance and auto-correlations
        US
       long         US long       CA              FR         GE           IT               JP         UK          US
     CLMX             FF         CLMX           CLMX        CLMX        CLMX             CLMX        CLMX        CLMX
       Wald    p     Wald    p    Wald    p      Wald   p    Wald    p   Wald    p        Wald    p   Wald   p    Wald    p
AR    14.902 0.5%   24.566 0.0% 15.425 0.4%     6.432 16.9% 23.428 0.0% 13.834 0.8%      10.323 3.5% 7.353 11.8% 11.250 2.4%
GARCH 9.317 5.4%     5.961 20.2% 14.643 0.6%    9.738 4.5% 2.382 66.6% 14.158 0.7%       11.100 2.6% 5.319 25.6% 5.078 27.9%
RS    7.037 13.4%    7.088 13.1% 4.639 32.6%    1.251 87.0% 9.526 4.9% 5.381 25.0%       0.849 93.2% 0.456 97.8% 3.336 50.3%

Panel B. Skewness and kurtosis
       US
      long       US long       CA          FR                  GE             IT         JP        UK                 US
     CLMX          FF         CLMX       CLMX                 CLMX          CLMX       CLMX       CLMX               CLMX
      Wald    p   Wald    p    Wald   p   Wald    p            Wald   p      Wald   p   Wald   p   Wald   p           Wald   p
AR    3.709 15.7% 3.898 14.2% 6.458 4.0% 10.823 0.5%          5.699 5.8%    9.280 1.0% 7.159 2.8% 6.089 4.8%         4.259 11.9%
GARCH 3.493 17.4% 3.795 15.0% 5.297 7.1% 4.706 9.5%           1.110 57.4%   6.247 4.4% 9.602 0.8% 2.914 23.3%        3.203 20.2%
RS    2.432 29.6% 4.656 9.8% 5.362 6.9% 2.763 25.1%           9.487 0.9%    5.509 6.4% 7.216 2.7% 1.610 44.7%        2.375 30.5%

Panel C. All
        US
       long       US long          CA           FR             GE           IT             JP         UK          US
      CLMX          FF            CLMX        CLMX            CLMX        CLMX           CLMX        CLMX        CLMX
       Wald    p   Wald    p       Wald    p   Wald    p       Wald    p   Wald    p      Wald    p   Wald    p   Wald    p
AR    25.948 0.0% 32.537 0.0%     24.609 0.0% 24.428 0.0%     26.516 0.0% 22.814 0.1%    21.562 0.2% 25.122 0.0% 21.869 0.1%
GARCH 18.937 0.4% 10.005 12.4%    24.211 0.1% 18.603 0.5%     19.906 0.3% 22.117 0.1%    17.508 0.8% 13.356 3.8% 12.501 5.2%
RS    9.543 14.5% 9.279 15.9%     12.771 4.7% 3.563 73.6%     14.650 2.3% 10.668 9.9%    11.310 7.9% 13.106 4.1% 6.530 36.7%



                                                               11
Table A3. What drives U.S. idiosyncratic volatility? Hendry regression

OLS regressions of aggregate idiosyncratic variances in the U.S. over 1964-2008, computed
using the CLMX model, on various determinants, labeled on the left. We show the regression on
all variables simultaneously and a regression reduced by the general-to-specific paring down
technique, described in the appendix. In the last row, we also report a joint Wald test checking
whether the variables dropped from regression I to II are jointly significantly different from zero.
All p-values are based on standard errors, using 12 Newey-West lags. The last column reports
the covariance decomposition described in the text.


                      I. All variables                   II. Significant variables from I
                 coef.             p-value            coef.           p-value       Cov decomp
 pyoung          0.772              0.001            0.879            0.000             12%
  psmall         11.058             0.007            13.467           0.000            -13%
   plow          -0.332             0.808
  lowto          -0.001             0.807
     dto         0.023              0.003            0.024            0.009             10%
  vwroe          0.086              0.836
 vwvroe          1.332              0.733
  cvroe          -0.846             0.008            -0.952           0.000            -11%
   veps          0.009              0.001            0.007            0.003             7%
   indto         0.003              0.005            0.004            0.013             1%
  maba           0.093              0.000            0.101            0.000             44%
  vmaba          -0.008             0.148
 cvmaba          0.000              0.529
     rd          0.173              0.001            0.134            0.000             23%
    cvrd         -0.006             0.000            -0.006           0.000             -8%
   mvp           0.534              0.000            0.542            0.000             10%
  mkttv          0.642              0.000            0.633            0.000             32%
     dip         -0.512             0.003            -0.510           0.005              1%
     def         0.004              0.446
   term          -0.010             0.000            -0.011           0.000              2%
   confi         -0.001             0.000            -0.001           0.000             -9%
    disp         -0.092             0.807
Adj. R2           86%                                 86%
Wald test for eliminated variables from regression I to II
                p-value             68.0%




                                                12
Table A4. Analyzing Model Residuals

Panel A reports specification tests of the regression model residuals and residuals for a RS model
on the residuals. The residuals are computed using the subgroup model and Hendry model. We
conduct specification tests on the RS model residuals using both ex ante and ex post
probabilities, denoted RS ante and RS post, respectively. The moment conditions include: mean,
variance, autocorrelation of first order for both mean and variance, skewness and kurtosis. To
compute the p-value of the Wald tests, we always use 12 Newey-West lags to adjust for serial
correlation. The parameters of the RS model are reported in Panel B. We estimate the RS model
as in Table 3, except we re-parameterize to ensure 0 <  1 <  2 . The last row in Panel B reports
the Wald test of 1 =  2 . In Panel C, we re-estimate the subgroup and Hendry models, by
allowing all coefficients to be linear functions of a dummy variable in the form of
b  b0  b1dummy . We refer to b0 as the “constant” coefficient, and b1 as the “dummy”
coefficient. The dummy variable takes a value of 1 if the CLMX smoothed probability in regime
2 is higher than 0.5.

Panel A. Specification test on the residuals and RS residuals of the residuals

     Models                  Subgroup Model                          Hendry Model
                          Wald          p-value                  Wald          p-value
     residuals            25.71              0.0%                 22.26            0.1%
      RS post              9.34              15.5%                7.21             30.2%

Panel B. Regime switching model for the regression residuals

                             Subgroup model                           Hendry model
                          coef.           std.                   coef.             std.
        1                -0.002              0.003              -0.001             0.002
        2                0.009               0.011               0.006             0.008
        b1                0.705               0.042               0.632             0.044
        b2                0.413               0.121               0.237             0.136
       1                 0.013               0.001               0.012             0.001
       2                 0.049               0.005               0.044             0.005
       p11                0.985               0.009               0.982             0.011
       p 22               0.929               0.062               0.903             0.097
   P( 1   2 )         34.9%                                   42.4%




                                                13
Panel C. Allowing for Regime 2 Dummy in Regression Coefficients

                                   Subgroup Model                                      Hendry Model
                            b0                         b1                      b0                        b1
                   coef.         p-value      coef.         p-value   coef.         p-value     coef.         p-value
    pyoung                                                            0.028          10.5%      0.383          41.4%
    psmall                                                            0.200          6.3%       27.402         2.8%
      plow
     lowto
       dto                                                            -0.016         0.4%       0.057          0.0%
     vwroe
    vwvroe
     cvroe                                                            0.390          0.2%        0.754        43.1%
      veps                                                            0.000          73.4%       0.016         0.2%
     indto          0.003         2.3%        0.003         48.6%     0.002          0.3%       -0.004        47.2%
     maba           0.066         0.0%        0.067         0.7%      0.058          0.0%       0.087         0.2%
    vmaba
    cvmaba
       rd          0.002         96.9%         0.170        1.7%       0.047        31.0%        0.116         3.8%
      cvrd         -0.003        0.6%         -0.003        20.0%     -0.002        3.4%        -0.011        0.0%
      mvp                                                              0.479         0.0%       -0.295        29.9%
     mkttv          0.526        0.0%          0.674        0.0%       0.514         0.0%        0.664         0.0%
       dip         -0.189        20.3%        -0.642        50.4%     -0.070        55.9%       -0.780        16.4%
       def          0.011        0.5%          0.039        12.7%
      term                                                            -0.005         0.0%       -0.015         0.5%
     confi                                                            -0.001         0.0%       -0.001         4.4%
    Adj. R2         89%                                                94%




                                                                14
Table A5. Idiosyncratic volatility across G7 countries: Hendry regression

OLS regressions of aggregate idiosyncratic variances in the G7 countries over 1983-2008,
computed using the CLMX model, on various determinants, labeled on the left. The annual data
time series for idiosyncratic variance are averaged over monthly observations in the year. More
details about the data are in the Appendix text, Section C and Table 5. We show the regression
on all variables simultaneously and a regression reduced by the general-to-specific paring down
technique, described in the Appendix text. In the last 4 rows, we also report joint Wald tests of
whether all variables dropped step by step from regression I to II are significantly different from
zero. All regressions include country dummies. All p-values are based on standard errors using
12 Newey-West lags and they are adjusted by clustering on years. All regressions include
country dummies. The last column reports the covariance decomposition described in the text.



                        I. all variables                      II. significant variables
                    coef.            p-value          coef.            p-value        Cov decomp
   vwroe           -0.142              3.8%          -0.146             2.6%             7.1%
  vwvroe           -0.498             43.6%
   cvroe            0.119             24.5%
    veps            0.039              6.6%         0.050              0.5%              0.1%
   indto            0.081              0.8%         0.083              0.6%             0.3%
   maba             0.024              0.0%         0.024              0.0%             24.6%
  vmaba             0.002              2.3%         0.002              2.1%              6.7%
  cvmaba            0.003              0.1%         0.003              0.1%             10.1%
   mkttv            0.457              0.0%         0.475              0.0%             29.9%
   dgdp            -0.027             29.2%
     def            0.000             91.2%
    term           -0.003              2.2%        -0.002              3.5%             0.4%
  usmvp             0.859              0.2%         0.832              0.5%             20.6%
  Adj. R2          0.71%                            71%
  R2 (w/o
  country
 dummies)           59%                             59%
Wald test for eliminating vwvroe, cvroe, dgdp, and def at 10%
                  p-value          0.678




                                                15
Table A6. Idiosyncratic volatility across G7 countries: beta model

OLS regressions of aggregate idiosyncratic variances in the G7 countries over 1983-2008, computed using the CLMX model, on
various determinants, labeled on the left. The annual data time series for idiosyncratic variance are average over monthly observations
in the year. More details about the data are in Appendix B. We show 5 regressions: one for each group of variables, one for all
regressors, starting with the betas with respect to the U.S. variance, a final subgroup one based on a paring down technique selecting
significant variables from the full regression. All p-values are based on standard errors using 12 Newey-West lags and are adjusted for
clustering on years. The last column for the fifth regression reports the covariance decomposition described in the text.

                         only US idio      all corp + US idio    all cycle + US idio   all variables + US idio    Hendry variables + US idio
                       coef.     p-value    coef.      p-value    coef.      p-value      coef.       p-value    coef.     p-value cov decomp
             vwroe                         -0.105       7.1%                             -0.079       12.4%
            vwvroe                         0.862       23.2%                              0.886       21.6%
             cvroe                         -0.046      51.4%                              0.064       33.9%
              veps                         0.077        0.2%                              0.064        0.6%      0.078     0.0%      1.5%
             indto                         0.080        3.6%                              0.059        3.0%      0.045     5.4%      1.4%
             maba                          0.005       12.0%                              0.001       78.0%
            vmaba                          0.001        1.4%                              0.002        0.0%      0.001     0.0%     -14.1%
            cvmaba                         0.000       92.6%                              0.000       94.5%
             mkttv                                               0.538        0.0%        0.505        0.0%      0.514     0.0%      -0.1%
             dgdp                                                0.018       15.6%        0.012       35.3%
               def                                               0.001       32.8%        0.001       25.1%
              term                                               -0.002      0.2%        -0.002        1.3%      -0.002    1.6%      0.4%
            usmvp                                                0.510        0.1%        0.679        0.0%       0.703    0.0%      18.6%
dca          usidio   0.549       0.0%     0.681       0.0%      0.575        0.0%        0.628        0.0%       0.612    0.0%      34.4%
dfr          usidio   0.375       0.0%     0.539       0.0%      0.399        0.0%        0.478        0.0%       0.446    0.0%       7.0%
dge          usidio   0.339       0.0%     0.472       0.0%      0.343        0.0%        0.407        0.0%       0.371    0.0%       2.7%
dit          usidio   0.318       0.0%     0.476       0.0%      0.283        0.0%        0.405        0.0%       0.331    0.0%       0.8%
djp          usidio   0.610       0.0%     0.809       0.0%      0.562        0.0%        0.728        0.0%       0.673    0.0%      47.5%
duk          usidio   0.306       0.0%     0.534       0.0%      0.310        0.0%        0.442        0.0%       0.374    0.0%      -0.1%
adj. R2               59.6%                64.9%                 67.5%                   71.1%                   71.5%




                                                                     16
Figure A1. Regime probabilities for G7 countries
This figure reports the smoothed probability of being in regime 2 for the G7 countries other than the U.S., using a regime switching model defined
in equations (7) and (8). The model is estimated over sample period 1980 – 2008, country by country. The variable  CLMX2
                                                                                                                            is the aggregate firm
level idiosyncratic variance, as defined in equation (2), estimated using daily data.
                               CA                                                                      FR

  1                                                               1

 0.9                                                             0.9

 0.8                                                             0.8

 0.7                                                             0.7

 0.6                                                             0.6

 0.5                                                             0.5

 0.4                                                             0.4

 0.3                                                             0.3

 0.2                                                             0.2

 0.1                                                             0.1

  0                                                               0
  198008    198508    199008        199508   200008    200508     198008         198508     199008          199508     200008     200508



                               GE                                                                       IT

  1                                                                    1

 0.9                                                               0.9

 0.8                                                               0.8

 0.7                                                               0.7

 0.6                                                               0.6

 0.5                                                               0.5

 0.4                                                               0.4

 0.3                                                               0.3

 0.2                                                               0.2

 0.1                                                               0.1

  0                                                                    0
  198008    198508    199008        199508    200008    200508         198008      198508     199008          199508     200008     200508



                               JP                                                                       UK

  1                                                                    1

 0.9                                                               0.9

 0.8                                                               0.8

 0.7                                                               0.7

 0.6                                                               0.6

 0.5                                                               0.5

 0.4                                                               0.4

 0.3                                                               0.3

 0.2                                                               0.2

 0.1                                                               0.1

  0                                                                    0
  198008    198508    199008        199508    200008    200508         198008      198508     199008          199508     200008     200508




                                                                                17
