                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            EXTERNAL CAPITAL STRUCTURES AND OIL PRICE VOLATILITY

                                          John D. Burger
                                        Alessandro Rebucci
                                        Francis E. Warnock
                                     Veronica Cacdac Warnock

                                        Working Paper 16052
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16052


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




The authors thank Lutz Kilian for providing an update of his oil shocks series, Philip Lane and Gian
Maria Milesi-Ferretti for providing an update of their External Wealth of Nations dataset, Chandar
Henry at the Bank of Jamaica for official data on Jamaica IIP, Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi for research
assistance, and for helpful comments Eduardo Cavallo, Shelton Nicholls, Andy Powell, and seminar
participants at the IDB, the 2009 Business, Banking, and Finance Conference, the 2009 LACEA Conference,
and the 2010 AEA Meetings. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by John D. Burger, Alessandro Rebucci, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
External Capital Structures and Oil Price Volatility
John D. Burger, Alessandro Rebucci, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 16052
June 2010
JEL No. F3,G10

                                              ABSTRACT

We assess the extent to which a country’s external capital structure can aid in mitigating the macroeconomic
impact of oil price shocks. We study two Caribbean economies highly vulnerable to oil price shocks,
an oil-importer (Jamaica) and an oil-exporter (Trinidad and Tobago). From a risk-sharing perspective,
a desirable external capital structure is one that, through international capital gains and losses, helps
offset responses of the current account balance to external shocks. We find that both countries could
alter their international portfolio to provide a more effective buffer against such shocks.


John D. Burger                                       Francis E. Warnock
Loyola University Maryland                           Darden Business School
4501 N. Charles Street                               University of Virginia
Baltimore MD 21210-2699                              Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
jburger@loyola.edu                                   and NBER
                                                     warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
Alessandro Rebucci
Inter-American Development Bank                      Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Research Department                                  Darden Business School
1300 New York Av., Washington, DC 20577              University of Virginia
USA                                                  Box 6550
alessandroR@iadb.org                                 Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
                                                     vwarnock@virginia.edu
1. Introduction

        Oil-dependent economies, whether importers or exporters, are particularly exposed to large

and volatile shocks associated with oil price fluctuations. The macroeconomic impact of these

shocks is pervasive, encompassing the government’s budget process and balance sheet, as well as

private-sector production and consumption decisions. Insuring against the impact of energy price

shocks directly through futures or over-the-counter derivative contracts is difficult, as the typical

maturity of available instruments is either too short or the insurance is too costly for small, below-

investment-grade economies. It is therefore useful to think about additional insurance and risk-

sharing mechanisms that can enhance the set of available (and tradable) financial instruments.

        A country’s external capital structure (the composition of foreign assets and liabilities by

instrument, currency, and maturity) can mitigate or exacerbate the impact of external shocks. For

instance, foreign currency exposure may turn an otherwise benign real exchange response to an oil

price shock into a negative financial shock with undesirable contractionary effects. Similarly, the

maturity structure and instrument composition of foreign assets and liabilities (i.e., debt versus

equity or particular sectors of world equity markets as opposed to others) may significantly affect

the response to energy price and other external shocks.

        In this paper we examine how, in two countries that are strongly impacted by oil price

fluctuations (Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago), the external capital structure did in the past—and

can in the future—mitigate the repercussions of oil shocks. We explore questions related to three

aspects of the external capital structure: its characteristics, its role in adjustment to oil price shocks,

and possible future modifications. What are the characteristics of the existing external capital

structure? Is there a substantial currency mismatch? What is the role of the external capital structure

in the adjustment to oil shocks? Does it aid in the international sharing of the risk oil shocks pose,



                                                     1
or does it hinder risk sharing? How can the existing capital structure be modified to ameliorate the

transmission of oil shocks? The main findings are as follows.

               Characteristics of External Capital Structures. Trinidad and Tobago does not have a

                currency mismatch, as its foreign currency assets exceed its foreign currency liabilities.

                In contrast, Jamaica has a substantial currency mismatch, with large dollar liabilities

                unmatched by dollar assets or export revenues. This basic fact about Jamaica’s external

                capital structure is important to keep in mind.

               Role of the External Capital Structure in Response to Oil Price Shocks. In both countries

                there is little evidence that the existing capital structures help mitigate the impact of oil

                shocks.1 To be sure, in some cases the countries’ international portfolios are such that

                reactions of the current account balances are partially offset by profits or losses on

                international positions. But there is much scope for improvement.

               Possible Future Modifications to External Capital Structures. The international

                portfolios of both countries can be altered in ways that would ameliorate the impact of

                oil shocks. For Jamaica, the currency composition of official reserves could be shifted

                toward currencies that tend to do well when the oil price increases. Identifying which

                currencies will be positively correlated with the oil price in the future is difficult; in the

                recent past, the euro, Canadian dollar, and Norwegian krone performed well when oil

                prices increased. For Trinidad and Tobago, increased exposure to foreign assets that are

                negatively correlated with the oil price could mitigate the impact of oil price shocks on

                its external accounts. One way this could be attained is by investing some of the assets in

                its oil stabilization fund in transportation equities of advanced economies.


1
    This is contrary to the Kilian et al. (2009) finding for broad aggregates of oil exporting and importing countries.

                                                               2
       We note at the outset a caveat. Part of our analysis depends on having accurate time series of

capital gains and losses on international positions. But time series of the capital gains component of

a country’s international investment position generally do not exist; see Curcuru et al. (2008) and

Curcuru et al. (2009) on difficulties inherent in creating such time series for the United States. In

this study we estimate capital gains series as the difference between changes in the net foreign asset

position and the current account balance, as is common in the literature. However, without actual

data on international capital gains we have no way of knowing that the resulting time series are

accurate. Finer analysis awaits better quality data on the gains and losses on international

investment positions.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some basic economic

indicators for each economy. Section 3 describes and analyzes the current capital structure of

Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago using the most recent data available, with an eye toward

identifying potential currency mismatches. In section 4 we empirically investigate the impact of oil

shocks on external accounts. The time series results are interpreted with a particular focus on any

evidence of international risk-sharing. In section 5 we discuss ways in which each country’s capital

structure could be altered. We present our conclusions in section 6.



2. Basic indicators of the importance of oil in each economy

       We chose for this study two Caribbean countries that have a high degree of trade openness

and whose economies are dependent, in different ways, on the world oil market. Basic indicators

show that Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago (henceforth TT) are potentially vulnerable to oil

market swings.



                                                   3
        For Jamaica, much of its persistent current account deficit, which has averaged roughly 10

percent of GDP over the past decade, owes to oil imports. When oil prices were very low (for

example, in 1998), oil contributed only about 25 percent to the overall trade deficit. However, in

years with more elevated oil prices the contribution of oil to Jamaica’s trade deficit often exceeded

50 percent (top panel of figure 1). Moreover, Jamaica receives, in effect, a double penalty; not only

does its trade deficit worsen when oil prices surge, but its currency also tends to depreciate against

the U.S. dollar (bottom panel of figure 1), potentially exacerbating the impact of adverse oil shocks

on its economy through adverse balance sheet effects that could outweigh any traditional

expenditure switching effect of the depreciation. Finally, at least recently, when the Jamaican dollar

depreciated, its spreads also widened (figure 2).

        The economy of TT, an oil exporter, is also intimately linked to the oil market. As the oil

portion of the trade balance increases, so does overall GDP (figure 3); the correlation between the

two series is a strikingly high 0.92. Moreover, dollar-based oil prices have translated almost directly

into TT$ revenues; while the TT$ is a floating currency, it has fluctuated little vis-à-vis the U.S.

dollar over the past decade (figure 4).2 Spreads in TT are largely in line with, if not a little lower

than, overall EMBI spreads, and as such increased sharply in the last quarter of 2008 (figure 5).



3. Existing capital structures and currency mismatches

        In this section we present information on each country’s external capital structure and

evaluate potential currency mismatches.

        The destabilizing potential of currency mismatches is well understood, so we will not

discuss it in detail here. Briefly, a mismatch in the currency denomination of credit flows and debt


2
 Note that while in nominal effective terms the TT$ has been depreciating since 2002, in real CPI-based terms (not
shown) the TT$ has been appreciating since 2004.

                                                          4
stocks creates a vulnerability that has been linked to the increased likelihood and severity of

financial crises. For example, if a country borrows heavily in foreign-currency-denominated debt, a

currency depreciation would immediately and severely worsen government and private balance

sheets and greatly increase debt repayment burdens. Firms would in turn reduce investment,

generating pressure for further currency depreciation.3

3.1 The Currency Mismatch Measure

        We use as a summary measure the Goldstein and Turner (2004) Aggregate Effective

Currency Mismatch (AECM), which compares measures of foreign currency debt to the ability to

service the debt via export revenue. The currency mismatch measure requires information on a

country’s foreign assets and liabilities as well as the currency composition of its debt components.

For foreign assets and liabilities, we focus on bonds, deposits, and loans—the items that matter

most for the assessment of potential currency mismatches—although we also present information

on other assets and liabilities (notably, portfolio equity and FDI). For debt, we are most interested in

ascertaining the extent to which it is denominated in foreign currencies. The greater share of debt

that is foreign currency denominated, the greater are the potential currency mismatch and

vulnerability to negative shocks.

        AECM is calculated as follows:



(1)      AECM  ( NFCA / XGS ) * ( FC %TD ) , if NFCA<0,

         AECM  ( NFCA / MGS ) * ( FC %TD) , if NFCA>0,




3
  The link between the contractionary effect of currency crises and the initial currency mismatch has been emphasized
in both theoretical and empirical literature. See for instance, Goldstein and Turner (2004), Krugman (1999), Jeanne and
Zettelmeyer (2002), Schneider and Tornell (2004), and Aghion et al. (2004).

                                                           5
where NFCA is net foreign currency assets (specifically, those related to bonds, deposits, and

loans), XGS is exports of goods and services, MGS is imports of goods and services, and FC%TD is

foreign currency debt as a percentage of total debt (expressed as a percent).4

           AECM is formulated as a shorthand measure of a country’s vulnerability to a large currency

depreciation. Typically the focus is on net foreign currency debtors (NFCA<0), who in a currency

crisis would face the possibility of rising debt burdens. An increasingly negative NFCA combined

with greater reliance on foreign currency debt signals a more vulnerable currency mismatch. Note

that a positive NFCA is scaled by imports, but when negative NFCA is scaled by exports (because a

depreciation generates a positive boost to exports, which should somewhat offset the adverse

balance sheet effect). Finally, as specified in (1), if NFCA is positive then so is AECM, indicating a

situation in which a depreciation of the domestic currency would generate positive balance sheet

effects.

           As defined in equation (1) the AECM has no upper or lower bounds. That said, in Goldstein

and Turner (2004), in a sample of 22 emerging markets over the 1994-2002 period, the AECM

measure generally falls in the -40 to +80 range, except for Argentina’s extreme AECM values. In

2002 the AECM was -310 for Argentina, negative but less extreme for countries like Brazil (-33)

and Turkey (-41), moderately positive (between 0 and +10) for many Asian emerging market

countries (but not for the Philippines), and sizeable and positive for the commodity exporters

Venezuela and Peru.5 AECM will be a larger negative value (depicting a worse currency mismatch)




4
  We follow Goldstein and Turner (2004) and calculate NFCA as the sum of cross-border BIS deposits and international
reserves net of liabilities to BIS banks, international bonds and multilateral loans outstanding. Note that FDI and
portfolio equity are excluded from NFCA, which is not dissimilar from their treatment in Lane and Shambaugh (2009)
measures of the currency composition of international positions.
5
  As an example of an AECM calculation, consider 2002 information for Brazil. It had an NFCA of -$75 billion,
supported by annual exports of roughly $69 billion. Thus, NFCA/XGS was -1.1. Compounding that was foreign-
currency debt ratio (FC%TD) of about 31 percent. Multiplying NFCA\XGS by 31 yields the AECM of -33.

                                                         6
when NFCA is a larger negative value, exports are smaller, and the percentage of foreign currency-

denominated debt is larger.

3.2 Jamaica’s External Capital Structure

        Table 1 summarizes 2005-2008 data on Jamaica’s capital structure. Panel (A) provides

details on foreign assets and liabilities. We focus on bonds, deposits, and loans, but for

completeness we also include data on equities and FDI. Over this four-year period Jamaica’s

increasingly negative net foreign asset (NFA) position surpassed negative 100 percent of GDP.

Jamaica’s foreign assets have been stable (albeit with modest growth in FDI assets and portfolio

equity assets); the large and growing negative NFA position owes to rapidly growing foreign

liabilities (a doubling of cross-border bond and bank debt, with noteworthy increases in

international bond issuance and international liabilities to BIS reporting banks), with both private

and public sectors having increased their foreign borrowing.6 FDI liabilities, which account for

roughly half of Jamaica’s foreign liabilities, have also risen, albeit not at the rate of bond and bank

debt growth.

        In panel (B) we provide information on the level and composition of total debt liabilities

based on data reported by the Bank of Jamaica. Domestic public sector debt outstanding has been

relatively stable in recent years and is denominated mostly in domestic currency, with the portion

that is US$-denominated falling from 17 percent in 2005 to 12 percent in 2008. The proportion of

floating-rate debt has increased significantly, reaching 62 percent of the domestic public debt as of

December 2007. Adding in public sector liabilities from panel (A), including multilateral loans,

total public sector debt liabilities, at 121 percent of GDP, is very high by international standards.




6
 Based on the underlying bond issuance data, 80 percent of the outstanding international bonds are denominated in U.S.
dollars, with the remaining 20 percent denominated in euros.

                                                          7
        With a large amount of public sector floating-rate debt, the government budget is exposed to

significant interest-rate risk. For example, in the recent global financial crisis, Jamaican spreads

rose dramatically, widening even relative to the EMBI Global benchmark (figure 2). Increased risk

aversion by global investors has translated into higher borrowing costs for all emerging markets,

and especially those with high debt levels (such as Jamaica). The combination of a large debt

burden and floating rate securities could thus prove problematic.

        Although Jamaica’s domestic public sector debt is denominated primarily in Jamaican

dollars, the rise in external debt (liabilities from panel (A)) has resulted in an increasing reliance on

foreign currency borrowing. Combined with strong domestic credit growth (a third of which is in

foreign currency), this has resulted in an increase in the share of total liabilities denominated in

foreign currency from 49 percent at the end of 2005 to an estimated 57 percent in September 2008.

        Jamaica’s AECM is negative and deteriorating (panel (C)), signaling an increasingly

dangerous currency mismatch. Its AECM for 2007 is sizeable not because exports are small (they

are large at roughly 50 percent of GDP), but because the NFCA is large and negative (at almost -

40% of GDP) and 54 percent of its debt is foreign-currency denominated. Jamaica, with a large and

growing negative foreign exchange exposure on top of a large and growing debtor position, is

vulnerable to significant depreciations of the Jamaican dollar versus the U.S. dollar.

3.3 Trinidad and Tobago’s External Capital Structure

        Table 2 summarizes data on TT’s capital structure over the 2005-2008 period.7 TT’s overall

NFA position is negative, but over the past four years has improved, largely due to the high oil

prices (panel (A)). Growth in foreign assets has been driven by international reserves (including

accumulations in the oil stabilization fund) and cross-border bank deposits. A large proportion of


7
 Data on TT’s debt structure are not always readily accessible. Unless otherwise noted, data are from the BIS-IMF-
OECD-World Bank External Debt Hub.

                                                          8
external liabilities is FDI. Excluding FDI, which we do when computing AECM, TT is considered a

net creditor in foreign currency.

       TT’s total debt-to-GDP and public debt-to-GDP ratios have improved in recent years (panel

(B)). The public debt-to-GDP ratio is currently low by international standards at 17 percent. Much

of TT’s debt is denominated in foreign currency, mostly the U.S. dollar. However, TT does not

suffer from a currency mismatch if one considers that TT’s main asset is oil, which trades

internationally in U.S. dollars. The TT$, a floating currency, fluctuates little against the U.S. dollar

and is largely unchanged over the past decade (figure 4).

       TT’s NFCA is positive ($8.6 billion in 2007) and, hence, so is its AECM. With a positive

NFCA, from a currency mismatch perspective foreign-currency-denominated debt is not

problematic, as a currency depreciation would lead to capital gains on external positions. In other

words, TT’s positive AECM indicates a long position in foreign currencies (the U.S. dollar in

particular), which could be stabilizing even in the face of shocks large enough to require a one-off

exchange rate adjustment. TT’s long position in foreign exchange is rare for an emerging economy,

as net long positions are more common in the advanced economies (Lane and Shambaugh 2009).



4. Oil shocks and external accounts

       We measure the effects of oil shocks on each country’s external accounts and analyze the

macroeconomic impact using the methodology of Kilian et al. (2009). The methodology involves

two steps: (i) trace fluctuations in the real price of crude oil to the underlying demand and supply

shocks in the crude oil market, and (ii) assess the response of each country’s external accounts to

these shocks.




                                                    9
4.1 Identifying Oil Demand and Supply Shocks

         As in Kilian et al. (2009), following the identification strategy of Kilian (2009) we estimate

a structural VAR model based on monthly data for the vector time series zt , which consists of the

percent change in global crude oil production, a suitably detrended measure of global real economic

activity in industrial commodity markets, and the real price of crude oil.8 The monthly model allows

for two years worth of lags. The structural VAR representation of the model is



                                         24
(2)                        A0 zt     Ai zt i   t ,
                                        i 1




where  t denotes the vector of serially and mutually uncorrelated structural innovations. The

structural innovations are derived by imposing exclusion restrictions on A01 in et  A01 t .

Fluctuations in the real price of oil are attributed to three structural shocks: 1t , which denotes

shocks to the global supply of crude oil;  2 t , which captures shocks to the global demand for all

industrial commodities (including crude oil) that are driven by global real economic activity; and

 3t , which denotes an oil-market specific demand shock.9 We call these shocks oil supply shock,

aggregate demand shock and oil-specific demand shock, respectively.



8
  Analogous approaches have been employed to study the effect of oil demand and oil supply shocks on U.S. stock
markets (Kilian and Park 2008) and to study the relationship between the U.S. retail gasoline market and the global
crude oil market (Kilian 2008).
9
  The term global real economic activity used by Kilian et al. (2009) refers to real economic activity that affects
industrial commodity markets rather than the usual broader concept of real economic activity underlying world real
GDP or industrial output. This distinction is necessary because an increase in value added in the service sector, for
example, is likely to have a different effect on global demand for industrial commodities than an increase in
manufacturing. Unlike alternative measures of monthly global real activity such as indices of OECD industrial
production, this index captures the recent surge in demand for industrial commodities from emerging economies such as
China and India. See Kilian (2009) for a full discussion of the rationale and construction of this index. The oil-market
specific demand shock is designed to capture shifts in precautionary demand for crude oil that reflect increased concerns

                                                            10
         As in Kilian (2009), the assumptions are that (i) oil producers are free to respond to lagged

values of oil prices, real activity, and oil production in setting oil supply, but will not respond to oil

demand shocks within the same month, given the costs of adjusting oil production and the

uncertainty about the state of the crude oil market; (ii) increases in the real price of oil driven by

demand shocks that are specific to the oil market will not reduce global real economic activity in

industrial commodity markets within the month; and (iii) innovations to the real price of oil that

cannot be explained by oil supply shocks or aggregate demand shocks must be demand shocks that

are specific to the oil market. These assumptions imply a recursively identified model of the form:


                        e1tprod   a11 0              0   1oilt supply shock                  
                                                                                                
(3)               et   e2rea       a21 a22          0    2aggregate       demand shock
                                                                                                    .
                              t
                                                                     t
                        e3t   a31 a32
                             rpo
                                                        a33    3oilt  specific demand shock   
                                                                                                 


         This structural model postulates that the real price of oil (conditional on lagged values of all

variables) is determined by the intersection of the supply and demand curves for crude oil. Oil

demand shocks (which do not shift the oil supply curve) move the demand curve along the supply

curve, causing the real price of oil to change. The model also allows for oil supply shocks (e.g., an

unexpected oil supply disruption caused by a war or driven by an exogenous political decision) to

move the vertical supply curve along the downward-sloping demand curve, again causing the real

price of oil to change. All three types of shocks are allowed to affect the real price of oil within a

given month. The model further imposes that the shifts in the real price of oil triggered by oil-

market-specific demand shocks will not affect global aggregate demand within the same month.




about future oil supply shortfalls and that are by construction orthogonal to the other shocks. For other possible
interpretations, see Kilian (2009).

                                                             11
This assumption is consistent with the sluggish response of real aggregates to shocks in oil markets

documented in related literature.

        The response of the real price of oil to the three structural shocks (εjt, j=1,2,3) (from Kilian

2009) is reported in figure 6, which is from Kilian et al. (2009). Although all three responses are

ultimately transitory, the timing, persistence, and magnitude of the responses vary depending on the

source of the shock. An unanticipated increase in oil-market specific demand (such as an increase in

precautionary demand for oil) causes an immediate and persistent increase in the real price of oil

that is characterized by overshooting; an unanticipated increase in aggregate demand for all

industrial commodities causes a delayed, but sustained increase in the real price of oil; and an

unanticipated oil supply disruption causes a short-lived increase in the real price of oil within the

first year.

        In this study we are interested in assessing the effect of these oil demand and oil supply

shocks on external accounts. Because international data on external accounts for most countries are

available only at annual frequency, whereas the shocks implied by Kilian’s (2009) VAR model are

measured at monthly frequency, we follow Kilian et al. (2009) and construct annual measures of the

shocks by averaging the monthly structural innovations for each year:

                                            1 12
                                 ˆ jt        ˆ j,t ,i ,
                                           12 i 1
                                                              j  1,...,3 ,

where ˆ j ,t ,i refers to the estimated residual for the jth structural shock in the ith month of the tth year

of the sample. Although data for zt are available as far back as 1973, we lose two years worth of
observations in estimating the VAR model. Thus, the resulting annual shock series goes back to
1975.
        Figure 7, also from Kilian et al. (2009), plots ˆ jt , j  1,...,3, and illustrates that oil price

shocks are best thought of as composites of underlying demand and supply shocks. For example, the


                                                              12
oil price shock of 1979/80 is the result of the superimposition of three large positive aggregate

demand shocks in 1978, 1979, and 1980, a one-time spike in oil-specific demand in 1979 (at the

time of the Iranian Revolution, the Iranian hostage crisis and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan)

and an oil supply shock in 1980 (but interestingly not in 1979).

4.2 Estimation of Dynamic Effects

           We then estimate the impact of the oil shocks on external balances, as in Kilian et al. (2009).

Let yt denote a stationary macroeconomic aggregate of interest such as the share of the trade

balance in GDP. We want to estimate the response of yt to demand and supply shocks in the crude

oil market. We treat the shocks ˆ jt , j  1,...,3, as predetermined with respect to yt , which rules out

contemporaneous feedback from yt to the shocks.10 This assumption allows us to examine the

dynamic effects of the shocks on the dependent variable based on regressions of the form:



                                               h
(4)                               yt   j   ijˆ jt i  u jt ,    j  1,...,3 ,
                                              i 0




where u jt is a potentially serially correlated error and ˆ jt is a serially uncorrelated shock. The

parameter h is chosen to coincide with the maximum horizon of the impulse response function to

be computed. In practice, we set the maximum horizon of the impulse responses to five years.11 By

definition the impulse response is dyt 1 d ˆ j ,t . Differentiation yields that dyt d ˆ j ,t i   ij . Under



10
     In contrast, strict exogeneity imposes in addition Granger non-causality from yt to ˆ jt . Pre-determinedness and strict
exogeneity in our regression framework correspond to the notion of weak and strong exogeneity. For further discussion
see Cooley and LeRoy (1985) and Engle et al. (1983).
11
   Given that oil demand may adjust sluggishly to higher oil prices, it would be desirable to know how much external
balances adjust at longer horizons, but the short time span of data currently available precludes the required econometric
analysis.

                                                                  13
stationarity, it follows that dyt d ˆ j ,t i  dyt i d ˆ j ,t   ij . So, to the extent that the oil market is

predetermined with respect to macroeconomic aggregates and external accounts, which is a

reasonable assumption in our application, a simple OLS regression can be used to consistently

estimate the responses of external accounts.

         Note however that this equation-by-equation approach is built on the premise that the shock

series ˆ jt are mutually uncorrelated. Whereas the structural VAR residuals ˆ jt are orthogonal by

construction, the annual shocks ˆ jt , obtained by aggregating over time monthly estimates, need not

be orthogonal. In our application, their correlation is very low, ranging from -0.11 to 0.07, making it

reasonable to treat these shocks as orthogonal.

         In the empirical analysis we consider the following six measures of each country’s external

balance:


        Non-Oil Merchandise Trade Balance (TBNO)
        Oil Trade Balance (OILBAL)
        Merchandise Trade Balance (TB) ≡ TBNO + OILBAL
        Current Account (CA) ≡ TB + Service Trade Balance + Income Balance
        Change in Net Foreign Assets (dNFA)
        Capital Gains on Foreign Assets and Liabilities (CAPGAIN) ≡ dNFA + CA 12


         The Net Foreign Assets (NFA) data are from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), updated

through 2007.13 All other data (including the trade balance, current account, and GDP data) are

from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook database. All external accounts are expressed in current

12
   As CAPGAIN is calculated as the change in the net foreign asset position less the current account balance, it is
subject to the caveats raised in Curcuru et al. (2008) and Curcuru et al. (2009). For Jamaica and TT, as well as for
almost every country, there is a great need for directly measured—and, hence, presumably more accurate—data on
international capital gains.
13
   Note that there is some discrepancy between Jamaica’s published IIP data (available from 2005 to 2007) and the Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti estimates (available for a much longer time period).

                                                           14
U.S. dollars and, as is conventional, are normalized by nominal GDP for the empirical analysis.

Estimation is for the period from 1980 through 2007.14

4.3 The Responses of External Balances

         Figure 8 shows the responses of external balances to oil shocks. We first discuss the

responses of the oil trade balance, non-oil trade balance, and current account (panels (a) and (b)).

Then we analyze whether the responses of capital gains are such that they help offset responses of

the current account in a way that mitigates movements in the net foreign asset position (panels (c)

and (d)).

         The responses of external balances to oil-specific demand and supply shocks are constructed

from regression model (4). All responses have been normalized such that a given shock implies an

increase in the real price of oil. The impulse response functions are framed by one-standard error

bands based on estimated OLS standard errors.15,16

         4.3.1 Trade and Current Account

         The estimated responses of oil trade balance, non-oil trade balance, and current account for

the three types of oil shocks are shown in panel (a) for Jamaica and panel (b) for TT. Many of the

explanations for the estimated responses are intuitive.

         For example, for Jamaica any shock that increases the real price of oil has a negative impact

on the oil trade balance (first row of panel (a)). Global demand and oil-specific demand shocks have

a sustained and significant impact, while the impact of oil supply shocks is short-lived, not

14
   A more detailed description of these aggregates is provided in the data appendix of Kilian et al. (2009).
15
   A correction of the standard errors for autocorrelation and possibly heteroskedasticity could be considered here given
the fact that the econometric model omits any dynamics.
16
   In background research work not reported in the paper (but available from the authors), we have used similar
methodology to explore the impact of natural disasters and non-fuel commodity price shocks on Jamaica’s external
accounts. We found no significant effects. Natural disasters data are from EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International
Disaster Database (http://www.em-dat.net). The alternative non-fuel commodity price series used, including food prices,
are from the IMF’s IFS database. Finding that these other shocks have limited impact on Jamaica’s external accounts
need not imply that they are unimportant for Jamaica’s welfare and growth, but more likely mean that the methodology
used in the paper to assess their impact might not be suitable for those shocks.

                                                          15
surprisingly because the oil price response to the supply shock (figure 6) was short-lived. The

responses for the non-oil trade balance are less precise, and thus the responses for the overall

current account balance are similar to, but not exactly same as, the responses from the oil trade

balance. Overall, we can conclude that demand shocks that raise the real price of oil lead to a

deterioration in Jamaica’s current account.

         For TT, the most precisely estimated responses (those that are significantly different zero)

are for the global demand shock (second column of panel (b)). A global demand shock that raises

the real price of oil leads to an improvement in not only the oil trade balance but also the non-oil

trade balance and, hence, also the current account balance.17 Responses to other shocks are

imprecisely measured and therefore less conclusive.

         4.3.2 Current Account, Capital Gains, and the Net Foreign Asset Position

         To ascertain whether the external capital structures help mitigate the impact of oil price

shocks, we focus on the current account, capital gains on international positions, and the NFA

position. Theory suggests that in a financially integrated world oil-importing nations should take

equity stakes in oil-exporting countries in order to hedge against oil price volatility (see for instance

Ghironi et al. 2007). This hedging would allow oil-importing countries to earn capital gains,

offsetting the impact of the shock on the oil trade balance and the current account, thereby shielding

the NFA from oil prices fluctuations. In our analysis, we ask the following. Does the capital gains

path tend to offset the response of the current account in a way that mutes the overall response of

external national wealth (the NFA position)?



17
   As Kilian et al. (2009) discuss, under incomplete markets, a surplus in the oil trade balance should lead to a deficit in
the non-oil trade balance. However, in the case of the global demand shock, the same shock that drives the oil price up
can also drive the non-oil trade balance up if the global demand increase affects other export sectors of the economy.
What we thus estimate and observe is the net effect. It is not surprising, therefore, to see that the response of the non-oil
trade balance compounds the effect on the oil trade balance.

                                                             16
       Panels (c) and (d) show the responses of the current account, capital gains, and the NFA

position to oil price shocks. For Jamaica, in one case, global demand shocks, capital gains move in

the opposite direction of the current account responses, at least to some extent (panel (c), second

row). But overall, shocks that raise the real price of oil tend to negatively impact Jamaica’s NFA

position, suggesting that for the most part Jamaica’s external capital structure is not mitigating the

impact of these shocks. For TT, there is some evidence, not overwhelming, that for demand shocks

(the middle and bottom rows) the external capital structure mitigates some of the impact on the

NFA position (panel (d)).



5. Potential Modifications of the External Capital Structures

       In this section we discuss potential portfolio modifications that may help to better hedge

against the risks posed by oil price shocks (based on the analysis from Section 4) and external

shocks more generally (based on the information from table 1 and 2). We stress that what follows is

a cursory analysis that should be seen as illustrative.

5.1 Jamaica

       To shield the net foreign asset position in the face of an oil price shock, capital gains should

offset current account movements. Because Jamaica’s current account balance is strongly affected

by oil price changes (top panel of figure 9), to do so the country portfolio (or capital structure)

should be strongly and positively correlated with oil prices.

       Oil prices have a strong positive correlation with a wide range of assets. One example is oil

company stocks or oil-related exchange-traded funds (ETFs); another, perhaps more feasible, is a

fund based on a broad equity index of a country that has both substantial oil production and deep

equity markets (e.g., Norway or Canada). Given the close link between the oil price and currency



                                                   17
movements of oil-exporting countries (Chen and Rogoff, 2003), one concrete way to implement

such a portfolio would be to switch part of the official reserve portfolio into these fully convertible

currencies.

       Jamaica’s current capital structure shows its vulnerability to currency fluctuations (table 1).

In theory, a country with a procyclical exchange rate could hedge domestic output fluctuations by

taking long positions in foreign currencies. This hedging, consistent with Lane and Shambaugh

(2010), would provide an appreciating foreign asset during domestic economic contractions.

Unfortunately, Jamaica—like many other emerging economies—displays no such evidence of

access to international risk sharing via this channel. As figure 1 showed, the Jamaican dollar tends

to depreciate during troubled macroeconomic times but, at the same time, the data in table 1

indicate that Jamaica has a short position in foreign currency, not the preferred long position.

       Given Jamaica’s vulnerability to both oil price and exchange rate shocks, it might be able to

take advantage of the recent tight positive relationship between the US$/euro exchange rate and oil

prices (bottom panel of figure 9). Whether this tight relationship will hold in the future is debatable.

If it were to persist, increasing the allocation of euro-denominated assets in its foreign portfolio

would help reduce fluctuations in its net foreign asset position and might ameliorate its currency

mismatch. More direct ways to address Jamaica’s currency mismatch include reducing foreign

currency borrowing, increasing trade (greater exports would reduce the magnitude of a negative

AECM), and increasing local bond market development (a higher local currency share in total debt

reduces the magnitude of the AECM).

5.2 Trinidad and Tobago

       While TT’s current capital structure shows no substantial vulnerability to currency

fluctuations (table 2), the response of capital gains on foreign assets and liabilities (CAPGAIN) to



                                                   18
the various oil market shocks suggests that TT’s external capital structure can be altered to better

shield the net foreign asset position against oil supply and oil-specific demand shocks. For TT, a

portfolio that would hedge against the macroeconomic effects of oil shocks would have a strong

negative correlation with oil prices, as the current account balance is tightly related to oil prices (top

panel of figure 10).

         For assets that are negatively related to oil prices, one might consider the U.S. dollar. The

U.S. dollar (bottom panel of figure 10) shows, at least in recent years, a tight (negative) relationship

with oil prices, but this correlation might not hold in the future. If it does, to limit fluctuations in the

net foreign asset position TT might increase its long U.S. dollar position. But holding dollar-

denominated assets would not suffice, as the TT$ fluctuates little with the U.S. dollar. Alternatively,

assets that might have the same desirable characteristic of being negatively correlated with oil

prices include a broad index of transportation stocks and, more directly, exchange traded funds that

are constructed to co-move negatively with oil prices.18



6. Conclusion

         In this paper we have described the external capital structures of Jamaica and TT and

analyzed how these structures did in the past—and could in the future—mitigate or exacerbate the

impact of external shocks. We examined the capital structures and evaluated potential currency

mismatches, and analyzed the response of external accounts to different types of oil shocks.19

         The analysis of Jamaica’s external capital structure highlighted many vulnerabilities due to

large and growing negative foreign exchange exposure combined with a large and growing debtor


18
   It is likely that the Heritage and Stabilization Fund tries to manage its portfolio with consideration such as this in
mind, although we have no definite way of knowing that.
19
   For Jamaica, we also investigated natural disasters and commodity price shocks, but found that these did not have a
systematic and significant impact on its external accounts.

                                                            19
position, much of which is financed by floating rate securities. Our investigation of the impact of oil

shocks on external accounts revealed a pattern of capital gains responses to oil shocks that does not

mitigate the macroeconomic effects of such shocks. A key consideration going forward is how the

composition of Jamaica’s (net) international portfolio might be altered so as to create capital gains

when there are shocks that increase the real price of oil. One potential way to ameliorate both

general vulnerability to currency movements and its response to oil shocks is to change the

composition of official reserves toward the euro and oil currencies such as the Norwegian krone and

the Canadian dollar.

        TT, in contrast, has no evident problem with currency mismatches, as its international assets

are larger than its liabilities (excluding FDI). That said, a key consideration going forward is how

the composition of TT’s (net) international portfolio might be altered in order to generate capital

gains when there are negative oil price shocks. Given that the TT$ fluctuates little with the U.S.

dollar, one way to mitigate the response to oil shocks is to add assets—such as a leveraged U.S.

dollar exchange-traded fund (ETF) or broad indexes of transportation shocks—that might co-move

negatively with the price of oil.

        The efforts that many oil-exporting countries have put into building oil stabilization funds

(such as TT’s Heritage Stabilization fund) recognize many of the issues we address. The debate on

the establishment of sovereign wealth funds highlights a desire of oil-exporting countries to increase

rate of returns from investments in good times. In contrast, we approach these issues by exploring

ways to insulate the economy from positive and negative contingencies, both over time and across

states of nature.




                                                  20
       Finally, we must restate an important caveat. In our analysis of the response of capital gains

to oil price shocks we use capital gains series estimated by combining information from IIP and

BOP data. Finer analysis awaits better data on capital gains.




                                                 21
References

Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, and A. Banerjee, 2004. “A Corporate Balance-Sheet Approach to
    Currency Crises”. Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 119 (November), pp. 6–30.
Bank of Jamaica, 2007. “Financial Stability Report”.
Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, 2008. Statistical Digest. Volume VII No. 1.
Chen Y. and K. Rogoff, 2003. “Commodity currencies”. Journal of International Economics 60(1):
    133-160.
Cooley, T.F., and S. LeRoy, 1985. “Atheoretical Macroeconometrics: A Critique”. Journal of
        Monetary Economic 16: 283-308.
Curcuru, S., T. Dvorak, and F. Warnock, 2008. “Cross-Border Returns Differentials”. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 123: 1495–1530.
Curcuru, S., C. Thomas, and F. Warnock, 2009. “Current Account Sustainability and Relative
    Reliability”. NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008.
Engle, R. F., D. F. Hendry, and J.-F. Richard, 1983. "Exogeneity". Econometrica 51, 277-305.
Ghironi, F., J. Lee, and A. Rebucci, 2007. “The Valuation Channel of External Adjustment”. NBER
    WP 12937.
Goldstein, M., & Turner, P., 2004. Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Markets.
    Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.
Jeanne, O., and J. Zettelmeyer, 2002. “‘Original Sin,’ Balance Sheet Crises, and the Roles of
    International Lending”. IMF Working Paper 02/234 (Washington: International Monetary
    Fund).
Kilian, L., 2009. “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks
    in the Crude Oil Market”. American Economic Review, 99(3): 1053-1069.
Kilian, L., 2008. “Why Does Gasoline Cost So Much? A Joint Model of the Global Crude Oil
        Market and the U.S. Retail Gasoline Market”. mimeo, Department of Economics, University
    of Michigan, http://www.personal.umich.edu/~lkilian/ paperlinks.html.
Kilian, L., and C. Park, 2008. “The Impact of Oil Price Shocks on the U.S. Stock Market”.
    International Economic Review (forthcoming).
Kilian, L., A. Rebucci, and N. Spatafora, 2009. “Oil Shocks and External Balances”. Journal
    International Economic, 77: 181-194.
Krugman, P., 1999. “Balance Sheets, The Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises” in International
    Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert P. Flood, Jr., ed. by P. Isard, A.
    Razin, and A. Rose (Norwell, Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic).
Lane, P.R., and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti, 2007. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and
    Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004”. Journal of
        International Economic 73: 223-250.
Lane, P.R., and J. Shambaugh, 2009. “Financial Exchange Rates and International Currency
    Exposures”. American Economic Review 99(1): 1-30.
Lane, P.R., and J. Shambaugh, 2010. “The Long or Short of it: Determinants of Foreign Currency
    Exposure in External Balance Sheets”. Journal of International Economics (forthcoming).
Schneider, M., and A. Tornell, 2004. “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial
    Crises”. Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 71 (July), pp. 883–913.




                                              22
Table 1: Summary Data for Jamaica’s Capital Structure
(in millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted)

                                                        end-05    end-06      end-07     Sept-08
 (A) Foreign Assets and Liabilities
 Foreign Assets                                          6561       7298        7511
  Cross-Border BIS Deposits                              2228       2434        2728        2692
  International Reserves less Gold                       2170       2318        1878        2257
  Foreign Direct Investment                              1861       1989        2173
  Portfolio Equity                                        301        557         731

 Foreign Liabilities                                    12942      15697       18347
  International Bonds                                    2999       3774        4260        4587
    Public Sector                                        2499       2824        3005        3512
  Liabilities to BIS Banks                               1294       2448        3345        4885
    Public Sector                                         531        703        1065        1623
  Multilateral Loans                                     1081       1025         940         900
  Foreign Direct Investment                              7389       8190        9513
  Portfolio Equity                                        179        259         289

 Net Foreign Assets                                      -6381     -8399      -10837
   NFA/GDP (%)                                             -68       -81        -101
 (B) The Structure of Debt
 Domestic Public Sector Debt                             7434       7992        7907        8006
   Floating rate (%)                                       49         56          62          62
   US$-indexed or US$-denominated (%)                      17         13          12          12

 Total Public Sector Debt                               11545      12544       12918       14041
  Public Debt/GDP (%)                                     123        121         121

 Private Domestic Bank Credit                            2299       2744        3248        3698
  Foreign Currency (%)                                     34         34          34          34

 Total Debt                                             15107      17983       19700       22076
   Foreign Currency (%)                                    49         51          54          57
   Total Debt/GDP (%)                                     161        173         184
 (C) The Currency Mismatch Measure
 NFCA                                                    -976      -2495        -3939
 Exports                                                 3994       4782         4928
 Aggregate Effective Currency Mismatch                    -12        -27          -43

Notes. Data are primarily from the BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank External Debt Hub, supplemented by Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2007) and local sources. Domestic public sector debt characteristics are provided by the 2007 Bank of
Jamaica Financial Stability Report; we assumed no changes for 2008. The foreign exchange share of private domestic
bank credit is based on February 2008 data from the BOJ. Net Foreign Currency Assets (NFCA) and Aggregate
Effective Currency Mismatch (AECM) are calculated as defined by Goldstein and Turner (2004) and therefore exclude
equity and FDI. Total Debt is estimated as the sum of International Bonds, Cross-Border Liabilities to BIS banks,
Multilateral Loans, Domestic Public Sector Debt, and Private Domestic Bank Credit.




                                                           23
Table 2. Summary Data for Trinidad and Tobago’s Capital Structure
(in millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted)

                                                        end-05      end-06   end-07   Sept-08
 (A) Foreign Assets and Liabilities
 Foreign Assets                                         10871       14078    16210
 Cross-border BIS Deposits                              4736        5918     7897     9118
 Int'l Reserves less Gold                               4961        6586     6694     8775
     Heritage and Stabilization Fund                    871         1396     1759
 Foreign Direct Investment                              1158        1556     1600
 Portfolio Equity                                       15          18       20

 Foreign Liabilities                                    19280       21226    22741
 International Bonds                                    2050        2496     2291     2284
     Public Sector                                      682         539      691      684
 Liabilities to BIS Banks                               3129        2947     3204     3886
     Public Sector                                      91          143      321      439
 Multilateral Loans                                     482         434      438      411
 Foreign Direct Investment                              13506       15246    16705
 Portfolio Equity                                       113         102      103

 Net Foreign Assets                                     -8409       -7148    -6531
   NFA/GDP(%)                                           -56         -39      -32
 (B) The Structure of Debt
 Domestic Public Sector Debt                            1816        1878     2089     2364
 Total Public Sector Debt                               3071        2994     3539     3898
   Public Debt/GDP (%)                                  20          16       17

 Private Domestic Bank Credit                           4272        4964     5935     6640

 Total Debt                                             11749       12720    13957    15585
   Foreign Currency (%)                                 48          46       43       42
   Total Debt / GDP (%)                                 78          70       67
 (C) The Currency Mismatch Measure
 NFCA                                                   4036        6627     8658
 Imports                                                5725        6843     7670
 Aggregate Effective Currency Mismatch                  34          45       48

Notes. Data are primarily from the BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank External Debt Hub, supplemented by Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2007) and local sources such as CBTT (2008). Net Foreign Currency Assets (NFCA) and Aggregate
Effective Currency Mismatch (AECM) are calculated as defined by Goldstein and Turner (2004) and therefore exclude
equity and FDI. Total Debt is estimated as the sum of International Bonds, Cross-Border Liabilities to BIS banks,
Multilateral Loans, Domestic Public Sector Debt, and Private Domestic Bank Credit.




                                                               24
Figure 1. Jamaica: Longer-Term Perspective on Oil, Trade, and the Exchange Rate

                    Jamaica: Oil Price and the Share of Oil in the Trade Balance
90%



80%

                                                                                                    oil price

70%



60%



50%



40%
                                             oiltrade/trade


30%



20%



10%



 0%
      1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007




                                                                   Jamaica: Exchange Rate (J$/US$)



            80                                                                                                                            80




            60                                                                                                                            60




            40                                                                                                                            40




            20                                                                                                                            20




               0                                                                                                                          0
                      85                                      90                                 95                        00        05
                     Sour ce: Inter national Monetar y Fund /Haver Analytics




                                                                                                                                25
                 60
                      62
                           64
                                66
                                     68
                                          70
                                               72
                                                    74
                                                         76
                                                              78
                                                                   80
                                                                        82
                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                       400
                                                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                                                             800
                                                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                                                                                                          1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1400
      1/2/2007
                                                                                                                         1/2/2007
      2/2/2007
                                                                                                                         2/2/2007
      3/2/2007
                                                                                                                         3/2/2007
      4/2/2007
                                                                                                                         4/2/2007
      5/2/2007
                                                                                                                         5/2/2007
      6/2/2007
                                                                                                                         6/2/2007
      7/2/2007
                                                                                                                         7/2/2007
      8/2/2007
                                                                                                                         8/2/2007
      9/2/2007
                                                                                                                         9/2/2007
     10/2/2007
                                                                                                                        10/2/2007

     11/2/2007
                                                                                                                        11/2/2007

     12/2/2007
                                                                                                                        12/2/2007

      1/2/2008
                                                                                                                         1/2/2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                        EMBI Spreads




      2/2/2008




26
                                                                                                                         2/2/2008

      3/2/2008                                                                                                           3/2/2008

      4/2/2008                                                                                                           4/2/2008

      5/2/2008                                                                                                           5/2/2008




                                                                             Exchange Rate: Jamaican Dollar/US Dollar
      6/2/2008                                                                                                           6/2/2008
                                                                                                                                                             Jamaica




      7/2/2008                                                                                                           7/2/2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 2. Jamaica: Recent Data on Spreads and the Exchange Rate




      8/2/2008                                                                                                           8/2/2008

      9/2/2008                                                                                                           9/2/2008
                                                                                                                                              Global




     10/2/2008                                                                                                          10/2/2008

     11/2/2008                                                                                                          11/2/2008

     12/2/2008                                                                                                          12/2/2008
Figure 3. Trinidad and Tobago’s Dependence on Oil




                                                      Trinidad and Tobago: GDP and Oil Trade Balance
                                                                             (millions of USD)


 20000


 18000


 16000


 14000


 12000


 10000


  8000


  6000

              corr=0.92
  4000


  2000


     0
      80

             81

                    82

                           83

                                  84

                                         85

                                                86

                                                       87

                                                              88

                                                                     89

                                                                            90

                                                                            91

                                                                                   92

                                                                                          93

                                                                                                 94

                                                                                                        95

                                                                                                               96

                                                                                                                      97

                                                                                                                             98

                                                                                                                                    99

                                                                                                                                           00

                                                                                                                                                  01

                                                                                                                                                         02

                                                                                                                                                                03

                                                                                                                                                                       04

                                                                                                                                                                       05

                                                                                                                                                                              06
    19

           19

                  19

                         19

                                19

                                       19

                                              19

                                                     19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                          19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                 27
Figure 4. A Longer-Term Perspective on Trinidad and Tobago’s Exchange Rate



                       Tr inidad and Tobago: Exchange Rate (TT$/US$)



  6. 75                                                                            6. 75



  6. 00                                                                            6. 00



  5. 25                                                                            5. 25



  4. 50                                                                            4. 50



  3. 75                                                                            3. 75



  3. 00                                                                            3. 00



  2. 25                                                                            2. 25
          85                 90                 95                  00   05
          Sour ce: Inter national Monetar y Fund /Haver Analytics




                        Tr in/Tobago: Nominal Effective Exchange Rate

                                                2005=100

   200                                                                             200



   180                                                                             180



   160                                                                             160



   140                                                                             140



   120                                                                             120



   100                                                                             100



    80                                                                             80
          85                 90                 95                  00   05
          Sour ce: Inter national Monetar y Fund /Haver Analytics




                                                                              28
                 6.00
                        6.05
                               6.10
                                      6.15
                                             6.20
                                                    6.25
                                                           6.30
                                                                  6.35
                                                                         6.40
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                                                                                                        500
                                                                                                                                                                                600
                                                                                                                                                                                      700
                                                                                                                                                                                            800
                                                                                                                                                                                                  900
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1000
      1/2/2007
                                                                                                                                1/2/2007

      2/2/2007                                                                                                                  2/2/2007

      3/2/2007                                                                                                                  3/2/2007

      4/2/2007                                                                                                                  4/2/2007

      5/2/2007                                                                                                                  5/2/2007

      6/2/2007                                                                                                                  6/2/2007

      7/2/2007                                                                                                                  7/2/2007

      8/2/2007                                                                                                                  8/2/2007

      9/2/2007                                                                                                                  9/2/2007

     10/2/2007                                                                                                                 10/2/2007

     11/2/2007                                                                                                                 11/2/2007

     12/2/2007                                                                                                                 12/2/2007

      1/2/2008                                                                                                                  1/2/2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                               EMBI Spreads




      2/2/2008                                                                                                                  2/2/2008

      3/2/2008                                                                                                                  3/2/2008

      4/2/2008                                                                                                                  4/2/2008

      5/2/2008                                                                                                                  5/2/2008


      6/2/2008                                                                                                                  6/2/2008

      7/2/2008                                                                                                                  7/2/2008




                                                                                Exchange Rate: Trinidad and Tobago (TT$/US$)




29
      8/2/2008                                                                                                                  8/2/2008
                                                                                                                                                                       Global




      9/2/2008                                                                                                                  9/2/2008
                                                                                                                                                           TT




                                                                                                                               10/2/2008
     10/2/2008

                                                                                                                               11/2/2008
     11/2/2008

                                                                                                                               12/2/2008
     12/2/2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 5. Trinidad and Tobago: Recent Data on Spreads and Exchange Rate
                                              Figure 6: Responses to One-Standard Deviation Structural Shocks
                                                        (with one and two standard deviation error bands)

                           Oil supply shock                                        Aggregate demand shock                                 Oil-specific demand shock
                      12                                                      12                                                     12




                      10                                                      10                                                     10




                      8                                                       8                                                      8




                      6                                                       6                                                      6
  Real price of oil




                                                          Real price of oil




                                                                                                                 Real price of oil
                      4                                                       4                                                      4




                      2                                                       2                                                      2




                      0                                                       0                                                      0




                      -2                                                      -2                                                     -2




                      -4                                                      -4                                                     -4




                      -6                                                      -6                                                     -6


                       0    5            10          15                        0       5            10      15                        0        5            10        15
                                Months                                                     Months                                                  Months

Notes: From Kilian et al. (2009), estimates based on model (3) described in the text. The confidence intervals were constructed using a recursive-
design wild bootstrap.


                                                                                            30
              Figure 7: Annual Averages of the Shocks that Determine the Real Price of Oil: 1975-2006
                                                             Oil Supply Shock
  1


0.5


  0


-0.5


 -1
 1975                 1980                  1985                 1990                  1995                 2000    2005


                                                         Aggregate Demand Shock
  1


0.5


  0


-0.5


 -1
 1975                 1980                  1985                 1990                  1995                 2000    2005


                                                        Oil-Specific Demand Shock
  1


0.5


  0


-0.5


 -1
 1975                 1980                  1985                 1990                  1995                 2000    2005




 Notes: From Kilian et al. (2009), annual averages of the structural shocks underlying the responses in Figure 6.



                                                                 31
Figure 8. Responses of External Balances to Oil Shocks

The figures show estimated responses of external balances to three types of oil shocks: oil supply, global
demand, and oil demand. Panels (a) and (b) show the responses of non-oil merchandise trade balance
(TBNO), oil trade balance (OILBAL), and current account (CA), all scaled by nominal GDP, to these shocks.
Panels (c) and (d) show the responses of capital gains on gross foreign assets and liabilities (CAPGAIN),
current account (CA), and the change in the net foreign asset position (DNFA). All measures of external
balances are scaled by nominal GDP. Each shock is defined so that it implies an increase in the real price of
oil.
                                           (a) Jamaica: OILBAL, TBNO, and CA

     Response of OILBAL_GDP to OILSUPPLY                       Response of OILBAL_GDP to GLOBDEM            Response of OILBAL_GDP to OILDEM
   0.06                                                     0.02                                    0.00



   0.04                                                                                             -0.01
                                                            0.00

   0.02                                                                                             -0.02

                                                           -0.02
   0.00                                                                                             -0.03



   -0.02                                                   -0.04                                    -0.04



   -0.04                                                                                            -0.05
                                                           -0.06

   -0.06                                                                                            -0.06

                                                           -0.08
   -0.08                                                                                            -0.07



   -0.10                                                   -0.10                                    -0.08
               0       1       2       3       4       5                0    1    2   3    4    5                0       1       2       3       4       5




    Response of TBNO_GDP to OILSUPPLY                          Response of TBNO_GDP to GLOBDEM               Response of TBNO_GDP to OILDEM
 0.10                                                       0.10                                     0.125


                                                                                                     0.100
 0.05
                                                            0.05
                                                                                                     0.075


 -0.00                                                                                               0.050

                                                            0.00
                                                                                                     0.025
 -0.05
                                                                                                    -0.000
                                                           -0.05

 -0.10                                                                                              -0.025


                                                                                                    -0.050
                                                           -0.10
 -0.15
                                                                                                    -0.075


 -0.20                                                     -0.15                                    -0.100
           0       1       2       3        4      5                    0    1    2   3    4    5                    0       1       2       3       4       5




     Response of CA_GDP to OILSUPPLY                                Response of CA_GDP to GLOBDEM             Response of CA_GDP to OILDEM
0.075                                                      0.025                                     0.02


0.050
                                                           -0.000
                                                                                                     0.00
0.025

                                                           -0.025
-0.000                                                                                               -0.02


                                                           -0.050
-0.025
                                                                                                     -0.04
-0.050
                                                           -0.075


-0.075                                                                                               -0.06
                                                           -0.100

-0.100
                                                                                                     -0.08
                                                           -0.125
-0.125


-0.150                                                     -0.150                                    -0.10
           0       1       2       3       4       5                    0    1    2    3   4    5                    0       1       2       3       4       5




                                                                                 33
                                     (b) Trinidad and Tobago: OILBAL, TBNO, and CA

           Response of OILBAL_GDP to OILSUPPLY                                       Response of OILBAL_GDP to GLOBDEM                   Response of OILBAL_GDP to OILDEM
         0.10                                                                  0.175                                             0.12


                                                                               0.150                                             0.10

         0.05
                                                                               0.125                                             0.08


                                                                               0.100                                             0.06

         0.00
                                                                               0.075                                             0.04


                                                                               0.050                                             0.02
         -0.05

                                                                               0.025                                             0.00


                                                                               0.000                                             -0.02
         -0.10

                                                                               -0.025                                            -0.04


         -0.15                                                                 -0.050                                            -0.06
                         0           1           2       3       4       5                      0       1   2    3   4   5                    0       1       2           3           4           5




   Response of TBNO_GDP to OILSUPPLY                                             Response of TBNO_GDP to GLOBDEM                            Response of TBNO_GDP to OILDEM
0.075                                                                        0.20                                                   0.050


0.050
                                                                                                                                    0.025
                                                                             0.15
0.025

                                                                                                                                   -0.000
-0.000                                                                       0.10


                                                                                                                                   -0.025
-0.025
                                                                             0.05
-0.050
                                                                                                                                   -0.050


-0.075                                                                       0.00
                                                                                                                                   -0.075

-0.100
                                                                             -0.05
                                                                                                                                   -0.100
-0.125


-0.150                                                                       -0.10                                                 -0.125
                 0           1           2           3       4       5                     0        1       2    3   4       5                    0       1           2           3           4           5




             Response of CA_GDP to OILSUPPLY                                            Response of CA_GDP to GLOBDEM                      Response of CA_GDP to OILDEM
     0.15                                                                      0.30                                               0.15



     0.10
                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                                  0.10

     0.05
                                                                               0.20
                                                                                                                                  0.05
     -0.00
                                                                               0.15

     -0.05                                                                                                                        0.00

                                                                               0.10
     -0.10
                                                                                                                                 -0.05
                                                                               0.05
     -0.15

                                                                                                                                 -0.10
                                                                               0.00
     -0.20



     -0.25                                                                    -0.05                                              -0.15
                     0           1           2           3       4       5                  0       1       2    3   4   5                    0       1           2           3           4           5




                                                                                                            34
                                                 (c) Jamaica: CA, CAPGAIN, and DNFA

         Response of CA_GDP to OILSUPPLY              Response of CAPGAIN_GDP to OILSUPPLY      Response of DNFA_GDP to OILSUPPLY
  0.075                                               0.20                                   0.2


  0.050                                               0.15
                                                                                             0.1
  0.025                                               0.10


 -0.000                                               0.05                                   -0.0


 -0.025                                              -0.00
                                                                                             -0.1
 -0.050                                              -0.05


 -0.075                                              -0.10                                   -0.2


 -0.100                                              -0.15
                                                                                             -0.3
 -0.125                                              -0.20


 -0.150                                              -0.25                                   -0.4
                 0       1       2       3   4   5            0   1    2    3    4    5                 0       1       2       3       4       5




         Response of CA_GDP to GLOBDEM                Response of CAPGAIN_GDP to GLOBDEM            Response of DNFA_GDP to GLOBDEM
0.025                                                0.20                                     0.15



                                                     0.15                                     0.10
-0.000


                                                     0.10                                     0.05
-0.025

                                                     0.05                                    -0.00
-0.050

                                                     -0.00                                   -0.05

-0.075
                                                     -0.05                                   -0.10

-0.100
                                                     -0.10                                   -0.15


-0.125
                                                     -0.15                                   -0.20



-0.150                                               -0.20                                   -0.25
             0       1       2       3       4   5            0   1    2    3    4    5                     0       1       2       3       4       5




          Response of CA_GDP to OILDEM                  Response of CAPGAIN_GDP to OILDEM            Response of DNFA_GDP to OILDEM
0.02                                                 0.100                                    0.10


                                                     0.075
0.00                                                                                          0.05
                                                     0.050


-0.02                                                0.025                                   -0.00


                                                     -0.000
-0.04                                                                                        -0.05
                                                     -0.025


-0.06                                                -0.050                                  -0.10


                                                     -0.075
-0.08                                                                                        -0.15
                                                     -0.100


-0.10                                                -0.125                                  -0.20
             0       1       2       3       4   5            0    1    2    3   4    5                     0       1       2       3       4       5




                                                                       35
                            (d) Trinidad and Tobago: CA, CAPGAIN, and DNFA

         Response of CA_GDP to OILSUPPLY     Response of CAPGAIN_GDP to OILSUPPLY      Response of DNFA_GDP to OILSUPPLY
 0.15                                         0.15                                  0.15



 0.10
                                                                                    0.10
                                              0.10
 0.05

                                                                                    0.05
 -0.00
                                              0.05


 -0.05                                                                              0.00


                                              0.00
 -0.10
                                                                                    -0.05

 -0.15
                                             -0.05
                                                                                    -0.10
 -0.20



 -0.25                                       -0.10                                  -0.15
             0    1    2    3    4       5            0   1    2    3    4    5                  0       1       2       3       4       5




         Response of CA_GDP to GLOBDEM        Response of CAPGAIN_GDP to GLOBDEM           Response of DNFA_GDP to GLOBDEM
0.30                                         0.15                                    0.3



                                             0.10
0.25
                                                                                     0.2
                                             0.05
0.20

                                             -0.00
                                                                                     0.1
0.15

                                             -0.05

0.10
                                                                                     0.0
                                             -0.10

0.05
                                             -0.15
                                                                                    -0.1
0.00
                                             -0.20



-0.05                                        -0.25                                  -0.2
             0    1    2    3    4       5            0   1    2    3    4    5                 0        1       2       3       4       5




          Response of CA_GDP to OILDEM          Response of CAPGAIN_GDP to OILDEM            Response of DNFA_GDP to OILDEM
0.15                                         0.15                                    0.125


                                                                                     0.100
0.10                                         0.10
                                                                                     0.075


0.05                                         0.05                                    0.050


                                                                                     0.025
0.00                                         0.00
                                                                                    -0.000


-0.05                                        -0.05                                  -0.025


                                                                                    -0.050
-0.10                                        -0.10
                                                                                    -0.075


-0.15                                        -0.15                                  -0.100
             0    1    2    3    4       5            0   1    2    3    4    5                      0       1       2       3       4       5




                                                               36
Figure 9. Jamaica: Current Account, Oil Prices, and the U.S. Dollar

                                Jamaica: Current Account Balance
                                               Mil.US$
                                         World Crude Price
                        US$/Bbl, average of UK Brt Lt/Dubai Med/Alaska NS heavy
   400                                                                                          100
             r =-0.81

     0
                                                                                                80

   -400
                                                                                                60

   -800

                                                                                                40
  -1200

                                                                                                20
  -1600        CAB
               Oil Price
  -2000                                                                                         0
            80            85            90           95            00              05
          Sources: International Monetary Fund /Haver Analytics


                                     USD/Euro Exchange Rate
                                            EOP, US$/Euro
                                         World Crude Price
                        US$/Bbl, average of UK Brt Lt/Dubai Med/Alaska NS heavy
    1.6                                                                                         100
             r = 0.89


                                                                                                80
    1.4


                                                                                                60

    1.2

                                                                                                40


    1.0
                                                                                                20
                                                                                    USD/Euro
                                                                                    Oil Price
    0.8                                                                                         0
            99      00       01      02      03      04       05        06    07        08
          Sources: International Monetary Fund /Haver Analytics




                                                                   37
Figure 10. Trinidad and Tobago: Current Account, Oil Prices, and the U.S. Dollar

                  Tr inidad and Tobago: Cur r ent Account Balance (mil US$)


                                  Wor ld: Aver age Cr ude Oil Pr ice (US$/Bbl)

  8000                                                                                               100
              r = 0. 85



  6000                                                                                               80




  4000                                                                                               60




  2000                                                                                               40




      0                                                                                              20




  -2000                                                                                              0
                        80               85         90         95          00              05
           Sour ce: Inter national Monetar y Fund /Haver Analytics




                                      U. S. : Exchange Rate (SDRs/US$)


                                  Wor ld: Aver age Cr ude Oil Pr ice (US$/Bbl)

   0. 80                                                                                             100
              r =-0. 79



   0. 76                                                                                             80




   0. 72                                                                                             60




   0. 68                                                                                             40




   0. 64                                                                                             20




   0. 60                                                                                             0
            96     97        98     99    00   01   02   03   04     05   06     07   08        09
           Sour ce: Inter national Monetar y Fund /Haver Analytics




                                                                                       38
