                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPLICATIONS OF ALTERNATIVE U.S. GREENHOUSE GAS
                          CONTROL MEASURES

                                          Sebastian Rausch
                                          Gilbert E. Metcalf
                                           John M. Reilly
                                           Sergey Paltsev

                                        Working Paper 16053
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16053


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




We thank Don Fullerton and anonymous referees for helpful suggestions. This paper was written
for the Energy Policy Symposium on Distributional Aspects of Energy and Climate Policy held in
Washington, D.C., on Jan. 22 -23, 2010, organized by the University of Chicago Energy Initiative,
Resources for the Future, and the University of Illinois. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Sebastian Rausch, Gilbert E. Metcalf, John M. Reilly, and Sergey Paltsev. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Distributional Implications of Alternative U.S. Greenhouse Gas Control Measures
Sebastian Rausch, Gilbert E. Metcalf, John M. Reilly, and Sergey Paltsev
NBER Working Paper No. 16053
June 2010
JEL No. Q48,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the distributional and efficiency impacts of different allowance allocation schemes for
a national cap and trade system using the USREP model, a new recursive dynamic computable general
equilibrium model of the U.S. economy. We consider allocation schemes applied to a comprehensive
national cap and trade system that limits cumulative greenhouse gas emissions over the control period
to 203 billion metric tons. The policy target approximates national goals identified in pending legislation.
We find that the allocation schemes in all proposals are progressive over the lower half of the income
distribution and proportional in the upper half of the income distribution. We also find that carbon
pricing by itself (ignoring the return of carbon revenues through allowance allocations) is proportional
to modestly progressive. This striking result follows from the dominance of the sources over uses side
impacts of the policy and stands in sharp contrast to previous work that has focused only on the uses
side. Lower income households derive a large fraction of income from government transfers and, reflecting
the reality that these are generally indexed to inflation, we hold the transfers constant in real terms.
As a result this source of income is unaffected by carbon pricing, while wage and capital income is
affected.


Sebastian Rausch                                     John M. Reilly
Joint Program on the Science                         Joint Program on the Science
 and Policy of Global Change                         and Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)                            1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
sebastianrausch@hotmail.com                          jreilly@mit.edu

Gilbert E. Metcalf                                   Sergey Paltsev
Department of Economics                              Joint Program on the Science
Tufts University                                     and Policy of Global change
Medford, MA 02155                                    Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and NBER                                             1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu                            Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                     paltsev@MIT.EDU
1. INTRODUCTION
U.S. Senate proposals for cap and trade legislation and the House-passed
Waxman Markey Bill focus on similar overall cuts in greenhouse gases. The
biggest difference among them is how allowances, and the revenue from their
auction, would be distributed. Different uses of revenue or different allowance
allocations would not in the first instance affect the direct cost of achieving
emissions reductions but they can have important implications for how costs are
borne by different regions and among households of different income levels.
Different uses of revenue may have indirect effects on the overall welfare cost of
a policy to the extent revenue is used to offset other distortionary taxes. In
addition the allowance allocation has efficiency impacts to the extent that it
creates further distortions or prevents pass through of the full CO2 price in some
products, or is used in some way that does not create value for U.S. citizens.
Rausch et al. (2009) investigated some generic allocation schemes with a multi-
region, multi-household static general equilibrium model of the U.S., the U.S.
Regional Energy Policy (USREP) model. Here we extend the USREP model to a
recursive dynamic formulation and design allocation schemes intended to
approximate more closely specific cap and trade proposals.
    In extending the USREP model to a recursive dynamic formulation we borrow
the dynamic structure of the MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis
(EPPA) model (Paltsev et al. (2005)). With this extension we are able more
closely to represent features of revenue use and allowance allocation in specific
legislative proposals and contrast their distributional implications. As with
previous analyses of greenhouse gas legislation conducted with the EPPA model
such as that in Paltsev et al. (2009) we attempt to capture key features of the cap
and trade provisions in the proposals but are not able to address many other
provisions of the bills that deal with energy efficiency standards and the like. The
added value here is that we can consider distributional effects of proposed
legislation. We contrast the allowance allocation schemes of the House
legislation (Waxman-Markey) with those of the Senate proposals of Kerry and
Boxer and of Cantwell and Collins. As a result of negotiations in the Senate the
Kerry-Boxer bill has stalled and been replaced by a discussion draft by Senators
Kerry and Lieberman. The bill contains a variety of new features but is similar to
Waxman-Markey in its allocation of allowance value. To isolate the effects of
different allocation schemes, we formulate a cap and trade policy designed to
limit cumulative emissions over the control period in all scenarios to 203 billion
metric tons (bmt). The cap and trade provisions of the proposals we consider
would lead to somewhat different cumulative emissions because of differences in
the timing of reductions, sectoral coverage, and whether outside credits were
allowed.




                                         1
    Waxman-Markey and Kerry-Boxer are part auction, part free allocation with a
complex allowance and revenue allocation designed to achieve many different
purposes. In contrast, Cantwell and Collins proposal auctions all allowances and
distributes most of the revenue with a very straightforward lump sum allocation to
individuals. Extending our analysis to distributional issues requires further
interpretation, especially for those proposals with complex allocation schemes, of
how allocation of allowances and auction revenue would actually occur if current
proposals were implemented.
    Our analysis shows a number of results. First, scenarios based on the
Waxman-Markey and Kerry-Boxer (or Kerry-Lieberman) allowance allocation
schemes are more progressive (i.e., a larger welfare loss is imposed on higher
income households) in early years than scenarios based on the Cantwell-Collins
proposal. We emphasize, however, that the overall distributional impact of these
proposals depend on all the proposals contained in these legislative proposals and
not just the cap and trade programs. Nonetheless the allowance allocation
schemes are important determinants of the overall distributional impact of these
bills. Second, scenarios based on the Cantwell-Collins allocation proposal have
lower welfare costs due to lower redistribution to low income households and
consequent lower income-induced increases in energy demand. Third, we find
that the Waxman-Markey and Kerry-Boxer (or Kerry-Lieberman) allocation
schemes appear to overcompensate some adversely affected income groups and
regions early on though this dissipates over time as the allocation scheme evolves
to something closer to lump sum distribution. Fourth, the allocation schemes in
all proposals are progressive over the lower half of the income distribution and
essentially proportional in the upper half of the income distribution. Finally we
find that carbon pricing by itself, ignoring the return of carbon revenues through
allowance allocations, is proportional to modestly progressive. We trace our
result to the dominance of the sources side over the uses side impacts of the
policy. It stands in sharp contrast to previous work that has focused only on the
uses side, and has hence found energy taxation to be regressive. It is worth
pointing out that our model framework provides only an analysis of welfare costs
of climate policy and does not attempt to incorporate any benefits from averting
climate change. Any welfare changes reported in this paper therefore refer to
changes in costs.
    The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the recursive
dynamic version of the USREP model. Section 3 provides some background on
incidence theory. Section 4 discusses the legislative proposals we evaluate,
mapping the allowance and revenue allocation in the Bills to specific
distributional schemes in the model. Section 5 defines policy scenarios based on
the proposed greenhouse gas control measures. Section 6 investigates the
distributional implications across regions and income classes of allocation




                                        2
Table 1. USREP Model Details: Regional and Sectoral Breakdown and Primary Input
Factors.
       a
Region                   Sectors                      Primary Input Factors
Alaska (AK)                     Non-Energy                     Capital
California (CA)                  Agriculture (AGR)             Labor
Florida (FL)                     Services (SRV)                Land
New York (NY)                    Energy-Intensive (EIS)        Crude Oil
New England (NENGL)              Other Industries (OTH)        Shale Oil
South East (SEAST)               Transportation (TRN)          Natural Gas
North East (NEAST)              Energy                         Coal
South Central (SCENT)            Coal (COL)                    Nuclear
Texas (TX)                       Convent. Crude Oil (CRU)      Hydro
North Central (NCENT)            Refined Oil (OIL)             Wind
Mountain (MOUNT)                 Natural Gas (GAS)
Pacific (PACIF)                  Electric: Fossil (ELE)
                                 Electric: Nuclear (NUC)
                                 Electric: Hydro (HYD)
                                 Advanced Technologies
                                (see Table 3)
a
 Model regions are aggregations of the following U.S. states: NENGL = Maine, New Hampshire,
Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island; SEAST = Virginia, Kentucky, North Carolina,
Tennessee, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi; NEAST = West Virginia, Delaware,
Maryland, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, District of
Columbia; SCENT = Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana; NCENT = Missouri, North Dakota, South
Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Minnesota, Iowa; MOUNT = Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Nevada, Utah,
Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico; PACIF = Oregon, Washington, Hawaii.

scenarios reflecting our interpretation of proposed policies, and Section 7 reports
the results of a counterfactual analysis that allows us to trace the source of
distribution effects we observe. Section 8 concludes.

2. A RECURSIVE-DYNAMIC U.S. REGIONAL ENERGY POLICY
MODEL
USREP is a computable general equilibrium model of the U.S. economy designed
to analyze energy and greenhouse gas policies.2 It has the capability to assess
impacts on regions, sectors and industries, and different household income
classes. As in any classical Arrow-Debreu general equilibrium model, our

2
  As in any standard computable general equilibrium model, our framework adopts a full-
employment assumption and further assumes that money is neutral, i.e. production and
consumption decisions are solely determined by relative prices.




                                              3
framework combines the behavioral assumption of rational economic agents with
the analysis of equilibrium conditions, and represents price-dependent market
interactions as well as the origination and spending of income based on
microeconomic theory. Profit-maximizing firms produce goods and services
using intermediate inputs from other sectors and primary factors of production
from households.         Utility-maximizing households receive income from
government transfers and from the supply of factors of production to firms (labor,
capital, land, and resources). Income thus earned is spent on goods and services or
is saved. The government collects tax revenue which is spent on consumption and
household transfers. USREP is a recursive-dynamic model, and hence savings and
investment decisions are based on current period variables.3
    The USREP model is built on state-level economic data from the IMPLAN
dataset (Minnesota IMPLAN Group, 2008) covering all transactions among
businesses, households, and government agents for the base year 2006. The
detailed         representation       of       existing        taxes      captures
effects of tax-base erosion, and comprises sector- and region-specific ad valorem
output taxes, payroll taxes and capital income taxes. IMPLAN data has been
augmented by incorporating regional tax data from the NBER tax simulator to
represent marginal personal income tax rates by region and income class. Energy
data from the Energy Information Administration’s State Energy Data System
(SEDS) are merged with the economic data to provide physical flows of energy
for greenhouse gas accounting. Non-CO2 greenhouse gases are based on the EPA
inventory data, and are included as in the EPPA model with endogenous costing
of the abatement (Hyman et al., 2003).
    The basic structure and data used in the USREP model are described in some
detail in Rausch et al. (2009) with the dynamic structure borrowed from EPPA
(Paltsev et al., 2005). We focus discussion here on elements of the model that
differ from that described in these two previous papers and on the data sources
and calibration needed to regionalize the model. The underlying state level data
base provides flexibility in the regional detail of the model. Here we use the
regional structure shown in Figure 1. This structure separately identifies larger
states, allows representation of separate electricity interconnects, and captures
some of the diversity among states in use and production of energy. Table 1
provides an overview of the sectoral breakdown and the primary factors of

3
  Experience from a forward-looking version of the EPPA model (Babiker et al. (2008)) suggests
that energy sector and CO2 price behavior are similar to those derived from a recursive-dynamic
model. Consumption shifting as an additional avenue of adjustment to the policy may, however,
lower overall policy costs. On the other hand, inter-temporal optimization with perfect foresight
poorly represents the real economy where agents face high levels of uncertainty that likely lead to
higher costs than if they knew the future with certainty. We leave for future work the careful
comparison of how alternative approaches to expectations formation may influence model results.




                                                4
                  Figure 1. Regional Aggregation in the USREP Model.


production. Consistent with the assumption of perfect competition on product and
factor markets, production and consumption processes exhibit constant-returns-to-
scale and are modeled by nested constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES)
functions. A detailed description of the nesting structure for each production
sector and household consumption is provided in Rausch et al. (2009).
   There are nine representative households in each region differentiated by
income levels as shown in Table 2. Households across income classes and
regions differ in terms of income sources as well as expenditures. State-specific
projections through 2030 are from the U.S. Census Bureau (2009a).4 Labor supply
is determined by the household choice between leisure and labor. We calibrate
compensated and uncompensated labor supply elasticities following the approach
described in Ballard (2000), and assume for all income groups that the
uncompensated (compensated) labor supply elasticity is 0.1 (0.3). Labor is fully
mobile across industries in a given region but is immobile across U.S. regions.
   Savings enters directly into the utility function which generates the demand for
savings and makes the consumption-investment decision endogenous. We follow
an approach by Bovenberg, Goulder and Gurney (2005) distinguishing between
capital that is used in production of market goods and services and capital used in
households (e.g. the housing stock). We assume income from the former is

4
  The USREP model incorporates demographic data on the population and number of households
in each region and income class for the base year 2006 based on U.S. Census Data (2009b). We
apply state-specific population growth rates uniformly to all income groups.




                                             5
Table 2. Income Classes Used in the USREP Model and Cumulative Population.
Income class         Description                 Cumulative Population
                                                                       a
                                                 for whole U.S. (in %)
hhl               Less than $10,000              7.3
hh10                   $10,000 to $15,000            11.7
hh15                   $15,000 to $25,000            21.2
hh25                   $25,000 to $30,000            31.0
hh30                   $30,000 to $50,000            45.3
hh50                   $50,000 to $75,000            65.2
hh75                   $75,000 to $100,000           78.7
hh100                  $100,000 to $150,000          91.5
hh150                  $150,000 plus                 100.0
a
    Based on data from U.S. Census Bureau (2009a).

subject to taxation while the imputed income from housing capital is not, and so
households can shift investment between market and housing capital in response
to changing capital taxation. Lacking specific data on capital ownership,
households are assumed to own a pool of U.S. capital—that is they do not
disproportionately own capital assets within the region in which they reside.
    We adopt the vintage capital structure of the EPPA model. Malleable capital is
mobile across U.S. regions and industries, while vintaged capital is region and
industry specific. As a result there is a common rate of return on malleable capital
across the U.S. The accumulation of both malleable and non-malleable capital is
calculated as investment net of depreciation according to the standard perpetual
inventory assumption. Given base year data about investment demand by sector
and by region, we specify for each region an investment sector that produces an
aggregate investment good equal to the sum of endogenous savings by different
household types. Foreign capital flows are fixed as in the EPPA model. We
assume an integrated U.S. market for fossil fuel resources and that the regional
ownership of resources is distributed in proportion to capital income. Rausch et
al. (2009) explored the implications of assuming instead that resource ownership
was regional. Such an assumption amplifies regional differences in the impacts of
climate legislation, resulting in greater costs for regions with significant energy
production but we believe that assumption overestimates regional differences
because equity ownership in large energy companies is broadly owned.
    Labor-augmenting technical change is a key driver of economic growth as in
EPPA. Regional labor productivity growth rates were calibrated to match
AEO2009 GDP growth through 2030. Beyond 2030, population and labor
productivity growth rates are extrapolated by fitting a logistic function that
assumes convergence in growth rates in 2100. The 2100 targets for annual labor




                                                6
Table 3. Summary of Advanced Technologies in USREP.
Technology                      Description
Coal Gasification               Converts coal into a perfect substitute for natural
                                gas.
Shale Oil                       Extracts and upgrades shale oil resources into a
                                perfect substitute for oil.
Biomass Liquids                 Converts biomass into a perfect substitute for
                                refined oil.
Biomass Electricity             Converts biomass into a perfect substitute for
                                electricity.
Intermittent Wind and Solar     Converts intermittent wind and solar resources into
                                an imperfect substitute for electricity. Costs
                                increase as wind production increases as a share
                                of total electricity production, representing
                                increasing costs of integrating wind into the grid.
Wind with gas backup            Creates a perfect substitute for conventional
                                electricity by jointly building wind turbines and
                                natural gas generation. The gas generation is
                                assumed to operate at a 7% capacity factor—only
                                as a backup when wind is not sufficient to meet
                                load requirements.
Wind with biomass backup        Creates a perfect substitute for conventional
                                electricity by jointly building wind and biomass
                                generation. The biomass generation operates at a
                                7% capacity factor—only as a backup when wind is
                                not sufficient to meet load requirements.
Advanced Gas                    Based on natural gas combined cycle (NGCC)
                                electricity generation technology that converts
                                natural gas into electricity.
Advanced Gas with Carbon        Natural gas combined cycle technology that
Capture and Sequestration       captures 90% or more of the CO2 produced in
                                generating electricity.
Advanced Coal with Carbon       Broadly based on an Integrated coal gasification
Capture and Sequestration       combined cycle (IGCC) plant that captures 90% or
                                more of the CO2 produced in generating electricity,
                                but can also represent flue gas capture processes.
Advanced nuclear                Next generation of nuclear power plants
                                incorporating estimated costs of building new
                                nuclear power plants in the future.

productivity growth and for annual population growth are two and zero percent,
respectively.
   Energy supply is regionalized for USREP by incorporating data on regional
fossil fuel reserves from the U.S. Geological Service and the Department of




                                         7
Energy5. The resource depletion model and elasticities of substitution between
resource and non-resource inputs in fossil fuel production are identical to those in
EPPA. As in EPPA, a range of advanced technologies not widely present in the
base year data are specified in Table 2.
   The markups, share parameters and elasticity parameters for the advanced
energy supply technologies are those from Paltsev et al. (2009) and the same cost
mark-ups apply in all regions except for renewables. For renewables the cost
shares are taken from Paltsev et al. (2009) but regional mark-ups and elasticity
parameters are derived from regional supply curves. Regional wind supply curves
for each technology have been estimated based on high-resolution wind data from
NREL (2009) and a levelized cost model described in Morris (2009) that was also
the basis for cost estimates in Paltsev et al. (2009). The TrueWinds model
(NREL, 2009) provides data on the capacity factors for wind turbines if they were
located at sites across the U.S., allowing construction of a regional wind supply
curve that depends on the quality of wind resources in each region. We derive
regional supply curves for biomass from data from Oakridge National
Laboratories (2009) that describes quantity and price pairs for biomass supply for
each state.
   Non-price induced improvements in energy efficiency are represented by an
Autonomous Energy Efficiency Improvement (AEEI) parameter as in EPPA, and
represent technological progress that reduces at no cost the energy needed in
consumption and production activities, thus resulting in reduced energy use per
unit of activity and general productivity improvement over time. Reference case
energy use is calibrated to the updated AEO2009 reference case (Energy
Information Administration (2009)). The baseline thus includes both the impacts
of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) and the Energy
Independence and Security Act (EISA).
   Sectoral output produced in each region is converted through a constant-
elasticity-of-transformation function into goods destined for the regional, national,
and international market. All goods are tradable. Depending on the type of
commodity, we distinguish three different representations of intra-national
regional trade. First, bilateral flows for all non-energy goods are represented as
―Armington‖ goods (Armington (1969)), where like goods from other regions are
imperfectly substitutable for domestically produced goods. Second, domestically
traded energy goods, except for electricity, are assumed to be homogeneous
products, i.e. there is a national pool that demands domestic exports and supplies
domestic imports. This assumption reflects the high degree of integration of intra-
U.S. markets for natural gas, crude and refined oil, and coal. Third, we

5
  Source for crude oil and natural gas reserves: Department of Energy (2009). Source for shale oil
reserves: John R. Dyni (2006). Source for coal resources: USGS (2009).




                                                8
differentiate six regional electricity pools that are designed to provide an
approximation of the existing structure of independent system operators (ISO) and
the three major NERC interconnections in the U.S. More specifically, we
distinguish the Western, Texas ERCOT and the Eastern NERC interconnections
and in addition identify AK, NENGL, and NY as separate regional pools.6 7
Within each regional pool, we assume that traded electricity is a homogenous
good, where no electricity is traded between regional pools.
   Analogously to the export side, we adopt the Armington (1969) assumption of
product heterogeneity for imports. A CES function characterizes the trade-off
between imported, from national and international sources, and locally produced
varieties of the same goods. Foreign closure of the model is determined through a
national balance-of-payments (BOP) constraint.

3. BACKGROUND ON DISTRIBUTIONAL ANALYSIS
Carbon pricing through a cap-and-trade system has very similar impacts to broad
based energy taxes – not surprising since over eighty percent of greenhouse gas
emissions are associated with the combustion of fossil fuels (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (2009)). The literature on distributional implications across
income groups of energy taxes is a long and extensive one and some general
conclusions have been reached that help inform the distributional analysis of
carbon pricing. First, analyses that rank households by their annual income find
that excise taxes in general tend to be regressive (e.g. Pechman (1985) looking at
excise taxes in general and Metcalf (1999) looking specifically at a cluster of
environmental taxes).
    The difficulty with this ranking procedure is that many households in the
lowest income groups are not poor in any traditional sense that should raise
welfare concerns. This group includes households that are facing transitory
negative income shocks or who are making human capital investments that will
lead to higher incomes later in life (e.g. graduate students). It also includes many
retired households which may have little current income but are able to draw on
extensive savings.


6
  We identify NY and NENGL as separate pools since electricity flows with contiguous ISOs
represent only a small fraction of total electricity generation in those regions. For example, based
on own calculation from data provided by ISOs, net electricity trade between ISO New England
and ISO New York account for less than 1% of total electricity produced in ISO New England.
Interface flows between the New York and neighboring ISOs amount to about 6% of total
electricity generation in ISO New York.
7
  The regional electricity pools are thus defined as follows: NENGL, NY, TX, AK each represent
a separate pool. The Western NERC interconnection comprises CA, MOUNT, and PACIF. The
Eastern NERC interconnection comprises NEAST, SEAST, and FL.




                                                 9
    That current income may not be a good measure of household well being has
long been known and has led to a number of efforts to measure lifetime income.
This leads to the second major finding in the literature. Consumption taxes –
including taxes on energy – look considerably less regressive when lifetime
income measures are used than when annual income measures are used. Studies
include Davies, St Hilaire and Whalley (1984), Poterba (1989, (1991), Bull,
Hassett and Metcalf (1994), Lyon and Schwab (1995) and many others.8
    The lifetime income approach is an important caveat to distributional findings
from annual incidence analyses but it relies on strong assumptions about
household consumption decisions. In particular it assumes that households base
current consumption decisions knowing their full stream of earnings over their
lifetime. While it is reasonable to assume that households have some sense of
future income, it may be implausible to assume they have complete knowledge or
that they necessarily base spending decisions on income that may be received far
in the future.9 It may be that the truth lies somewhere between annual and
lifetime income analyses. Moreover, if one were to use a lifetime income
approach, one would like to track consumption over the lifecycle to capture any
lifecycle changes in the consumption of carbon intensive products and compare
lifetime carbon pricing burdens rather than a single-year snapshot. This paper
takes a current income approach to sorting households.
    Turning to climate policy in particular a number of papers have attempted to
measure the distributional impacts of carbon pricing across household income
groups. Dinan and Rogers (2002) build on Metcalf (1999) to consider how the
distribution of allowances from a cap and trade program affects the distributional
outcome. Both these papers emphasize that focusing on the distributional burden
of carbon pricing (either a tax or auctioned permits) without regard to the use of
the revenue raised (or potentially raised) from carbon pricing provides an
incomplete distributional analysis. How the proceeds from carbon pricing are
distributed have important impacts on the ultimate distributional outcome.
    The point that use of carbon revenues matters for distribution is the basis for
the distributional and revenue neutral proposal in Metcalf (2007) for a carbon tax
swap. It is also the focus of the analysis in Burtraw, Sweeney and Walls (2009).
This latter paper considers five different uses of revenue from a cap and trade
auction focusing on income distribution as well as regional distribution. A similar

8
  Most of these studies look at a snapshot of taxes in one year relative to some proxy for lifetime
income – often current consumption based on the permanent income hypothesis of Friedman
(1957). An exception is Fullerton and Rogers (1993) who model the lifetime pattern of tax
payments as well as income.
9
  On the other hand casual observation of graduate students in professional schools (business, law,
medicine) make clear that many households are taking future income into account in their current
consumption decisions.




                                               10
focus on income and regional distribution is in Hassett, Mathur and Metcalf
(2009). This last paper does not consider the use of revenue but does compare
both annual and lifetime income measures as well as a regional analysis using
annual income. Grainger and Kolstad (2009) do a similar analysis as that of
Hassett, Mathur and Metcalf (2009) and note that the use of household
equivalence scales can exacerbate the regressivity of carbon pricing. Finally
Burtraw, Walls and Blonz (2009) consider the distributional impacts in an
expenditure side analysis where they focus on the allocation of permits to local
distribution companies (LDCs). Rausch et al. (2009) also investigate the welfare
costs of allocations to LDCs and find that allocations that lead to real or perceived
reductions in electricity prices by consumers have large efficiency costs.
    With the exception of the last paper, all of the papers above assume that the
burden of carbon pricing is shifted forward to consumers in the form of higher
energy prices and higher prices of energy-intensive consumption goods and
services. That carbon pricing is passed forward to consumers follows from the
analysis of a number of computable general equilibrium models. Bovenberg and
Goulder (2001), for example, find that coal prices rise by over 90 percent of a $25
per ton carbon tax in the short and long run (Table 2.4).10 This incidence result
underlies their finding that only a small percentage of permits need be freely
allocated to energy intensive industries to compensate shareholders for any
windfall losses from a cap and trade program. See also Bovenberg, Goulder and
Gurney (2005) for more on this issue.
    Metcalf et al. (2008) consider the degree of forward shifting, as a result of
higher consumer prices and backward shifting, as a result of lower factor returns,
over different time periods for a carbon tax policy begun in 2012 and slowly
ramped up through 2050. The tax on carbon emissions from coal are largely
passed forward to consumers in all years of the policy in roughly the same
magnitude found by Bovenberg and Goulder (2001). Roughly ten percent of the
burden of carbon pricing on crude oil is shifted back to oil producers initially with
the share rising to roughly one-fourth by 2050 as consumers are able to find
substitutes for oil in the longer run. Interestingly the consumer burden of the
carbon tax on natural gas exceeds the tax. This reflects the sharp rise in demand
for natural gas as an initial response to carbon pricing is to substitute gas for coal
in electricity generation. By 2050 the producer price is falling for reasonably
stringent carbon policies.11

10
   They assume world pricing for oil and natural gas so that the gross of tax prices for these two
fossil fuels rise by the full amount of the tax.
11
   Distributional results depend importantly on the stringency of policy. How stringent the policy
is affects whether carbon free technologies are adopted in the EPPA model and therefore what the
relative demand for fossil fuels is. In the text above we are reporting carbon tax results for a
policy that limits emissions to 287 billion metric tons over the control period.




                                               11
    Fullerton and Heutel (2007) construct an analytic general equilibrium model to
identify the various key parameters and relationships that determine the ultimate
burden of a tax on a pollutant.12 While the model is not sufficiently detailed to
provide a realistic assessment of climate change impacts on the U.S. economy it
illustrates critical parameters and relationships that drive burden results.
    The general equilibrium models discussed above all assume a representative
agent in the U.S. thereby limiting their usefulness to considering distributional
questions. Metcalf, et al. (2008) apply results from a representative agent model
to data on U.S. households that allows them to draw conclusions about
distributional impacts of policies but the household heterogeneity is not built into
the model.13
    Several computable general equilibrium (CGE) models have been constructed
to investigate regional implications of climate and energy in the U.S. For
example, the ADAGE model, documented in Ross (2008), has a U.S. regional
module which is usually aggregated to five or six regions. The MRN-NEEM
model described in Tuladhar et al. (2009) has nine U.S. regions. Both these
models use a single representative household in each region.
    Rausch et al. (2009) does an explicit CGE analysis of carbon pricing in a
single-period CGE model. That analysis considers a variety of possible
allocations of the revenue and/or allowances from cap-and-trade system and finds
that the use of revenues affects the overall progressivity of the policy
substantially. It also finds that a significant portion of the carbon price is passed
back to factors of production – most notably owners of natural resources and
capital. This contributes to a greater progressivity of carbon pricing than found in
literature that assumes full forward shifting.

4. U.S. CAP AND TRADE PROPOSALS: ALLOWANCE ALLOCATION
Below we carry out distributional analyses of cap and trade policies based on
alternative proposals for greenhouse gas control legislation currently under
consideration in the U.S. These are the house-passed American Clean Energy and
Security Act (H.R. 2454) sponsored by Reps. Waxman and Markey, the Clean
Energy Jobs and American Power Act (S. 1733) a Senate bill similar to H.R. 2454
and sponsored by Senators Kerry and Boxer, and now replaced by the American
Power Act (APA) draft bill by Kerry and Lieberman, and the Carbon Limits for

12
   The paper also provides a thorough summary of the literature on the incidence impacts of
environmental taxes.
13
   A recent paper by Bento et al. (2009) marks an advance in the literature by allowing for
household heterogeneity over income and location. That paper considers the impact of increased
U.S. gasoline taxes taking into account new and used car purchases along with scrappage and
changes in driving behavior.




                                             12
America’s Renewal (CLEAR) Act, a competing Senate Bill sponsored by
Senators Cantwell and Collins. All proposals seek an overall reduction of GHG
emissions in the U.S. to 83% below 2005 levels by 2050 with intervening targets.
Cap and trade components of the bills cover most of the economy’s emissions but
not necessarily all of them, with other measures directed toward uncapped sectors.
For example, estimates are that Waxman-Markey covers between 85% and 90%
of emissions with a cap and trade system. Waxman-Markey has a slightly looser
target for sectors covered by the cap and trade in 2020 than does Kerry-Boxer,
issuing allowances at a level 17% below 2005 emissions in 2020, whereas the
economy-wide goal is a 20% reduction by that date. Kerry-Lieberman would sell
as many allowances as needed to refineries at a fixed price but would adjust over
time to meet quantity targets. In our simulations of the effects of these bills, we
assume the national goals are met, and we achieve them with a cap and trade
system that covers all U.S. emissions except for land use CO2 sources (or sinks).
All of these proposals including banking and limited borrowing provisions and
hence the time profile of reductions described in the bills are better thought of as
the time profile of allowance allocation, with actual emissions levels in each year
determined by how allowances are banked or borrowed (to the extent borrowing
is allowed). In our simulations we find that the allocations result in net banking
with no borrowing. Of course, in actuality borrowing may occur to the extent that
unexpected costs make it attractive to bring permits forward in time.
    While the stated national targets are identical across the bills, the Cantwell and
Collins proposal has no provision for the use of offsets from outside the capped
sectors to be used in lieu of the cap. Reductions similar in nature to the offsets
allowed in the other bills are to be funded from a portion of the auction revenues
that are subject to future appropriations. The other two proposals allow up to two
billion tons per year of outside credits from a combination of domestic and
foreign sources. In our simulations the domestic credits would need to come from
a combination of reduced land use emissions and increased land use sinks.
Foreign credits would come from qualified reductions abroad. As shown in
Paltsev et al. (2009) if these credits are available at reasonable costs they would
significantly reduce the CO2 price and expected welfare cost of the legislation.
Emissions from the capped sectors then are reduced much less than the target
levels in the bill because available allowances are supplemented with external
credits. Our main interest in this paper is the consequences of alternative
distribution of allowances, and so we simulate the Cantwell-Collins allocation
scheme allowing for the same level of outside credits as the other two bills. Any
differences are the result of the allowance distribution mechanisms rather than the
level of the cap.
    The proposals are not always clear as to whether allowances are auctioned by
some central Federal Agency and the revenue distributed or the allowances are




                                         13
       Figure 2. The Allocation of Allowance Value in the Waxman-Markey Bill.

distributed to entities who then can sell them. For example, designations to States
could involve either a portion of allowance revenue or direct allocation of
allowances leaving it up to the State to sell them into the allowance market. For
our modeling purposes it does not matter whether it is revenue or the allowances
that are distributed. We thus focus in our analysis on the allocation of ―allowance
value‖ in the different proposals to allow for distribution of allowances or the
revenue from an auction.
   Figure 2 shows the allowance allocation scheme as it is proposed in the
Waxman-Markey bill. We do not show graphically the Kerry-Lieberman, Kerry-
Boxer and Cantwell-Collins allowance allocation schemes here. The Cantwell-
Collins bill calls for 75% of allowance revenue to be returned in a lump sum
manner and 25% retained to meet several objectives but without specifying
percentages for each. In terms of Figure 2, that bill would be simply two bars
dividing allowance value among these two purposes. The allocation schemes in
Kerry-Boxer and Kerry-Lieberman are similar to Waxman-Markey. The main




                                        14
difference is in terms of allowances set aside to offset the impact of the bill on the
deficit. Waxman-Markey allocates at most 10% of the allowances for this
purpose, in part directly and in part by directing how revenues obtained through
early auction would be used, whereas Kerry-Boxer allocates a percentage that
grows to 25%.15 The allocation of revenue for deficit impacts in Kerry-Lieberman
is much closer to Waxman-Markey. The increasing share devoted to this purpose
proportional reduces the allocation to all other purposes. For example, Kerry-
Boxer is able to allocate less than 50% of allowance value directly to households
through either the low income energy assistance or the consumer rebate fund—
whereas Waxman-Markey is able to allocate about 65% to households by 2050
through these two programs.
    Both Kerry-Boxer and Waxman-Markey have a small strategic reserve of
allowances and both allocate a substantial portion of allowances to local
electricity and natural gas distribution companies in early years on the basis that
these regulated entities will turn allowance value over to ratepayers, thus
offsetting some of the impact of higher energy prices. This turns these LDCs into
the mechanism for distribution as opposed to a government auction agency as in
Cantwell-Collins. The other bills transition to a system closer to Cantwell-Collins
over time, replacing the LDC distribution with a consumer rebate fund. Both
retain a separate allocation to focus specifically on low income energy consumers.
Both also then distribute allowances to different industries that are expected to be
particularly affected by the legislation, but these allocations phase out by 2030.
Use of allowances as an extra incentive for carbon capture and sequestration is
also identified in both. A next set of allowances are allocated to fund various
domestic energy efficiency programs. The next grouping of allocations is for
international mitigation and adaptation and for domestic adaptation programs.
Waxman-Markey contains a large set of allowances in later years designated for
prior year use. This use possibly reallocates allowances through time, allowing
the possibility of Federal borrowing if allowance prices rise too much. Of more
relevance here is that the bill prescribes about one-half of this allowance value to
go to the Treasury to offset impacts on the deficit and the other half as a consumer
rebate. These amounts are shown in Figure 2 combined with the other provisions
that direct revenue to the Treasury and to the consumer rebate. That value is
allocated in the year in which the allowances would be originally issued, i.e.
assuming the Federal government does not borrow them or if it does, the income
is not rebated immediately. The Kerry-Boxer bill does not have this provision.
    We do not represent the many different programs to which these allowances or
allowance value would go and the exact recipients will depend on program

15
   This depends in part on whether future vintage allowances are sold early in the 2014-2020
period. If so, the share of allowances allocated to deficit reduction rises to roughly 12 percent of
total allowances (current allowances and future allowances brought forward).




                                                15
decisions yet to be made. However, we approximate the impact on regions and
households of different income levels by distributing the allowance value based
on data we have within the model, and that approximates what we believe to be
the intent of the different distributions or how they would tend to work in
practice. The distributional instruments we have at our disposal in the USREP
Model and the correspondence to allocations called out in the bills are given in
Table 4. For example, we allocate to households the proposed distribution of
allowances to LDCs based on emissions and respective electricity and natural gas
consumption. To determine the regional distribution, we allocate 50% of LDCs
allowances based on historic sectoral emissions for the electricity and natural gas
electrictiy sector, respectively. The other half is allocated to regions based on
household electricity and natural gas consumption.16 Within a region, allowances
to LDCs are allocated based on respective fuel consumption. Allocations
designated for low income households are distributed to households with incomes
of less than $30,000 per year.
   Distributions to industries other than LDCs go to households based on their
capital earnings on the basis that this value will be reflected in the equity value of
firms, and so households that own capital, for example, through stock ownership,
will be the beneficiaries.17 Allowances distributed for energy efficiency and such
are distributed by region based on regional energy consumption and then within a
region by energy consumption by household on the basis that regions and
households that consume more energy have more opportunities to take advantage
of these programs. Allowances designated for worker assistance are distributed to
regions based on oil and coal production on the basis that these industries are
most likely to be affected by unemployment as the country shifts away from fossil
fuels. We distribute funds devoted to CCS along with other energy R&D funds.
   Given this mapping of the allocation provisions in the various legislative
proposals we construct Figure 3 that is similar to Figure 2 but showing instead
the allocation of allowance value mapped to the instruments we use in USREP.
The distribution instruments for all of these uses, except Foreign and
Government, direct revenue to households but the particular instrument
determines how the allowance value is allocated among households in different

16
   Rausch, et al. (2009) consider the efficiency implications of a misperception by households that
this lump-sum transfer lowers the marginal price of electricity and natural gas.
17
   An output-based rebate (OBR) to energy-intensive and trade-exposed (EITE) industries may
result in a greater pass-through of allowance value to end consumers relative to our allocation
based on capital earnings. How this allowance should be divided up, however, depends on factors
such as the degree of pass-through in downstream sectors, given that EITE products are often
intermediate goods, e.g. steel. Our approach treats all vulnerable industries symmetrically, and we
allocate allowances lump sum proportional to capital income. Our approach does not capture
incentive effects that would arise if allowance value was used to subsidize output in these
industries. Such output subsidies would incur additional efficiency costs that we do not capture.




                                                16
     xpenditurs are intended to incentivize energy savings and the like. Our




(a) Targeted Allowance Allocation Scheme                    (b) Per Capita Dividend Scheme


       Figure 3. The Allocation of Allowance Value according to Model Distribution
                                       Instruments.

regions and in different income classes. As modeled, allowance value allocated
abroad has no value for U.S. households. In the proposed legislation, most of the
allowance value distribution is a pure transfer but some of these program
expenditures are intended to incentivize energy savings and the like. Our
allocation approach treats all of these program expenditures as pure transfers.19
To the extent these programs overcome barriers that are not addressed by the CO2
price, additional efficiency gains would reduce the welfare costs we estimate. To
the extent these programs create double-incentives for particular activities, then
they are redirecting abatement to activities that are not the most cost effective and
that would increase the welfare cost we estimate. The assumption that they are
pure transfers is therefore a neutral assumption. Furthermore, note that transfers
of allowance value to households are treated as being non-taxable, with the effect


19
  We assume that the 25% of allowances in the Cantwell-Collins bill that go to a dedicated trust to
fund climate mitigation and adaptation, clean energy and efficiency, and transition assistance
programs, are allocated according to residual shares for similar categories (Energy use, Foreign,
Government) in the Waxman-Markey bill. We understand that additional legislation would be
needed to appropriate this allowance revenue to the purposes identified in the legislation, and
absent that the revenue would be returned to the Treasury.




                                                17
of increasing how much allowance value must be set aside relative to a scenario
where such transfers are taxed.
   Allowances allocated to government reduce the need for capital and labor taxes
to be raised as much to meet the revenue neutrality assumption we impose20, and
so affect the distribution to households based on how increases in taxes affect
different regions and income classes.

5. SCENARIO DESIGN
We distinguish two sets of scenarios that differ with respect to the underlying
allowance allocation scheme. Scenarios labeled TAAS represent a Targeted
Allowance Allocation Scheme that is based on the Waxman-Markey or Kerry-
Lieberman proposal. The TAAS_DR scenario sets aside a larger amount of
allowances for the purpose of Deficit Reduction (Deficit Reduction) as in the
allocation rule proposed by Kerry-Boxer. Scenarios labeled PCDS model a simple
Per Capita Dividend Scheme as is described in the Cantwell-Collins proposal.
   For each of the proposed allocation schemes, we design two scenarios that
differ with respect to how the revenue neutrality requirement is met. 22 Our base
case assumption is that sufficient allowance revenue is withheld by the
government to cover the deficit impact and the remaining revenue is allocated at
the percentages shown in Figure 3. An alternative case, denoted TAX, assumes
that only the amount of allowance revenue specifically designated for deficit
reduction in the bills is allocated to the government. We then raise capital and
labor taxes uniformly across regions and income classes (in percentage points) to
offset revenue losses from carbon pricing. This is separate from any allowance
revenue targeted to deficit reduction. All scenarios assume the medium offset
case from the analysis carried out in Appendix C of Paltsev et al. (2009) with
identical assumptions about supply and costs of domestic and international
offsets. We further assume that offsets have a cost to the economy, and implement
this assumption by transferring abroad the value of allowances purchases
internationally. Our assumption is that the average cost of these credits is $5 per
effective ton of offsets of CO2-e in 2015, rising at 4% per year thereafter.24 Also

20
   See Section 5 for a discussion of our treatment of revenue neutrality.
22
   We fix government spending in the policy scenarios to match government spending under the
reference scenario. Since government spending does not enter household utility functions, we did
not want to confound welfare impacts from changes in the size of government with welfare
impacts of climate policy. We discuss the implications of this assumption in section 6.1 below.
Government spending in the reference scenario is assumed to growth in proportion with aggregate
income.
24
   The Waxman-Markey bill specifies that 1.25 tons of foreign reductions are required to produce
1 ton of effective offsets. The $5/ton initial offset price means the actual payment per ton of
foreign reduction is $4. For all proposals analyzed, we treat offsets costs symmetrically.




                                              18
Table 4. Correspondence between Proposals Allowance Value Allocations and Distribution Instruments in USREP.

ALLOWANCE RECIPIENTS                                                        MODEL INSTRUMENT
Mitigating Price Impacts on Consumers
       All electricity local distribution companies (LDCs)                  Lump-sum transfer to consumers. Allocated to regions based on GHG emissions
                                                                            (50%) and based on value of electricity consumption (50%). Within a region, allocated
                                                                            to households based on the value of electricity
       Additional allowances for small electricity LDCs                     Lump-sum transfer to consumers. Allocated to regions based on GHG emissions
                                                                            (50%) and based on value of gas consumption (50%). Within a region, allocated to
                                                                            households based on the value of gas consumption.
      Natural gas LDCs                                                      Lump-sum transfer to consumers based on value of gas consumption
      State programs for home heating oil, propane, and kerosene            Lump-sum transfer to consumers based on value of oil consumption (excluding oil
      consumers                                                             consumed for transportation purposes)
Assistance for Households and Workers
      Protection for low-income households                                  Lump-sum transfer to households with annual income less than $30k.
      Worker assistance and job training                                    Distributed to regions based on value of energy production (coal, crude oil and refined
                                                                            oil). Within a region, distributed across households base on wage income.
       Per-capita consumer rebate                                           Lump-sum transfer based on per-capita.
                                1
       Nuclear working training                                             Distributed to regions based on value of nuclear electricity generation. Within a region,
                                                                            distributed across households based on wage income.
                                        2
Allocations to Vulnerable Industries                                        Lump-sum transfer based on capital income
                     3
Technology Funding                                                          Distributed to regions based on energy use (industrial and private). Within a region,
                                                                            distributed based on household energy consumption.
                        4
International Funding                                                       Transferred abroad.
Domestic Adaptation                                                         Distributed to government.
Other Uses
        Deposited into the Treasury (to offset the bill's impact on the Distributed to government.
        deficit)
        Grants to state and local agencies for transportation planning and Distributed to government.
                1
        transit
        Compensation for "early action" emission reductions prior to cap's Distributed to households on a per capita basis
        inception
                                                                                                                                                                 5
        Allowances already auctioned in prior years                         46% distributed to households on a per-capita basis, 54% distributed to government.
        Strategic reserve allowances                                        Distributed to households on a per capita basis.
      1                                                              2
Note: This allowance category only applies to the Kerry-Boxer bill. Allocations to vulnerable industries include: Energy-intensive trade-exposed (EITE) industries,
all petroleum refiners, additional allowances for small refiners, merchant coal-fired electricity generators, generators under long-term contracts without cost
                                                      3
recovery, cogeneration facilities in industrial parks. Technology Funding includes: Carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) incentives, state renewable energy
and efficiency programs, state building retrofit programs, incentives for renewable energy and agricultural emissions reductions, clean vehicle technology
incentives, energy innovation hubs, energy efficiency and renewable energy worker training fund, advanced energy research, supplemental reductions from
                                                               4
agriculture, abandoned mine land, and renewable energy. International Funding includes: International avoided deforestation, international clean technology
                                            5
deployment, and international adaptation. We allocate allowances that are already auctioned in prior years to the government and to households according to the
respective average share over the period from 2012-2050.




                                                                                19
note that since we create more allowance revenue for the government by
increasing the allowances to account for credits coming from outside the system,
we assume that the income transferred abroad to account for permit prices is taken
from the allowance revenue. Finally, our assumptions about the supply of offsets
imply a 203 bmt cumulative emissions target for 2012-205, which underlies all of
the scenarios we consider here.
   Our analysis also takes banking and borrowing into consideration. In the
Waxman-Markey bill, banking of allowances is unlimited and a two-year
compliance period allows unlimited borrowing from one year ahead without
penalty. Limited borrowing from two to five years ahead is also allowed, but with
interest. In general, we find no need for aggregate borrowing, and so there is no
need to implement an explicit restriction on it.
   Our scenarios draw on features of the proposed pieces of legislation described
above but in no way purport to model them in their entirety. Our focus is on the
efficiency and distributional consequences of allowance allocation schemes and
our scenarios model allowance trading along with their allocation over time. In
that regard, we have had to interpret how we believe various allocations would
work in practice when the exact allocation approach has not yet been fully
described, and would only be completely determined by executive branch
agencies responsible for these programs if the legislation were implemented. In
addition, we do not model other components of the various pieces of legislation
dealing with other policy measures such as renewable portfolio standards.

6. ANALYSIS OF SCENARIOS
Figure 4 shows the Reference and Policy with offsets emissions for the period
2012 to 2050. Projected Reference cumulative emissions over the 2012-2050
period are 298 bmt. In the Policy with offsets case, cumulative emissions are 203
bmt, a reduction of nearly one-third from Reference. The emissions path shown in
Figure 4 for the Policy with offsets case is the result from the scenario TAAS.
Cumulative emissions are identical under all six policy simulations, and the actual
emissions paths are nearly identical. Slight differences in the emissions paths
exist because of different overall welfare costs and distributional effects that can
lead to a slightly different allocation of abatement over time, but these differences
are so small that they would be imperceptible if plotted in Figure 4. Emissions in
the Reference include estimates of the effects of existing energy policies under the
Energy Independence and Security Act and the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act as they are projected to affect greenhouse gas emissions. Note,
that while the allowance allocation for 2050 is set at 83% below 2005, our
projected emissions in 2050 in the Policy with offsets case are only 35% below
2005 emissions because of the availability of offsets and banking. Before turning
to distributional analyses by income group or region, we consider the aggregate



                                         20
                (a) GHG Emissions                                   (b) CO2 Price

     Figure 4. U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Price (Scenario TAAS).

U.S. welfare impacts of the various policies we model. Figure 5 presents the
change in welfare relative to the Reference scenario, measured in equivalent
variation as a percentage of full income27, for the various bills. One key result we
see is that the _TAX scenarios lead to higher welfare costs than the scenarios
where a fraction of the allowance revenue is withheld to satisfy revenue
neutrality. Considering the TAAS scenario, for example, the welfare cost is 1.38
percent of full income by 2050 under the lump-sum scenario and 1.60 percent
under the tax scenario. Similar results hold for TAAS_DR and PCDS. This occurs
because the _TAX scenarios create more deadweight loss from capital and labor
taxation. Many economists have focused on a double-dividend effect where
allowance revenue is used to lower capital and labor taxes, but here we have the
reverse effect. Not enough of the revenue is retained to offset the deficit effects
of the bill so that capital and labor taxes need to be increased, thereby increasing
the cost the bill.28
   Conditional on the treatment of revenue shortfalls, the three scenarios have
very similar aggregate costs. TAAS_DR_TAX is somewhat less costly than
TAAS_TAX because the former scenario reserves more of the allowance to offset
27
   Full income is the value of consumption, leisure, and the consumption stream from residential
capital.
28
   This follows from our particular assumption about how taxes are raised to maintain revenue
neutrality. It is certainly possible that lump-sum taxes could be employed or some other
configuration of tax increases that is less distortionary than the tax increases we model. Therefore
one should not conclude that our result is general.




                                                21
the deficit and thus capital and labor taxes do not need to be increased as much.
The costs of PCDS and PCDS_TAX are slightly lower than the TAAS scenarios.
The lower costs of the PCDS scenarios at first blush are surprising. These
scenarios retain less of the allowance value to offset the deficit, and hence in the
_TAX case it requires somewhat higher increases in capital and labor taxes to
offset the deficit. The lower costs in PCDS scenarios arise from the distributional
outcomes as they affect energy expenditures and savings. In particular, TAAS and
TAAS_DR, through the low income energy assistance programs allocate more of
the revenue value to poorer households. Lower income households spend a larger
fraction of their income on energy and they save less. Thus, the abatement effect
of pricing carbon is offset to greater extent by an income effect among poorer
households in the TAAS and TAAS_DR than in the PCDS scenarios. In addition,
there is less saving and therefore less investment in TAAS and TAAS_DR because
less is saved for each additional dollar allocated to poorer households. Note that
our aggregate welfare estimates are a simple sum of the welfare of each income
class across all regions. An aggregate welfare function that weighted the welfare
of lower income households higher, giving welfare benefit to more progressive
outcomes would change these results, showing better results for TAAS and
TAAS_DR. How much to value more progressive outcomes is a judgment. Here
we leave it to the policy community to decide whether the more progressive
outcome of TAAS and TAAS_DR is worth the extra welfare cost.

6.1. Distributional Impacts across Income Groups
Aggregate impacts obscure differential effects across households. Ideally we
would construct a measure of the lifetime burden of carbon pricing and relate that
to a measure of lifetime income. Our data do not allow us to do that. Our
recursive-dynamic model has households of different income groups in each year
but we have no data that allow us to track the transition of households from one
income group to another. Instead we report burden impacts for different income
groups at different points of time to show how the relative burden shifts over
time.
   Figure 6 shows the burden for a representative household in each income
group for 2015, 2030, and 2050 for TAAS measured as equivalent variation
divided by full income (including the value of leisure and household capital).
Positive values indicate that a household benefits from the carbon policy.
Households in the two lowest income groups, hhl and hh10, benefit in all periods
as the return of permit revenue through various mechanisms more than offsets the
higher cost of goods and services due to carbon pricing and any effects on their
wages and capital




                                        22
     Figure 5. Welfare Change for Different GHG Control Proposals (U.S. Average).

income. Households hh15 and hh25 initially benefit but eventually bear net costs,
hh15 only in the final period. The effect of allocating an increasing amount of
allowances on a per-capita basis is particularly strong for the lowest income group
relative to higher income households since a dollar of additional revenue makes
up a larger fraction of full income for these households.29 The five highest
income households bear net costs throughout the period though the burden
through 2030 is less than 1 percent of income for all income groups. Over time,
the burden of the policy grows for wealthier households with the burden ranging
from 1 to roughly 1.5 percent by 2050.
   In all years the cap and trade policy combined with the TAAS allocation
scenarios is sharply progressive over the first five income groups though the

29
  Pechman (1985) realized that income data for the low income groups suffered from substantial
income mismeasurement. Since then, the approach adopted by him and many others is to omit the
lowest income group from distributional analyses. Given the interest of the policy community for
impacts on low income households, we decided to report results for households with annual
income less than $10k, but we want to point out that in light of likely measurements problems we
do not have the same degree of confidence in results as we do for other income groups.




                                              23
Table 6. Annual Cost per Household by Income Group (Scenario TAAS).
             hhl      hh10    hh15     hh25    hh30     hh50    hh75    hh100     hh150     Average

2015         -614     -472    -467     -426    36       261     328     344       401       87

2020         -563     -412    -418     -349    230      386     532     501       532       221

2025         -450     -248    -207     -64     631      920     1109    1098      1237      646

2030         -603     -240    -168     63      950      1420    1589    1650      2031      939

2035         -763     -304    -190     110     1170     1842    2050    2192      2758      1195

2040         -851     -307    -156     203     1397     2222    2456    2636      3304      1451

2045         -827     -216    -13      411     1658     2661    2916    3141      3918      1774

2050         -778     -109    129      594     1853     2974    3246    3482      4278      2008
NPV
        a    -291     -150    -119     -33     331      538     614     642       780       347
Average
Note: Table reports annual dollar costs per household by income group in various years. All dollar
                              a
amounts are in 2006 dollars. Net Present Value (NPV) average of welfare costs discounted to
2010 at 4% per annum.

burden for each income group, except that of the lowest, grows over time as the
policy begins to impose larger reductions in emissions. The difference in burdens
over the lowest five income groups grows over time as does the spread between
the burden for the lowest income group relative to the highest income group. The
policy is essentially neutral over the top income groups in all periods. As we will
show below over time sources side effects become more important in shaping the
distributional outcomes than do uses side effects.
   Table 6 reports the annual cost in dollar terms for different households in
different years. On average the per-household costs are relatively modest in the
early years of the program. While the costs appear large by 2050, it is important
to keep in mind that incomes are growing so that these costs are still modest
relative to household income. The average over time is the net present value
(NPV) average. Note that Waxman-Markey allows considerable borrowing of
allowances from the future by the Federal government if necessary to moderate
CO2 prices in the early years. If these were auctioned in earlier years then the
allowance revenue would accrue to the government earlier and in principle it
could be used earlier. We have assumed the revenue is only available when the
allowances were originally scheduled to be auctioned. If borrowing occurred and
the revenue was used as specified in the bill—to reduce




                                               24
Figure 6. Welfare Change by Income Group, U.S. Average (Scenario TAAS).




Figure 7. Welfare Change by Income Group, U.S. Average (Scenario PCDS).




                                  25
Figure 8. Welfare Change by Income Group, U.S. Average (Scenario TAAS_TAX).




Figure 9. Welfare Change by Income Group, U.S. Average (Scenario PCDS_TAX).




                                    26
Table 7. Allocation Of Annual Allowance Value And Tax Revenue (Scenario TAAS).
Allowance Values and Tax Revenue             Allocation of Allowance Value
                                             (Net of Tax Revenue Loss)
Year Allowance Loss in           Loss in tax Households      Government    Transferred
       value         tax         revenue                                   abroad
                            a
                     revenue     (% of
                                 allowance
                                 value)
2015 160.6           50.3        31.3        99.8            2.9           7.6
2020 182.9           52.2        28.5        113.0           2.9           9.0
2025 212.7           72.3        34.0        115.9           5.9           12.4
2030 254.1           73.1        28.8        131.5           30.2          19.3
2035 309.5           91.0        29.4        157.3           40.0          21.2
2040 374.0           124.4       33.3        182.4           43.0          24.2
2045 434.4           182.8       42.1        195.4           31.8          24.4
2050 494.7           248.8       50.3        203.0           19.1          23.9
                                                                     a
Note: Unless otherwise stated, all amounts are in billions of dollars. Change relative to the baseline.


deficit impacts and as a lump sum rebate to consumers - that could blunt some of
the progressivity in earlier years.
    Costs and distributional impacts for TAAS_DR are very similar to TAAS and so
we do not report them here. Rather we turn to the PCDS. Like TAAS and
TAAS_DR, PCDS has modest to negative burdens initially with burdens rising
over time. In comparison to the former bills the burden spreads across income
groups in any given year are smaller. Lower income households benefit in the
early years but not as much as in TAAS and TAAS_DR. This is reflected in the
flatter distributional curves for different years in Figure 7. By 2050 the PCDS
scenario and the TAAS scenario have more similar distributional effects because
by that time the allocation formula in TAAS_DR has become similar to that of the
PCDS, with 65 percent of revenue distributed on per capita basis. The remaining
difference is the continued allocation to low income consumers.
Distributional outcomes are altered when the full value of allowances is allocated
as specified in the bills and revenue losses in the federal budget are instead made
up by raising personal income tax rates. In general, the distributional burden
across household groups is more progressive in the _TAX cases. Consider the
burden snapshots for three different years as shown in Figure 8 for TAAS_TAX.
Lower-income households fare better under this approach with benefits to the
lowest income group rising from 1 to about 1.5 percent of full income in 2015
while the highest income groups are only slightly affected. Lower income groups
continue to do better – and in some cases are better off – when tax rates are raised
to recoup lost tax revenues than when allowance value is withheld. In general




                                                 27
Table 8. Increase In Marginal Personal Income Tax Rate for Revenue Neutrality.
Year            TAAS_TAX                TAAS_DR_TAX         PCDS_TAX
2015              0.52                          0.34        0.48
2020              0.56                          0.35        0.43
2025              0.73                          0.50        0.58
2030              0.58                          0.26        0.55
2035              0.63                          0.31        0.65
2040              0.80                          0.35        0.83
2045              1.13                          0.58        1.12
2050              1.50                          0.79        1.48
Note: Tax rate increase in percentage points.

they remain better off through 2050 because of the tax changes. By raising taxes
to offset the deficit, more revenue remains available to be distributed, and the
increase in transfers to lower-income groups more than offsets increases in
taxation to these households. A similar result holds for the PCDS allocation
proposal (see Figure 9).
    The different treatments of revenue neutrality illustrates a classic equity-
efficiency trade-off, where the withholding of allowances to preserve revenue
neutrality yields higher efficiency but less progressive outcomes than if taxes are
raised to maintain revenue neutrality in the government budget.
    The impact of climate policy on government tax revenues is significant and
helps explain why the different approaches to maintaining revenue neutrality
matter. Table 7 provides a comparison of allowance values and losses in tax
revenue arising from cap-and-trade policy. The initial loss of tax revenue due to
higher costs for firms and reduced economic activity is about 30 percent of the
value of allowances. The percentage begins rising in 2040 and by 2050, the loss
in tax revenue rises to one-half. The high tax revenue loss is in part an artifact of
the assumption in the model that fixes the path of government spending to match
that of the reference (no policy) scenario. (We refer to this as absolute revenue
neutrality.) Lower GDP growth increases the size of government relative to GDP
and magnifies the loss in tax revenue relative to allowance value. We make this
assumption because the government sector in USREP does not produce explicit
public goods that have any welfare value. By keeping revenue neutral changes in
government we do not release or consume more resources that otherwise would
be available to private sector.
    An alternative approach would be to fix the ratio of government spending to
GDP in the policy scenarios. To assess the distributional implications of this
would then require production of a public good and an estimate of how that public
good created welfare for different income classes in different regions, so that




                                                  28
        Figure 10. GHG Emissions Reductions by Region (Scenario TAAS).




              Figure 11. Welfare Change by Region (Scenario TAAS).

when government spending was increased or decreased we would have an
estimate of how that was affecting distribution compared with how distribution
was affected by changes in resources available to the private sector. If the




                                      29
government were kept at the same size in relative rather than absolute terms, the
revenue needed to offset impacts on the deficit would not increase and would
generally be at about the percentage we see in 2015. The difference would then
be additional allowance value that could be used for distributional or other
purposes.
   We note that the Congressional Budget Office scores bills on their impact on
the deficit, using a standard procedure for all legislation that is accepted by
Congress. The CBO methodology is described in Congressional Budget Office
(2009).     That approach will not be consistent with our approach that
endogenously calculates the deficit, and the revenue needed to close the deficit.
The two approaches do lead to reasonably close estimates of the allowance value
that must be set aside in early years (25 percent for CBO and 30 percent in this
analysis) before the results diverge due to the different modeling approach taken
by CBO from the approach taken here.
   With absolute revenue neutrality, the need to make up substantial revenue
losses leads to fairly large increases in marginal personal income tax rates under
the tax-based make-up (see Table 8). The TAAS_DR_TAX increases are much
less than the other two scenarios because more of the revenue is explicitly
allocated to deficit effects of the proposal. This just illustrates one way to make
up revenue losses. Other approaches could be undertaken that could enhance
efficiency or equity goals.30
   Summing up, we find that the TAAS and TAAS_DR scenarios on the one hand
and the PCDS scenarios on the other have quite different distributional impacts
across households, especially in the early years of the program. In addition,
policy decisions on how to close the budget deficit arising from decreased tax
collections have both efficiency and distributional implications.
   Using higher personal income taxes to close the deficit incurs an efficiency
cost but increases the progressivity of the programs because more of the
allowance revenue is available for distribution to households. We next turn to
regional impacts.

6.2. Distributional Impacts across Regions
Policy makers have also expressed concern over the regional impacts of climate
policy. In this section we explore how regional impacts change over time for the
allocation scenarios we have designed. Figure 10 shows that the greenhouse gas
emission reductions differ substantially among regions. Results are shown for the
TAAS scenario. These differences reflect different shares of emissions from
different sectors (electricity, transportation, industry) and different


30
     This is simply a variant on the green tax swap idea analyzed by Metcalf (1999) and others.




                                                 30
               Figure 12. Welfare Change by Region (Scenario PCDS).

electric generation technologies (nuclear, hydro, coal, natural gas). The energy
and emissions intensive regions (MOUNT, SEAST, SCENT, NCENT) show the
largest reductions. States in the Mountain, Southeast, Northeast and North Central
regions all experience reductions in GHG emissions relative to the business as
usual scenario in excess of 50 percent by 2050.
   Figure 11 shows the welfare impact of the TAAS scenario for each region.
Initially California, Texas, Florida and states in the South Central, Pacific, and
New England regions gain from the policy while other states suffer losses. By
2050 all states are bearing costs, ranging from about one-half of one percent (New
England) to about one and three-quarters percent.
   Welfare impacts for Alaska are not shown in Figure 12 to better visualize
relative welfare impacts for other regions. Under the TAAS scenario Alaska’s
welfare effects are as follows: 2015: -0.42%; 2020: -1.15%; 2025: -2.26%; 2030:
-2.57%; 2040: -3.52%; 2050: -5.27%. The substantial welfare impacts for Alaska
can be attributed to the fact that Alaska exhibits by far the highest energy intensity
among all regions and is a large energy producing state with a small population
(see Figure 14). In earlier years of the policy, welfare effects are relatively modest
compared to, e.g., 2030 and 2050. Alaska actually receives by far the highest
allowance revenue per household among all regions under the TAAS scheme since
many of the allowances are allocated on the basis of either energy consumption or
production, but this is far from sufficient to offset the large costs the economy
bears. As we note below, over time the allowance allocation effect becomes less
important in determining overall policy costs, and relative regional welfare



                                         31
differences are increasingly shaped by energy characteristics and income sources.
This explains why welfare effects for Alaska become more negative over time
both relative to earlier periods of the policy and in comparison to other regions.
The Alaska case is an interesting one in that it is a small state in terms of
population and GDP with relatively unique energy use and production attributes.
Our other regions, by aggregating more states, tend to average out so that there is
less disparity. The Alaska results are illustrative of within region effects that we
do not capture because of our aggregation.
   Regional impacts under PCDS are less balanced initially (Figure 12). The
standard deviation of welfare impacts under PCDS is slightly larger (0.11) than
under the TAAS scenario (0.09). Recall that PCDS deliberately takes a per-capita
approach premised on the view that regional disparities do not matter, while TAAS
includes a number of provisions (such as LDC allocations) that are explicitly
intended to address regional disparities. While the regional dispersion of welfare
impacts is slightly larger under PCDS, one interesting result of this analysis is that
the much simpler per-capita based approach is almost as effective in achieving a
balanced regional outcome as the targeted allocation scheme. By 2050, the
impacts under PCDS are quite similar to those under TAAS. Differential regional
impacts due to differences in allowance allocation schemes dissipate over time.
Section 7.1 provides a discussion of this effect.
   Impacts under TAAS_DR are very similar to those under TAAS and are not
reported here. Figure 15 also shows that the relative impacts across regions are
fairly stable over the policy period under the PCDS allocation. South Central,
North Central and Northeast states bear a larger impact of the policy though the
maximum difference across the period is less than two percentage points.31
   We do not show here the _TAX scenarios because the results are broadly
similar to the scenarios where a fraction of the allowance value is withheld to
satisfy revenue neutrality. The main differences are that the overall welfare costs
are larger for the U.S. as whole and thus regional losses tend to be somewhat
larger. In terms of distribution, the _TAX cases tend to favor lower income
regions (South and middle of the country) at the expense of higher income regions
(mainly the east and west coasts) because higher income regions pay more taxes.
   Summing up the regional results, all allocation scenarios lead to modest
differential impacts across most regions. The TAAS and TAAS_DR proposals
show greater gains to several regions in the initial years of the policy and higher
costs to other regions than do the PCDS scenarios. One of the political economy

31
   Welfare impacts for Alaska under the PCDS scenario are as follows: 2015: -0.60%; 2020: -
1.10%; 2025: -2.31%; 2030: -3.25%; 2040: -4.61%; 2050: -5.95%. Note that under the PCDS
allocation scheme Alaska receives less allowance revenue as compared to the TAAS case. This
lowers savings and investment, and hence brings about even larger welfare losses in later periods
of the policy as for the TAAS scenario.




                                               32
realities of climate change is that the East and West Coast regions have pushed
harder for climate legislation while the middle of the country and much of south
has resisted such legislation. With high energy intensity in these regions and the
significant presence of fossil industry one might expect greater economic impacts
of GHG mitigation legislation in these regions. The Cantwell-Collins bill has not
been subject to as much debate and negotiation as the other two bills, and has
been able to retain a simple allocation formula. The much richer set of allocation
mechanisms in Markey-Waxman and Kerry-Boxer are likely the result of
negotiation among representatives of these regions. To the extent our analysis
captures the regional distributional intent of these bills it suggests that the
allocation formula are not completely effective in evening out regional effects.
Some states like Texas and those in the South Central region that might have been
expected to suffer higher costs have those costs blunted significantly and actually
come out ahead in early years. Other regions such as the Mountain and North
Central states remain the biggest losers in early years. Over time the allocation
mechanisms evolve, and regional impacts are driven more directly by other
factors.

7. FURTHER ANALYSIS OF THE BURDEN RESULTS
In a CGE model it is difficult to attribute differences in results by region and
income class to specific causes because the possible sources of differences are
many and they interact in complex ways. This section provides an analysis of the
results to provide greater insight into why we see differences in effects.

7.1. The Importance of the Allowance Allocation Effect over Time
In order to isolate the impact of the allowance allocation on welfare, we run a
scenario assuming the allowance value in a given period is not recycled while
allowances in preceding periods are allocated according to the scheme described
in the TAAS scenario.
    Note that welfare costs will be higher in this case because the unrecycled
revenue increases government expenditure which as described earlier does not, as
modeled, enter household utility functions. The intent here is to use this exercise
to isolate the effects of higher energy costs caused by pricing from those
distributional impacts that result from the allowance allocation. Figure 13 shows
regional welfare impacts under this ―no-recycling‖ case. As expected, welfare
costs for each region and each period are higher as compared with the
corresponding scenario that assumes revenue allocation (compare with Figure 14).
For 2015, the distribution of regional costs is due to differences in regional
abatement costs. In later years, the results are driven by abatement costs for that
year, and the economic growth effects from previous years through the impact on




                                        33
              Figure 13. Regional Welfare Impacts without Allowance Allocation
                                    (Scenario TAAS).




          Figure 14. Regional Energy Intensity over Time (Scenario TAAS).

Gross Regional Product and savings and investment. We see from Figure 16 that
the pattern of regional welfare costs corresponds closely to differences in regional
energy intensity (energy consumption per dollar of GDP). Figure 14 shows an
index of energy intensity by region over time (normalized to the current period




                                        34
U.S. value). The patterns of regional welfare impacts and relative energy
intensities largely coincide, and are stable over time.
    Comparing Figure 14 with Figure 12 now provides a way of disentangling the
effect of the current period allowance allocation on welfare. The key result is that
the allocation effect becomes less important over time, and that regional welfare
impacts are eventually driven more by differences in the energy intensity. One
reason for this result is that over time there is less allowance value to be
distributed relative to the rising CO2 price as the carbon policy becomes tighter.
The number of allowances decreases over time and, in addition to that, the erosion
of the tax base is steadily increasing which means that more of the allowance
value has to be retained to maintain revenue-neutrality. This effect explains why
initially in periods 2015-2025 the allocation of allowances has a strong effect on
regional welfare impacts of the policy. As noted, regional effects of TAAS bear
little relationship to factors like energy intensity and energy production that
should factor into the cost of the policy. Some of the regions that display relative
high energy intensity are actually overcompensated in 2015 and 2020 (viz. the
South Central and North Central region, and Texas). The results suggest that any
implemented allocation scheme will prove to be less effective over time in muting
the regional variation in welfare impacts.

7.2. Sources vs. Uses Side Impacts of Carbon Pricing
A well-established observation is that carbon pricing incorporates a regressive
element because lower income households spend a higher proportion of their
income on energy. Most estimates of the distributional impact of carbon and
energy pricing focus on this ―cost-push analysis‖ element of carbon pricing by
using an Input-Output framework to trace price increases through a make-and-use
matrix to evaluate the policy cost on different households based on expenditure
shares (e.g., Dinan and Rogers (2002), Parry (2004), Burtraw et al. (2009) and
Hassett et al. (2009)). Such an approach neglects behavioral responses to relative
price changes and does not take into account sources side effects. 32 Rausch et al.
(2009) found that even in a static model the sources side effects were important in
determining the distributional effects of carbon pricing. Here we repeat their
counterfactual analysis in our recursive dynamic simulation.
   Figure 15 provides welfare impacts across income groups for three scenarios
designed to disentangle the contribution of sources and uses side effects on
welfare across the income distribution. The logic of our counterfactual analysis is
as follows. If households in different income groups are characterized by identical
income shares i.e., have equal ratios of capital, labor, and transfer income, then a
32
   Sources side effects refer to burden impacts arising from changes in relative factor prices, while
uses side effects refer to burden impacts arising from change in relative product prices. This
terminology goes back to Musgrave (1957).




                                                 35
change in relative factor prices affects all households equally. This counterfactual
analysis isolates the distributional impacts of the uses of income effects of a
policy. If households are assumed to have identical expenditure shares for all
goods and services, a change in relative product prices produces an equal impact
on consumers in different income classes. In that case, we isolate the
distributional impacts of the sources of income effects of a policy. Any
differential burden impacts of a policy across households from the counterfactual
case that eliminates differences among households in how they spend their
income are then determined by sources of income effects. Results that eliminate
differences in income sources, allows us to focus on how uses side factors shape
the relative burden of carbon pricing.
   The two counterfactual cases do not eliminate these drivers of incidence but by
eliminating household heterogeneity they suppress differential impacts across the
income distribution. Harberger (1962) uses a similar analysis to identify the
incidence of a corporate income tax. Note that as we measure the real burden, i.e.,
the change in equivalent variation, our incidence calculation is independent from
the choice of numéraire.
   Panel a shows results for 2015, panel b for 2030 and panel c for 2050. In each
panel results for three cases are shown. The line labeled ―carbon pricing burden‖
shows the welfare effect that combines income and expenditure heterogeneity.
This is the welfare effect, without any recycling, given observed income sources
and expenditures shares as they vary among households. The line labeled
―identical income shares‖ eliminates heterogeneity of income sources to isolate
the uses side effect of the policy. The line labeled ―identical expenditure shares‖
eliminates expenditure heterogeneity to isolate the sources side effect. A
downward slope indicates a progressive result and an upward slope a regressive
result. We also show the observed burden policy impacts labeled as ―carbon
pricing burden‖. This shows the differential burden impacts resulting from
heterogeneity in both the sources and uses of income.
   To eliminate the muddying effect of allowance allocation we assume that the
carbon revenue is not recycled to households.34 Non-recycled revenue increases
government spending on goods and services which, by assumption, is not utility
enhancing. As a result, the costs to households are much larger because the
allowance revenue is not available to them but we still see the striking result that
carbon pricing is modestly progressive initially and, for income groups above the
two lowest becomes essentially neutral by 2030. For the counterfactual analysis
we hold government transfers to households constant at the no policy level.



34
  We also looked at a scenario in which we assume that additional government revenue is spent
according to private sector consumption. We find that this has second-order effects only.




                                             36
              (a) Year 2015                               (b) Year 2030




              (c) Year 2050

    Figure 15. Relative Sources vs. Uses Side Impacts across Income Distribution.

   The uses side impacts are sharply regressive in all years in accord with
previous analyses that focus on expenditure side burdens only. Sources side
impacts, on the other hand, are modestly progressive in 2015 and essentially
proportional in the other years. In all years, combined effects in the line ―carbon
pricing burden‖ track closely the line ―identical expenditure shares‖. This sug-
gests that relative welfare impacts across the income distribution are largely
driven by sources side effects.
   Table 8 reports sources of income by income class for the base year, and helps
to explain why sources side effects are modestly progressive especially at low
income levels. The relative income burden of carbon pricing depends on the
change in relative factors prices and on differences in the ratio for the sources of




                                         37
Table 8. Source of Income by Annual Income Class in USREP Model.
        Fraction of    Fraction of    Fraction of    K/L     Transfer /
        Income         Income         Income         ratio   (Capital+Labor)
        from           from           from                   ratio
        Labor          Capital        Transfers
Hhl     12.8%          6.5%           80.8%          0.5     4.2
hh10    28.6%          9.8%           61.6%          0.3     1.6
hh15      43.0%            18.2%             38.8%             0.4          0.6
hh25      48.3%            22.3%             29.5%             0.5          0.4
hh30      55.3%            24.7%             20.0%             0.4          0.3
hh50      60.4%            35.4%             4.2%              0.6          0.0
hh75      62.0%            37.5%             0.5%              0.6          0.0
hh10      59.4%            42.3%             -1.7%             0.7          0.0
0
hh15      57.6%            45.7%             -3.3%             0.8          0.0
0
Note: Based on IMPLAN data (Minnesota IMPLAN Group, 2008). Household transfers include
social security, state welfare payments, unemployment compensation, veterans’ benefits, food
stamps, supplemental security income, direct relief, earned income credit. Note that transfers are
net of household transfer payments to the rest-of-world (including cash transfers as well as goods
to the rest-of-world).

income for households. We find that the capital rental rate increases over time
relative to the price for labor. As the capital-labor ratio slightly increases in
income, just looking at the relative income burden from changes in capital and
labor income would imply that the uses side is slightly regressive. This finding is
in line with Fullerton and Heutel (2010) who find that the capital and labor
income for the lowest income households falls proportionally more than average.
What makes the source-side incidence modestly progressive to proportional is the
fact that low income households derive a large fraction of income from transfers
relative to low income households, and we hold transfers constant relative to the
no policy baseline. Transfer income thus insulates households from changes in
capital and labor income. This effect is strongest for the two lowest income
households where transfers account for about 80 and 60 percent of income as
shown in Table 8.36
   Figure 15 also suggests that especially in a dynamic setting, the sources side
effect is more important in determining the welfare impact than is the uses side
effect for a given income class. The intuition for this result seems fairly obvious—
over time the impacts of an ongoing mitigation policy cumulate through effects on
overall economic growth and are reflected in general wage rates and capital
36
   The sensitivity of distributional impacts of policies to the treatment of government transfers has
been found in other work. Browning and Johnson (1979), for example, find that holding transfers
fixed in real terms sharply increases the progressivity of the U.S. tax system.




                                                38
returns. The annual abatement costs become an ever smaller share of the
economic burden of the policy, and so are less important in determining the
overall impacts. Furthermore, because the fraction of income derived from
transfers increases over time, we find that the progressivity of the sources-side
effect also slightly increases for the five lowest income groups.
   Overall, this analysis demonstrates that it can be misleading to base the
distributional analysis on uses side factors only. The virtue of our general
equilibrium framework is the ability to capture both expenditure and income
effects in a comprehensive manner.


8. SUMMARY
There has been much attention on the overall cost and efficiency of current
legislative proposals for addressing climate change in the U.S. In this paper we
focus on the distributional effects of the policies taking account of both the higher
energy costs that carbon pricing implies and the distribution of allowance value
described in the bills. Secondarily we are also interested in any efficiency effects
of the allowance allocation approaches in the different bills. To focus on the
effect of allowance allocation, we used approximations of the allowance
allocation features of current proposals, but represented here as a comparable,
comprehensive cap on all emissions in the U.S. with the same level of external
credits allowed across all allocation scenarios. We, therefore, did not represent
other features of the bills many of which may have strong efficiency and
distributional consequences. While we try to adhere to the text of the various
pieces of legislation as closely as possible when allocating allowance value, we
note that we had to rely on our own interpretation of legislative intent in places
where allocation mechanisms were not completely defined in the bills. While the
scenarios are motivated by the various proposed pieces of legislation, none of the
scenarios should be interpreted as an analysis of the complete legislation.
    Focusing on efficiency first, we find that retaining more of the revenue to
offset the deficit impacts of the legislation, as does the Kerry Boxer bill, improves
the efficiency of mitigation policy because labor and capital taxes need to be
raised less to maintain revenue neutrality. Economic efficiency is improved if all
deficit impacts are offset with revenue retained from the allowance auction. The
trade-off is that it would leave less revenue to affect desired distributional
outcomes.
    We also find that the scenarios designed to approximate the Cantwell-Collins
allocation proposal to be less costly than those we used to approximate the other
bills. We trace this result to the fact that the Cantwell-Collins allocation proposal
distributes less of the allowance value to poor households. In the other allocation
schemes, more money for poorer households produces a greater income effect on




                                         39
energy demand, and as a result abatement is more costly. Poorer households also
save less, and so more allowance value going to poor households leads to less
savings and investment. Economists have widely acknowledged that there is an
equity-efficiency tradeoff between schemes with lump-sum distribution and those
that would cut labor and capital taxes, reducing the distortions they create. Here
we find a more subtle equity-efficiency tradeoff, where even under lump sum
distribution of revenue there is an efficiency gain to distributing value to wealthier
households because less is spent on energy and more of the allowance value ends
up as savings and investment.
    Our analysis of distribution by income class and region show that the
Waxman-Markey and Kerry-Boxer (or Kerry-Lieberman) allocation schemes
address the distributional impacts of the policy by redistributing more of the
allowance value to poorer households and to central and southern regions of the
U.S. in the early years of the policy, shifting allowance value away from wealthier
households and the coasts. In fact the bills redistribute to such a degree that they
tend to result in net economic benefits for the poorest households and for some
regions of the country such as the South Central states, Texas, and Florida that
would generally be expected to bear the highest costs. The very simple per capita
allocation scheme of Cantwell-Collins tends to be more distributionally neutral by
income class but produces slightly less balanced outcome by region. Over time
the distribution schemes matter less. In part this is because over time all these
bills convert to a consumer rebate and so are more like the Cantwell-Collins
allocation approach. However, over time more of the annual cost of the policy is
the result of economic growth effects—reductions in past Gross Regional
Product, savings, and investment. The annual abatement costs become a smaller
share of the total costs, and the available revenue to alter distributional effects
shrinks relative to this increasing cost.37
    An important finding of this paper is that sources side effects of carbon
mitigation proposals dominate the uses side effect in terms of determining
distribution outcomes. In the near term, the distributional consequences of the
carbon pricing can be significantly affected by the distribution of allowance value.
Over the longer term, however, the overall growth effects are more important
determinants of distribution and the revenue available from the allowance auction
may not be sufficient to have much effect in changing distributional outcomes.
This point is reinforced by the finding that carbon pricing by itself, i.e., when
carbon revenues are not recycled back to households, is neutral to modestly
progressive. This follows from the dominance of sources over uses side impacts
of the policy and stands in sharp contrast to previous work that has focused only

37
   As noted above, the share of allowances that must be held back for revenue neutrality in the out
years falls if government spending as a share of GDP is held fixed. A priori it is not obvious
which assumption on government spending is more realistic.




                                                40
on the uses side. We find sources side effects to be modestly progressive to
proportional because low income households derive a relatively large fraction of
their income from transfers which insulates them from changes in capital and
labor income.
   We emphasize that our scenarios focused solely on the distributional
implications due to carbon pricing and the allocation of allowance revenue, and
that we did not attempt to model each bill in its entirety. More precise
representation of the many programs described in these bills could give different
outcomes and there is inevitable uncertainty in economic forecasts of this type.
We also must admit significant limitations in our ability to forecast relative effects
on regions over the longer term. Climate policy will dramatically change energy
technologies and regions that aggressively develop these industries and attract
investment could fare better even if they currently are heavily fossil energy
dependent. However, such regions must overcome the initially higher costs of
their fossil energy dependence.


Acknowledgments
Without implication, we would like to thank Shanta Devarajan, Denny Ellerman,
Don Fullerton, one anonymous referee, and participants at the Energy Policy
Symposium on Distributional Aspects of Energy and Climate Policy held in
Washington, D.C., and the CEEPR Spring 2010 Workshop for helpful comments.
We thank Dan Feenberg for providing data from the NBER TAXSIM simulator on
marginal income tax rates. We thank Tony Smith-Grieco for excellent research
assistance. We acknowledge support of MIT Joint Program on the Science and
Policy of Global Change through a combination of government, industry, and
foundation funding, the MIT Energy Initiative, and additional support for this work
from a coalition of industrial sponsors.

9. REFERENCES
Babiker, M., G. Metcalf and J. Reilly, 2003: Tax Distortions and Global Climate
    Policy. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 46, pp. 269-
    87.
Babiker, M., A. Gurgel, S. Paltsev and J. Reilly, 2008: A Forward Looking
    Version of the MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model.
    MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, Report 161,
    Cambridge,                   MA,                available               at:
    http://globalchange.mit.edu/files/document/MITJPSPGC_Rpt161.pdf




                                         41
Ballard, C., 2000: How many hours are in a simulated day? The effect of time
   endowment on the results of tax-policy simulation models. Working Paper,
   Michigan State University.
Bento, A., L. Goulder, M. Jacobsen and R. von Haefen, 2009: Distributional and
   Efficiency Impacts of Increased Us Gasoline Taxes. American Economic
   Review, 99(3), pp. 667-99.
Bovenberg, A. and L. Goulder, 2001: Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts
   of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost? C. Carraro and G. E. Metcalf,
   Distributional and Behavioral Effects of Environmental Policy. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press, pp. 45-85.
Bovenberg, A., L. Goulder and D. Gurney, 2005: Efficiency Costs of Meeting
   Industry-Distributional Constraints under Environmental Permits and Taxes.
   RAND Journal of Economics, 36(4), pp. 951-71.
Browning, Edgar K. and William R. Johnson, 1979. The Distribution of the Tax
   Burden, Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.
Bull, N., K. Hassett and G. Metcalf, 1994: Who Pays Broad-Based Energy Taxes?
   Computing Lifetime and Regional Incidence. Energy Journal, 15(3), pp. 145-
   64.
Burtraw, D., R. Sweeney and M. Walls, 2009: The Incidence of U.S. Climate
   Policy: Alternative Uses of Revenue from a Cap and Trade Auction.
   Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Burtraw, D., M. Walls and J. Blonz, 2009: Distributional Impacts of Carbon
   Pricing Policies in the Electricity Sector. Washington, DC: Resources For the
   Future.
Congressional Budget Office, 2009: The Role of the 25 Percent Revenue Offset in
   Estimating the Budgetary Effects of Legislation.            Washington, DC:
   Congressional Budget Office.
Davies, J., F. St Hilaire and J. Whalley, 1984: Some Calculations of Lifetime Tax
   Incidence. American Economic Review, 74(4), pp. 633-49.
Department of Energy, 2009: U.S. Crude Oil, Natural Gas, and Natural Gas
   Liquids Reserves, 1977 through 2007. Annual Reports, DOE/EIA-0216.
Dinan, T. and D. Rogers, 2002: Distributional Effects of Carbon Allowance
   Trading: How Government Decisions Determine Winners and Losers.
   National Tax Journal, 55(2), pp. 199-221.
Dyni, J., 2006: Geology and Resources of Some World Oil-Shale Deposits. USGS
   Scientific Investigations Report 2005-5294, p 42.
Energy Information Administration, 2009: Annual Energy Outlook 2009.
   Washington, D.C., U.S. Energy Information Administration DOE/EIA-0383.




                                       42
Friedman, M., 1957: A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton, NJ:
    Princeton University Press.
Fullerton, D.and G. Heutel, 2007: The General Equilibrium Incidence of
    Environmental Taxes. Journal of Public Economics, 91(3-4), pp. 571-91.
Fullerton, D.and G. Heutel, 2010: Analytical General Equilibrium Effects of
    Energy Policy on Output and Factor Prices. NBER Working Paper 15788,
    Cambridge, MA.
Fullerton, D. and D. Rogers, 1993: Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden?
    Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution.
Grainger, C. and C. Kolstad, 2009: Who Pays a Price on Carbon? Cambridge,
    MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15239.
Hassett, K., A. Mathur and G. Metcalf, 2009: The Incidence of a U.S. Carbon
    Tax: A Lifetime and Regional Analysis. The Energy Journal, 30(2), pp. 157-
    79.
Harberger, A., 1962: The Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax. Journal of
    Political Economy 70, pp. 215-40.
Hyman, R., J. Reilly, M. Babiker, A. De Masin and H. Jacoby, 2003: Modeling
    Non-CO2       Greenhouse Gas Abatement. Environmental Modeling and
    Assessment, 8(3), pp. 175-86.
Lyon, A. and R. Schwab, 1995: Consumption Taxes in a Life-Cycle Framework:
    Are Sin Taxes Regressive? Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(3), pp.
    389-406.
Metcalf, G., 1999: A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms. National Tax
    Journal, 52(4), pp. 655-81.
Metcalf, G., 2007: A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap: An Equitable Tax
    Reform to Address Global Climate Change. Washington, DC: The Hamilton
    Project, Brookings Institution.
Metcalf, G., S. Paltsev, J. Reilly, H. Jacoby and J. Holak, 2008: Analysis of a
    Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Cambridge, MA:
    MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change Report No.
    160.
Minnesota IMPLAN Group, 2008: State-Level U.S. Data for 2006. Stillwater,
    MN: Minnesota IMPLAN Group.
Morris, J., 2009: Combining a Renewable Portfolio Standard with a Cap-and-
    Trade Policy: A General Equilibrium Analysis. MS in Technology and Public
    Policy, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
NREL, 2009: Eastern and Western Wind Datasets. Available at:
    http://nrel.gov/wind/integrationdatasets/




                                      43
Oakridge National Laboratories, 2009: Estimated Annual Cumulative Biomass
    Resources      Available     by     State    and    Price.     Available    at:
    http://bioenergy.ornl.gov/main.aspx#Biomass%20Resources
Paltsev, S., J. Reilly, H. Jacoby, R. Eckaus, J. McFarland, M. Sarofim, M.
    Asadoorian and M. Babiker, 2005: The MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy
    Analysis (EPPA) Model: Version 4. MIT Joint Program on the Science and
    Policy of Global Change, Report 125, Cambridge, MA, available at:
    http://globalchange.mit.edu/files/document/MITJPSPGC_Rpt125.pdf
Paltsev, S., J. Reilly, H. Jacoby and J. Morris, 2009: The Cost of Climate Policy
    in the United States. MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global
    Change,       Report       173,     Cambridge,      MA,        available    at:
    http://globalchange.mit.edu/files/document/MITJPSPGC_Rpt173.pdf
Parry, Ian W. H. 2004. Are Emissions Permits Regressive. Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management 47:364-387.
Pechman, J., 1985: Who Paid the Taxes: 1966-85? Washington D.C., Brookings.
Poterba, J., 1989: Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise
    Taxes. American Economic Review, 79(2), pp. 325-30.
Poterba, J., 1991: Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive? Tax Policy and the Economy,
    5, pp. 145-64.
Rausch, S., G. Metcalf, J. Reilly and S. Paltsev, 2009: Distributional Impacts of a
    U.S. Greenhouse Gas Policy: A General Equilibrium Analysis of Carbon
    Pricing. MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change,
    Report          182,        Cambridge,         MA,          available       at:
    http://globalchange.mit.edu/files/document/MITJPSPGC_Rpt182.pdf
Ross, M., 2008: Documentation of the Applied Dynamic Analysis of the Global
    Economy (ADAGE). Research Triangle Institute Working Paper 08-01.
Tuladhar, S., M. Yuan, P. Bernstein, W. Montgomery and A. Smith, 2009: A
    Top-Down Bottom-up Modeling Approach to Climate Change Policy
    Analysis. Energy Economics, in press.
U.S. Census Bureau, 2009a: American Community Survey 2006: Household
    Income in the Past 12 Months. Table B19001, accessed on 22 June 2009 via
    the American FactFinder website, http://factfinder.census.gov/
U.S. Census Bureau, 2009b: State Population Projections. Accessed on 11
    January 2009, http://www.census.gov/population/www/projections/stproj.html
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2009: Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
    Emissions and Sinks: 1990 – 2007. Washington, D.C., Environmental
    Protection Agency EPA 430-R-09-004.




                                        44
U.S. Geological Survey, 2009: USGS USCOAL Coal Resources Database.
   Available          at:       http://energy.er.usgs.gov/coalres.htm. and
   http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/djvu/B/bull_1412.djvu




                                   45
