NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAYING THE PIPER, CALLING THE TUNE:
IMPLICATIONS OF CHANGES
IN REIMBURSEMENT

Victor

B. Fuchs

Working Paper No. 1605

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1985

Financial support from The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the
research assistance of Leslie Perreault are gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Health Economics and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1605
April 1985

Paying the Piper Calling the Tune:
Implications of Changes
in Reimbursement

AB ST R ACT

The United States is in the midst of a revolution in health
care finance, the third since the end of World War II. Medicare's
prospective payment system (PPS) based on diagnosis—related
groups (DRGs), the State of California's hospital—specific con-

tracts for Medi—Cal patients, deductibles and coinsurance, health
maintenance organizations (HMOs), and preferred provider organizations (PPOs) are among the best known symbols of the new era in

health care finance. This paper analyzes the economic factors
responsible for innovations in reimbursement, discusses the distinguishing characteristics of the new methods, and examines
their potential impact on hospitals, physicians, nurses, and
patients. The paper concludes by considering some fundamental
problems of public policy with respect to health care.

Victor R. Fuchs
National Bureau of' Economic Research
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard

Stanford, CA 9L305
415/326—7639

April 10, 1985

PAYING THE PIPER, CALLING THE TUNE:
IMPLICATIONS OF CHANGES IN REIMBURSEMENT

Victor R. Fuchs
"He who pays the piper

can call the tune."

——John Ray
English Proverbs

The financing of health care in the United States has
undergone three revolutions since the end of World War II. First
there was the extraordinarily rapid diffusion of private health
insurance between 1945 and 1960. In only 15 years the number of
persons with hospital insurance jumped from 32 million to 122
million, and the number with physician expense protection soared
from less than 5 million to more than 83 million. Second, there
was the 1965 legislation that created Medicare and Medicaid. This
stroke of the pen provided substantial health insurance coverage
to many additional millions of Americans among the elderly and
poor.

The third major change began tentatively in the 1970s when a
few states began experimenting with regulation of hospital
reimbursement. This movement accelerated in the early 1980s as
both the private and public sectors embraced large—scale, radical
alterations in the reimbursement of hospitals and physicians.
Medicare's prospective payment system (PPS) based on diagnosis—
related groups (DRGs), the State of California's hospital—
specific contracts for Medi—Cal patients, deductibles and

coinsurance, health maintenance organizations (HMOs), and
preferred provider organizations (PPOs) are among the best known
symbols of a new era in health care finance.
This third transformation is more difficult to define than
the previous two, and it is far from completed. It may, however,
prove to be the most revolutionary of the three. Certainly from
the point of view of health care providers, the new methods of
reimbursement have implications far greater than those stemming
from the spread of private insurance or the introduction of
Medicare and Medicaid. The latter two movements increased demand
for medical care, regularized payment and made it more secure,
and increased equality of access. Neither movement, however,
threatened the traditional system of organization and delivery of
care. Private insurance companies were extremely loathe to
challenge the behavior of physicians or hospitals, and the
Medicare and Medicaid legislation stated specifically that there
was to be no interference with traditional practice.
The current revolution in reimbursement starts from a
different premise. The "third parties" (government and business)

who have been "paying the piper" have decided to "call the tune."
Far from promising not to change the system, they frequently have
change as a major objective. The primary purpose of this paper is
to consider the economic and ethical implications of these
changes. It will look at possible effects on patients as well as
providers and on medical education and research as well as on

patient care. Implications for efficiency in the allocation of
resources, for distributional equity, and for other ethical

2

problems will also be discussed. The paper begins with an
analysis of why these changes have been introduced, followed by a
brief discussion of their distinguishing characteristics. The
next section examines their potential impact, and the final
section highlights the fundamental policy issues that must be
addressed by any system of health care finance.

3

I. Recent Changes

Economic Background
Health policy traditionally encompasses three major areas:

access to care, the health of the population, and the
cost of care. In the 1950s and 1960s the first two concerns were

dominant, Numerous health policy initiatives ranging from
expansion of medical education and research to the introduction
of Medicare and Medicaid were undertaken with the goals of
eliminating barriers to access and improving the health of the
population. Costs were secondary, and frequently were not
considered at all.
In these two primary areas of concern, considerable progress
was achieved. Disparities in access to care across income groups
and between whites and nonwhites were sharply reduced. Delays in
admission to hospitals were virtually eliminated; indeed, most
hospitals now report excess capacity. As surpluses of medical and
surgical specialists in the larger cities developed, more
physicians began to locate in smaller cities and towns. Many of
these changes are directly attributable to specific health policy
initiatives.

The past twenty years have also witnessed extraordinary
improvements in the health of the population, including a 60
percent reduction in infant mortality (to 10 per 1,000 live
births) and very large declines in age—adjusted death rates from
influenza and pneumonia, heart disease, and stroke. Unlike the
gains in access, it is more difficult to tie these advances in

14

health to specific policies or programs, but it is likely that

thenumerous public policy initiatives played some positive role.
As these gains were unfolding in the 1970s, the nation
became increasingly aware of the high and rapidly rising cost of
medical care. The health sector, which in 1950 had used only -L4
percent of the nation's output, had grown to 6.1 percent by 1965,
to 9.4

percent

by 1980, and to 10.8 percent by 1983. The cost

problem, which had been building throughout the period, became
critical in the late 1970s and the early 1980s because the
economy as a whole grew very slowly while health expenditures
kept increasing at an extremely rapid pace. Figure 1 shows that
the annual percentage changes in gross national product and
health expenditures tend to follow the same pattern. (Both series
have been adjusted for inflation and population growth and
smoothed with a five—year moving average.) In the late 197Os and
early 1980s, however, the rate of growth of the GNP fell to less
than one percent per annum while real health expenditures per
capita continued to increase at more than four percent. The
health care system is like an 80,000 ton ocean liner going full
speed ahead; it can't be turned around on a dime. But sooner or
later health spending must reflect the country's underlying
economic capacity.
The problem can be seen even more clearly in Figure 2, which
shows the difference between changes in health spending and
changes in the GNP. This "gap" is a measure of the rate at which
labor

and capital flow to the heJth sector away frcn the rest of

the economy. When this gap reached 4 percent per annum in the

late 1970s and early 1980s, the health sector's share of GNF grew
5

Figure 1

7

6

5

zz

4

Lu

a-

z
0
iLl

3

Lu

a-

2

1

0
1950

1970

1960

1980

YEAR

Annual percentage change in gross national product and health

expenditures, adjusted for inflation and population growth,
1 951 -1981 (five-year moving average)

6

Figure 2

5

4

z2

<3
w
I-

2
w
C-)

w
1

0

1950

1960

1970

1980

YEAR

Difference in annual percentage change, health
expenditures minus gross national product, 1951-1981
(five-year moving average)

7

from 9 percent to 10 percent in less than three years.
If the overall economy resumes and maintains a more rapid
rate of growth, as it did in 1983 and 1984, the gap should
decrease. But there is a second problem with respect to cost: the
size of the gap in the long run. Over the past 30 years the gap
has averaged 2.7 percent per annum. If a gap of this magnitude

were to continue for another 30 years, health spending would grow
to over 20 percent of the gross national product. It seems highly
likely that the other sectors of the economy will make strenuous
efforts to prevent that from happening.
Resistance to the expansion of the health sector mounts
because the larger that sector is, the more it takes away from
other sectors when its rate of growth exceeds that of the economy
as a whole. When the health sector was only 5 percent of the
Gross National Product, the large gap increased its share to 10
percent, thus taking away five percentage points from the rest of
the economy. But now that the share is 10 percent of GNP, the
same gap over the same number of years would raise the share to
almost 20 percent, thus taking away 10 percentage points from the
rest of the economy. The larger any sector is relative to the
total economy, the more difficult it is for it to grow faster
than the total. Even a two percent gap for 30 years would put
health at 17 percent of the GNP. But a smaller gap means a slower
rate of growth for the health sector unless the GNP grows very
rapidly.

These overall macroeconomic considerations have had special
force within the federal government and have contributed to a

8

sense of panic, as shown in Table 1. We see in the fifth row the
familiar increase in health spending as a percentage of GNP. We
also can note the federal government's increased share of health
spending (row 6) and perhaps most important of all, the rise in
federal health spending as a share of total federal spending
(row 7). The federal government faces a tremendous deficit, now,
and for several years ahead. It must hold down spending, or raise
taxes appreciably. One result is a strenuous effort to curb
federal spending for health.
The private sector also feels the squeeze, as may be seen in
Table 2, which highlights the growth of private health insurance

premiums. Increases in these premiums in the short run are paid
mostly by business corporations as employee benefits. In that
sense, in the short run they come out of profits. We can see that
in 1950 these premiums were less than six percent of profits, but
by 1980 they were 4O percent. In the long run, these payments
come out of the real compensation of employees (in the form of
lower wages or higher prices). It is also relevant, therefore, to
note how rapidly these premiums have risen as a share of
disposable personal income. In short, there is widespread
interest and concern about health spending because it looms so
large in both public and private budgets.

To be sure, an increase in a sector's share of GNP need not
automatically be cause for alarm. There is nothing sacred about
five percent of GNP, or 10 percent. Why

not

20 percent? In a

dynamic market economy some sectors will grow and some will
shrink as a resuat of changes in demand and supply, and if the
health sector grows——so what? In general, economic theory

9

TABLE 1. FEDERAL AND NATIONAL HEALTH EXPENDITURES, TOTAL FEDERAL OUTLAYS, AND
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT
(three-year averages centered on selected years, 1950-1980;
billions of 1983 dollars)

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

6

7

9

16

42

63

87

52

63

84

119

176

228

302

170

248

295

359

463

547

695

1175

1404

1589

2015

2369

2686

3224

(2) as percent of (4)

4.4

4.5

5.3

5.9

7.4

8.5

9.4

(1) as percent of (2)

12.5

11.2

11.2

13.4

24.2

27.6

28.7

(1) as percent of (3)

3.8

2.9

3.2

4.4

9.2

11.5

12.5

(1) Federal health expenditures

(2) National health expenditures
(3) Total federal outlays
(4) Gross national product

Sources:

Council of Economic Advisors. 1984. Economic Report of the President. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. Tables B-i and B-73.
Gibson, Robert M., Daniel R. Waldo, and Katharine R. Levit. 1983. "National
Health Expenditures, 1982," Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 5(1) (Fall).
Baltimore, Md.: Health Care Financing Administration. Table 1

10

TABLE 2. HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS, CORPORATE PROFITS, AND DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME
(three-year averages centered on selected years, 1950-1980;
billions of 1983 dollars)

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

8

15

23

35

47

65

91

(2) Corporate profits before taxes

134

147

152

226

188

196

227

(3) Disposable personal income

833

975

1105

1382

1639

1879

2226

(1) as percent of (2)

5.9

10.3

15.4

15.4

25.1

32.9

40.0

(1) as percent of (3)

0.9

1.6

2.1

2.5

2.9

3.4

4.1

(1) Health insurance premiums

Sources:

Council of Economic Advisors. 1984. Economic Report of the President.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. Tables B-23 and B-82.
Health Insurance Association of America. 1982-1983. Source Book of Health
Insurance Data. Washington, D.C.: Health Insurance Association of
America. Table 3.1.

11

supports this view——but there is something peculiar about health
spending, namely the importance of third—party payment. Both

theory

and empirical research suggest that private and public

insurance programs bias the system toward "over—utilization."
When consumers pay for goods and services directly, they
tend to balance the costs of what they buy against the benefits
they expect to receive. When insurance is present, however, the
patient will want, and the responsive physician will choose, an
amount of care where the cost to society of the additional care
exceeds the benefit to the patient. Deductibles and coinsurance
can alleviate this problem a little, but most Americans want to
be insured against large health care expenditures. Thus a
fundamental problem of health care policy is how to provide
insurance without pushing utilization far beyond the point where
the additional benefit is equal to the additional cost.

To summarize: recent changes in reimbursement primarily
reflect a desire to curb spending——a desire that arises for three

principal reasons. First, the slow growth of the economy in the
late 1970s and early 1980s was not accompanied by an equivalent

slowing in health spending. Thus the gap between the two growth
rates became alarmingly large. Second, health spending now takes
such a large fraction of public and private budgets, it is
questionable whether even the average gap of the past three
decades (about 2.7 percent per annum) can be sustained. Third,
the large role played by third—party payment has raised doubts

whether the benefits to patients from additional spending are
equal to the cost to society of providing the additional care.

12

A fourth reason, probably less important from a long—run

perspective, is that the country is currently in a pause or even
a retreat from the thrust toward more equal access to care. Some,

but not all, of the cutbacks in funding and changes in methods of
reimbursement can be interpreted as a weakening of the commitment
to provide high quality care to the poor. This aspect will be
discussed further in sections II and III.

General Characteristics
Significant changes in health care finance have occurred in
almost every sector of the economy. The federal government has
radically altered hospital reimbursement for Medicare patients;

several state governments regulate hospital rates for all types
of patients; other states have installed special cost containment
programs for Medicaid patients; participation in health
maintenance organizations has been growing at an unprecedentedly
rapid rate; health care providers and health insurance companies
are experimenting with a variety of new types of coverage which

patients to "preferred providers" in exchange for
discounts in fees and charges; and many conventional insurance
channel

policies are being changed to include larger deductibles and
coinsurance.

With such a diverse set of changes

under way, it

is not easy

to provide a brief summary of their characteristics. Indeed,
apart from a desire to contain costs, there is probably no

characteristic that is common to jj new programs. There are,
however, a few features that are sufficiently general to warrant
a

brief discussion.
13

1. Much of the recent emphasis is on changes that lower
costs for specific payers. Many previous policy proposals were
aimed at containing costs for the health care system as a whole,

e.g., Main Enthoven's Consumer Choice Health Plan, or President
Carter's proposal to cap hospital expenditures. With the
exception of the all—payer hospital regulations in a few states,
this is not true of recent cost containment initiatives. For
example, Medicare's Prospective Payment System is designed to
lower costs for Medicare. The State of California's hospital
specific contracts for Medi—Cal (Medicaid) patients is designed
to save money for the government of California. The insurer
initiated preferred provider organizations and prudent buyer
plans are explicitly intended to lower costs for the initiators

of these plans.
There may be nothing wrong with this competitive,
individualistic approach. Indeed, it may be the only way to
obtain rapid change in a system that previously seemed rooted in
"business as usual." Ever since Adam Smith, economists have been
intrigued by the observation that an individual "by pursuing his
own

interest

.

. . frequently

promotes that of the society more

effectually than when he really intends to promote it" (Smith,
1776). Economists have also discovered, however, that the
individualistic approach does not always lead to socially optimal
results. Later in this paper we will consider some possible
adverse consequences of a free market solution to problems of
health insurance and health care.

1 Lt

2. Payment for individual tests, visits, days in hospital,
and the like are being replaced by global payments for an illness
episode, a hospital admission, or for a year of care regardless
of services used (capitation).
3.

Reimbursement rates are set prospectively rather than

retrospectively. This change is often described as the end of
"cost based reimbursement," but that is not the most accurate
description. Costs of production will continue to play a major
role in the determination of health care prices, just as they do
in virtually all markets, including the most competitive. What is
disappearing is the willingness of payers to pay retrospectively
based on cost rather than knowing in advance what the price will
be. Buyers are now negotiating in advance for a particular

package of services.
)4•

Consumers must make more choices and accept more

financial responsibility for their choices. In the past, many
employers offered a single health plan to their workers. Now it
is not unusual for employees to choose among conventional
reimbursement insurance, a closed panel prepaid group practice, a
preferred provider plan, and still other forms of payment and
organization. Moreover, within the conventional reimbursement

mode there are frequently choices to be made about the size of
the deductible and the percentage of coinsurance. Those consumers
who choose a preferred provider plan frequently have the option
to obtain care outside the plan if they are willing to pay a
larger coinsurance percentage.

15

II. Implications of Recent Changes

Just as it is difficult to generalize about the
characteristics of recent changes in reimbursement, it is also
difficult to generalize about their likely effects. Each
innovation in organization and finance has its own special thrust
and its own special economic and ethical implications.
Furthermore, most of' the changes are very recent; not enough time

has elapsed to collect and analyze reliable measures of their
impact. This section, therefore, is primarily speculative. I draw
on economic theory to infer the likely effects of changes from
retrospective to prospective payment and from reimbursement for
individual services to global reimbursement. I also consider the
implications of increased competition in insurance and medical
care markets, and of greater use of deductibles and coinsurance
on efficiency and equity. Inferences from theory are supplemented
by the results of demonstrations and experiments in health care
reform.

Economic Implications
The primary purpose of recent changes in organization and
finance is to slow the rate of increase in health care spending.
It seems likely that they will have this effect, at least in the
short run. This will come about primarily because the incentives
and constraints facing the key decision makers——physicians,
hospital administrators, insurance buyers, and patients——will be
different from those they faced in the past.

16

Physicin. The most important

impact

on physicians will

probably come from the shift to global forms of reimbursement. As
long as physicians are reimbursed for each service individually,

there is less reason for them to question the incremental value
of each additional visit, test, X—ray, and the like. Global

reimbursement for an episode of illness, however, or for a year
of care regardless of services provided (as in capitation
payment) will give physicians great incentive to consider the
incremental value of what they do. Furthermore, as more
physicians assume some financial responsibility for the hospital
care, prescriptions, and other dimensions of care that they
order, they will have greater incentive to question the value of
that care.

The best example of this phenomenon is the lower hospital
utilization in prepaid group practice plans [Luft, 1981]. In the
past some skeptics argued that lower hospital utilization in
Kaiser, the Group Health Cooperative, and other prepaid group
practices was the result of patient differences. They claimed
that patients who needed or wanted less hospitalization sought
out the prepaid plans. However, a prospective, controlled
experiment that randomly assigned patients to a prepaid plan or
conventional insurance demonstrated the same difference in
hospital utilization that was observed in less adequately
controlled studies [Manning et al., 19814].

Hospita' administrators. While there is no completely
satisfactory model of a nonprofit hospital or of the behavior of
hospital administrators, there are a few generalizations that
conrnand wide agreement. The primary job of a hospital

17

administrator is to keep other people happy, or, if not happy, at
least not QQ. unhappy. The "other people" are the physicians who
bring patients to the hospital, the patients themselves, the
employees who work in the hospital, and the trustees who can hire
and fire the administrator. Each of these constituencies has
different and sometimes conflicting goals. The physician wants
the hospital to have the most modern technical facilities, a
large high—quality staff of nurses, technicians, and other
personnel, and considerable excess capacity to reduce the
possibility of delays in admission or services for the patient
once admitted. The patients typically want high quality care and
amenities; price is rarely of concern because hospital insurance
is widespread and usually comprehensive. The nurses, technicians,
and other employees want good wages and working conditions, and
the opportunity to provide high quality care. The trustees
typically want to be associated with a high quality hospital that
delivers excellent care and that enjoys a good reputation in the
community. The latter may entail providing care for those in need
regardless of ability to pay. All groups want the hospital to
remain solvent, but in the past that was usually taken for granted.
Under the traditional system of retrospective reimbursement
based on incurred costs, most of the pressures on the
administrator were in the direction of improving quality
regardless of the effect on cost. A reimbursement system such as
Medicare's Prospective Payment System dramatically changes the
balance of pressure. Under the new system there is a real
prospect that the hospital will not have enough revenue to cover

10
U

its costs. The need to stay solvent was always one of the
implicit pressures on the administrator, but now it has become
explicit. Physicians begin to realize that the increased cost of
new equipment and additional personnel won't necessarily be
matched by increased revenue; if the hospital is forced out of
business it will not be there to receive their patients. The
employees begin to realize that higher wages or greater fringe
benefits cannot automatically be covered by higher charges. Faced
with the prospect of deficits and even bankruptcy, the trustees
start changing the questions they ask and the pressures they put
on the administrator. There is nothing that can match red ink for
attracting the attention of trustees of hospitals or other
organizations.

Health insurance companies. Increased competition in health
insurance markets will also tend to restrain the growth of
expenditures for health care. Both public and private insurers
are abandoning their laissez—faire attitude toward physicians and

hospitals in two important ways: they are bargaining about
price, and they are insisting on controls over utilization.
Individual insurance companies now have little choice in the
matter because if they do not move in a cost restraining
direction they will lose out to those companies that do.

Patients. Those patients who continue to have "wall—to—
wall" coverage under conventional insurance will continue to want
"everything possible." An increasing proportion of patients,

however, will be paying for some of their care directly, through
deductibles and coinsurance. The basic law of demand says that an
increase in the price of a commodity results in a decrease in the

19

quantity demanded. The Rand heaJt.h insurance experiment ENewhouse

et al., 1981] demonstrated conclusively that medical care is nc

an exception. Families with complete insurance coverage (no
deductibles or coinsurance) used substantially more physicians'
services and had more hospital admissions than did families who
had to pay for a portion of the bill at the time of utilization.
The growing use of deductibles and coinsurance in private
insurance and government programs is likely to decrease the
demand for medical care. How this will affect the quantity and
price of care will depend on the sensitivity of supply to price
change. In the short run, when supply is likely to be quite
inelastic, the decrease in demand will result in a small decrease
in quantity and large downward pressure on price. In the long
run, when supply is more elastic, the primary effect of a
decrease in demand will be on quantity, with a smaller effect on
price. All of the above assumes no shifting of demand. If
suppliers, faced with decreasing demand, can in part offset the

decrease by recommending more care, the declines in quantity and
price will be smaller than otherwise. Global forms of
reimbursement and direct controls on utilization, however, will
tend to restrain the ability of suppliers to shift demand.

Differential impacts. While the general effect of
reimbursement changes is to restrain the growth of expenditures,
the impact will vary for hospitals, physicians, and nurses. Most

of the belt—tightening is likely to be felt by hospitals, for
several reasons. First, it is tempting to try to control hospital
costs because they are such a large part of the total (over 4O

20

percent) and have been rising especially rapidly. Second, it is
easier to control payments to a few thousand hospitals than to
hundreds of thousands of physicians. Third, most of the demand
for hospital services is generated by physician decisions. As
physicians begin to realize that money spent for hospital care is
money that could be spent for their services, they are likely to
hospitalize patients less. At first, it will be possible to do
this without seriously jeopardizing patients' health, as has been
demonstrated with shorter lengths of stay and ambulatory surgery.
Hospitals are likely to try to adapt to cost controls and the
decreased demand for in—patient care by diversifying into other
activities, including "captive" physicians' groups, home health
care services, and coninunity—based health promotion activities.

Although physicians collectively have the opportunity to
protect their incomes by directing most of the restraint on
spending toward hospitals, equipment manufacturers, and drug
companies, they too will have to adapt in ways that many will
find unpleasant. In particular, in order to cope with the new
financial constraints physicians will probably have to give up
some of their independence and autonomy. Increasingly they will

feel the need to join group practices or other forms of
organizations in order to be able to bargain with insurance
companies and other purchasers of care. Also, they will
increasingly feel the need for professional managers to help them
function in a more competitive environment. In the process, some
of their power and decision—making authority will be lost.
Changes in methods of hospital reimbursement. are also likely

to affect the goals of the nursing profession. For instance, in

21

the past many hospital nurses were working toward a goal of
separate billing for their professional services. They believed
that this approach would increase the prestige and status of
nurses and result in greater economic return. Given the trend
toward global reimbursement, however, either on a capitation or
admission basis, there is no scope for separate billing by
nurses. Indeed, separate billing by physicians may well be on its

way out.

rr1-hv

to

gr ryf' hr-if1 iir in fh cd trq Fr frnc.f.r

other personnel responsibilities that were considered

peripheral to nursing, or were considered to be below their skill
level. With a shrinkage in the demand for hospital care resulting
from new reimbursement methods, however, nurses will become more
concerned about protecting their jobs and may reverse these
goals. In the future, more nurses are likely to argue that it is
better to have most patient services provided by the same
person——the professional nurse.

Longer run effects. While many of the changes in ways of
thinking and behavior induced by the changes in incentives may be
short—run or one—time, some effects will emerge only over a
longer period of time and are likely to be cumulative. For
instance, even in the short run physicians will have an incentive
to consider the incremental value of services in relation to
their incremental cost, but they may not know what the
incremental value is. Over the longer run there is likely to be
more research on these questions, both informally within health
care institutions and more formally at medical schools and

research organizations. Similarly, in the long run the education
and training of physicians is likely to change to make them
better able to evaluate and assimilate this type of research. To
cite another example, in the short run hospital administrators
may want to take account of marginal costs in their
decisionmaking, but the relevant information may not be
available. In the longer run these data will be developed and
utilized.

Another likely long—run consequence is a shift in the
character of innovative activity. Innovations in medical care, as
in other fields, typically take one of two forms. There is
"product" innovation that consists of the introduction of new
services that increase the quality of care, e.g., organ

transplants, neonatal intensive care. These innovations usually
increase the cost of care but they allow physicians and other
health professionals to deliver a superior product. The other
kind

of innovation is "process" innovation, e.g., automated

testing. It enables health professionals to do what they have
been doing but to do so at lower cost. There have always been
both

kinds of innovations, but in the past the retrospective

cost—based reimbursement system tended to encourage product
innovation that increases cost. In the future, with prospective,
closed—end reimbursement methods, the emphasis is likely to
switch to process innovation that lowers cost.

Distributional effects. One of the likely effects of the
Medicare PPS is to redistribute resources among institutions and
among regions of the country. The implications for efficiency and
equity of this redistribution vary, depending upon the reasons

23

for the original disparity in costs. Suppose Hospital A treats
patients in DRG X at an average cost of $5,000 per admission,
while Hospital B has an average cost of $3,000 for patients in
the same DRG. Under the old system each hospital would be paid
its cost. Under the new system each will get $14,000, thus

redistributing resources from A to B. The evaluation of this
redistribution depends critically on the reason for the

difference in cost.
One possibility is that B is simply more efficient than A,
i.e., the patients are identical, input prices are identical, and

patient outcomes are identical, but B does a better job of
producing care. In this case it is both efficient and equitable
to redistribute resources, i.e., to reward the efficient and

punish the inefficient.
A second possibility is that there is no difference in
output, patient mix, or efficiency, but that Hospital A pays
higher prices for its inputs. It may be, for example, that there
is a strong union in A that has negotiated higher wages or that
the administrators in A are paid higher salaries than the
administrators in B. In that case there are no great efficiency
gains in transferring resources, since there are no efficiency
differences. The redistribution does seem to be equitable,
however, unless the wage differential simply offsets a difference
in the cost of living.

A third possibility is that the differences in costs are due
to differences in output. Although the patient mix is the same,
Hospital A uses more inputs to produce higher quality care, more

214

amenities, and the like. In this case the redistribution may be
judged equitable (there is nothing in the Medicare legislation to
suggest that patients in Hospital A ought to get a higher
standard of care than patients in Hospital B). The implications
for efficiency are not as obvious, but the value of the marginal

output of the additional resources is probably greater in B than
in A.

Still another possibility is that the difference in cost is
the result of differences in patient mix within the DRG. To the
extent that this is the source of the cost differential, there
may be no gains to efficiency or equity in redistributing
resources; there may even be losses. Teaching hospitals, for
instance, claim that differences in patient mix contribute to
their higher costs. Some studies suggest that education and
research also raise costs in hospitals that carry on these
activities.

Education and research. One special area of concern is the
future of support for education and research. In the past some of
the funding for these efforts probably came from reimbursement
for patient care. The new methods of reimbursement are designed
in part to do away with this type of cross—subsidization. The
buyers of care are saying "We want to pay for only the care we
use; if we want to support education and/or research, we will do
It's

that separately."

always nice to know what you are paying for and not have to buy
into "package" deals or "tie in" sales.

it is also desirable to distinguish betjeen the funding of

medical education (undergraduate and postgraduate) and the

25

funding of research. In too many discussions these two activities
are treated as if they were inextricably related. This may well
be true with respect to the production of education and research,
but it certainly need not be true of the funding. Indeed,
economic theory suggests that they should be treated differently.
Medical research often has large positive externalities, i.e.,
confers benefits on society as a whole that are far greater than
the return to those carrying on the research. Because of these
externalities the private market will do less research than is
socially optimal. The case for government subsidy is very strong.
With respect to medical education, the case for government
subsidy is much weaker. Most of the benefits of this education
are realized by those who receive the training. There is no
obvious case for subsidization to achieve the socially optimal
amount. As a matter of equity, society may want to help poor
students obtain access to medical education but this can be
accomplished through sharply focused loans and scholarships
rather than general subsidies.

Hospital specialization. The new systems of reimbursement
are likely to lead to hospitals specializing in the diagnosis and
treatment of particular health problems. Such specialization
would raise the quality of care and increase efficiency.
Specialization, however, poses a problem for academic medical
centers with traditional teaching programs. It would be more
difficult to provide a complete educational experience for medical
students in a specialized hospital; some changes in educational
programs would be necessary.

26

Specialization may also bring one type of payment system
into conflict with another. For instance, the Medicare system
based on DRGs clearly favors the growth of specialization, but
the FF0 systems would tend to lose bargaining power as a result
of hospital specialization. Suppose the XYZ Corporation enters
into a FF0 arrangement with a local hospital to send all their
employees to that hospital in exchange for a price discount and
utilization controls. If the hospital becomes specialized in

certain types of care, those employees who need other types of
care will not be well served by the FF0 system. The XYZ
Corporation could presumably adapt by making arrangements with
all the local hospitals, but then the FF0 system loses some of
its cutting edge.

Although many patients might benefit from the higher quality
and lower costs resulting from hospital specialization, there
will be disadvantages to patients as well. There are
disadvantages to being hospitalized in an unfamiliar institution
or in one that is inconveniently located. In a system of
specialized hospitals patients will have to weigh these dis—
advantages against the advantages of receiving more specialized
care.

Decrease in number of soecialists. While hospitals are
likely to become more specialized, the proportion of physicians
who are specialists or subspecialists is likely to fall. Surgery
is a good example. Under the traditional system of fee—for—
service reimbursement with surgeons practicing alone or in small

groups, the typical comunity has a large number of surgeons
relative to the demand for operations. The average surgeon has a

27

low workload, but high fees per procedure yield a good income.
The new reimbursement systems will shift medical practice
toward large groups or other large—scale organized systems of
care. As demonstrated by the Mayo Clinic and Kaiser, these groups
and systems take on only as many surgeons as are needed at a full
workload for each surgeon. The ones so employed continue to earn
a good income, but their implicit fee per procedure is much less
than in traditional practice. The low workload—high fee pattern
will cease to be economically viable for most surgeons, and young

physicians will be less likely to enter surgery.
Surgeons are not the only ones who will be affected. Much
the same story could be told about many internal medicine
subspecialties, and much the same pattern of change will emerge.
This decrease in the number of specialists who have small

workloads in their specialty could simultaneously lower costs and
raise the quality of care.

Ethical Concerns
The financing and delivery of health care has always posed
ethical problems for health professionals and for society as a
whole. Some of these problems will be exacerbated by the changes
in reimbursement that are now under way, and new problems are
likely to arise. They will be encountered at the level of the
individual physician, among groups of physicians and hospitals,
and at the coninunity and national levels.

Physician—patient relations. The pressure to make
physicians more cost conscious, to practice more "cost effective"

28

medicine, will force them to make decisions that are contrary to

the imediate interests of individual patients even though these
decisions may be optimal for society as a whole. The conflict can
be seen in Figure 3, which shows the marginal (additional)
benefits and marginal costs associated with varying amounts of
care. The vertical axis is scaled in dollars while the horizontal
axis may be thought of as measuring additional tests,
prescriptions, days in the hospital, physician visits, and the
like for any given medical condition. The downward slope of the
marginal benefit curve simply assumes that the additional benefit
of additional care gets smaller as the quantity of care
increases. Beyond some point (where the curve crosses the
horizontal axis), additional care does the patient more harm than
good. The marginal cost curve is horizontal under the simplifying
assumption that each additional unit of care increases total cost
by about the same amount as the preceding unit. To be sure, for
any given patient there will always be great uncertainty about
the benefit of any particular intervention, and there may be
uncertainty about marginal costs as well: these curves should be
regarded as average or expected or "best guess" results.
Given the situation portrayed in Figure 3, what is the
optimal amount of care? From a social point of view, the optimum
is clearly Q., where the marginal benefit is equal to the
marginal cost (under the assumption that the marginal cost
reflects the value of the resources in some alternative use). If

more care than Q1 is provided, the additional

than

cost is greater

the additional benefit. If less than Q1 is provided, the

benefit of additional care is greater than its cost.

29

Figure 3

Marginai benefit

Marginal cost

0

Qua ntity

0

a

QI

CHOOSING THE "APPROPRIATE' AMOUNT OF CARE

30

of Care

From the patient's point of view, Q1 is best if there is no
insurance (i.e., the patient must pay the full marginal cost),
but Q2 is best if the patient is fully insured. Any pressure on
the physician to move from Q2 to Q1 creates a dilemma: to choose
between what is good for society as a whole (and what competitive
pressures may require for the survival of his or her group or
hospital) and what is best for the individual patient. For
instance, the physician may believe that an extra day in the
hospital reduces slightly the probability of a complication but
that the value of that reduction is far less than the cost of the
extra day. Under the old system of reimbursement, the physician
had little incentive to discharge the patient a day earlier; the
cost of' the extra day was widely diffused among all health

insurance buyers or all taxpayers. If, however, the hospital is
receiving global reimbursement for each admission, or if it is on
a prospective global budget, or if the physician belongs to an
HMO with capitation reimbursement or to a PPO with utilization
controls, there will be considerable pressure on the physician to
avoid that extra day of hospitalization.
Assuming the physician chooses Qi' what does he or she tell
the patient? That Q1 is "best"? Or that Q2 is better but that Q1
is recommended because it is more cost—effective? Most patients
follow their physicians' suggestions with regard to tests,
hospitalizations, and the like, under the assumption that the
physician has a professional commitment to putting the patients'
interests first. Confidence in the integrity and intention of the
physician frequently makes a positive contribution to the
patient's health. If insured patients begin to believe that their

31

physician is recommending Q1 rather than Q2, they may become less
honest in describing their symptoms and condition. This loss of
candor will make the physician's task more difficult.
To be sure, under the old system there was frequently an
economic incentive for the physician to recommend Q3, especially
for services that produced income for the physician. According to
some observers, widespread insurance coverage led some (many?)
physicians to recommend Q3, which is clearly neither in the best
interests of the patient (even if fully insured) or of society.
These observers see the current cost containment effort as
pushing physicians back from Q3 to Q2. If that is the case, there
is no conflict for the ethical physician.

Relations among physicians and hospital3. Compared to most
industries relations among physicians and hospitals in the same
community have been marked by an unusual degree of cooperation
and openness. Although they were ostensibly competing with one
another, physicians have freely exchanged information, helped one
another, and covered for one another; hospitals, especially the
nonprofit community hospitals, have behaved in much the same way.
Indeed, one of the complaints of outside observers was that
physicians and hospitals did not compete enough. Whatever rivalry
existed was largely expressed in efforts to raise the quality of
care, leaving the community to pick up the check.
One of the objectives of the new reimbursement methods is to
increase competition among physicians and among hospitals, to
transform health care into a competitive industry. There are

unquestionable advantages to competition, but what will happen to

32

the free exchange of information, the cooperation, and the mutual
assistance that characterized health care in the past? Will
physicians in one group be reluctant to share information with
physicians in a competing group? How will physicians reconcile
profession—wide obligations with obligations to their group and
hospital? Wil]. hospitals be willing to make data freely available

when this information may give a competitive advantage to another
hospital? The virtues of competitive markets are considerable,
but it is questionable whether the transformation of the health
care industry into an approximation of the used car industry
represents social progress. Even if more competition is, on
balance, good for society, the health professionals caught in the
competitive maelstrom are likely to feel great conflict as to
what constitutes appropriate behavior.

Collective responsibility for health care. The citizens of
most countries feel a responsibility for meeting the medical care
needs of their fellow citizens. In developed countries this is
typically done through some form of national health insurance.
Altruism is only one motive, to be sure. National health
insurance may be desired to eliminate free riders (but the
concept of' free rider already presupposes an unwillingness to let

sick people go without care) or to gain more control over
physicians and hospitals, or for other motives.
The United States has never had national health insurance
for several reasons. We are more heterogeneous than most nations;
we are less sanguine about the beneficence of government; and we
have a more comprehensive network of private institutions to pay
for health care for those in need. Cornnunity rated insurance

33

premiums, for instance, keep insurance affordable for those who
use a great deal of care. The heavy users are, in effect, cross—
subsidized by those who use less care. Nonprofit hospitals also
have typically been an instrument of cross—subsidization. They
charge less than full cost to some patients (sometimes charging
or collecting nothing at all) while making up the difference
through charges to other patients. The pattern of coverage that
emerged in the United States in the late 1960s and 1970s was

n1thv in mnv rsn-'i-s hii1

it. rm

i-'1sr t.r' nrcvi1ir

universal coverage for a single standard of care than anything
previously experienced in this country.
The new methods of reimbursement are designed to change this
pattern. Competitive purchase of health insurance on a selective
basis will erode community rating as groups with low utilization
demand and obtain lower premiums. Cross—subsidization by
hospitals will be eliminated as competitive buyers refuse to pay

more than their true costs.
The normative inferences to be drawn from these changes vary
with circumstances and values. For instance, many people believe
that if cigarette smokers use more medical care than nonsmokers,
it is appropriate that they pay a higher premium for health
insurance. But what if old people use more care than the young,
women more than men, blacks more than whites, or persons with
congenital abnormalities more than those without such
limitations? Legislation that prohibits insurance companies from
explicitly considering specific characteristics in sett.ing

individual premiums do not have much effect. Most insurance is

bought by groups, and is mostly experience—rated or self—insured.
The current trend is for each group to try to get the lowest
possible premium for itself regardless of what happens to the

rest of the community.
The ethical dilemma is clear. On the one hand it is socially
desirable to reward healthy behaviors and efficiency and to
punish excessive use of care. On the other hand the fragmentation
of insurance markets raises the possibility of very high premiuns
for some groups. Society could deal with this problem by
explicitly subsidizing those groups with high utilization.
However, this may be more difficult to accomplish (for political
and administrative reasons) than the previous method of implicit
subsidies through community—wide or nation—wide premiums.

III. _tp Done?
For decades various politicians, academicians, health
professionals, and policy experts have been offering "solutions"
to the problems of health care. Competition, regulation, more
government subsidy, less government subsidy, increasing the
supply of hospitals and physicians, decreasing the supply——most
of these strategies have been adopted at one time or another;

nn hv hcn cr

1ik1v to h "th" solijtAon Why no1? Ar

they flawed in theory? In execution? Not necessarily. The time

has

come to candidly acknowledge that some problems defy

solution, that the most one can hope for is alleviation and
amelioration.

Health policy, like so many other major areas of public
concern, requires trade—offs between such highly valued goals as
efficiency and justice, and between freedom and security. Even
the best solution must fall short in one direction or another,
and the more effective the solution is for one goal the greater
the shortfall is likely to be for another. That is the principal
reason why there is so much controversy over policy: people
differ in the values they place on the various goals. Some are
prepared to see society give up a good deal of efficiency to get
more justice or more security while others feel that freedom is a

paramount value.
The financing of health care is a classic example of an
insoluble dilemma, the need to choose between the Scylla of risk
aversion and the Charybdis of moral hazard. Most people do not

36

want to run the risk of having to pay very large bills for
medical care. They seek health insurance, but once they have the
insurance they consume more medical care than they would without
insurance, and more than is socially optimal. The cost of this
additional care makes health insurance more expensive than it
would otherwise be. All of this is true regardless of whether
insurance is obtained privately or provided collectively through
government.

A theoretical solution is for individuals, when well, to
make an arrangement with the insurance company and/or the
providers of care that when sick, only the socially optimal
amount of care will be provided, even though the insurance
nominally covers all necessary care. Prepaid group practices
(such as Kaiser) and the British National Health Service can be
regarded as being organized on that principle. It works, and
sometimes it works very well, but it requires either some
deception or a great deal of restraint. It is rational for a
person who is well to want to be part of such a system, but once
sick it is equally rational to want all the care that might
provide some benefit. The challenge to the system is to keep
the patient from getting that additional care.
In the past it may not have been too difficult to meet that
challenge because much of the additional care delivered in other
systems was of questionable value. But as competitive pressures
drive all systems toward more stringent evaluation of the cost—
effectiveness of care, it will become more difficult to convince

patients that they are getting the best possible care. "Low
yield" medicine is not "no—yield" medicine.

37

One partial solution lies in changing perceptions of what
constitutes "appropriate" care. Once the leading medical centers
change their approach, and the leading medical schools change
what they teach their students, most physicians will adapt to
prevailing practice, just as they have in the past. Patients will
then adapt to their physicians' recommendations.
As discussed in the section on ethical concerns, competitive
pressures among physicians and hospitals may inhibit the flow of

A ...-..4-.
.-.1 -..1 ...4-......
4-,.. 4-L..4
L..1.L)LJ I.LI
UidJ .L.y U1.....C'..1
Ui. .LL11Ut tiIc*...,..
LiL'L1.
pz LLJ.
_,......_.1 1

JLI.LLI1

can be found in the approach of other industries. The public
utility companies, for instance, sponsor and generously fund the
Electric Power Research Institute to conduct long—run economic,
social, and technical research that benefits the individual
companies and society as a whole. Several highly competitive
electronics companies have created a consortium to carry on
research on a scale greater than would be possible for the
individual firms. The key to such industry undertakings is
widespread agreement that all companies will contribute funds,
data, personnel, and the like. Such agreement is necessary to
keep each company from thinking that cooperation on their part
will put them at a competitive disadvantage.
The problem of insuring medical care for all, regardless of
their income or other circumstances, is primarily a matter of'

will, rather than of method of reimbursement. When government
agencies simultaneously change their method of paying for care
for the elderly or the poor or any other group and reduce the
amount they are prepared to pay, there is a high probability that

38

there will be some reduction in the quantity or quality of care
received. It is usually incorrect, however, to blame the new

method for the denial of care; it is the reduction in the amount
of money available for reimbursement that is probably the cause.
If society wants to provide care for the poor, virtually any
system of reimbursement can be used. It is not the change in
reimbursement method

that

is denying care to the poor; the

change is simply the instrument whereby a weakening of commitment
to the poor is given expression.

The situation is, of course, more complicated than that.
Much of the pressure for change in reimbursement is not motivated
by a desire to see the poor get less care; it is an effort to
make the system more cost—effective. If that is the dominant
motive, however, there is an urgent need to find ways to halt and
reverse the erosion of support for the least fortunate in our
society. It seems highly unlikely that this can be accomplished
without substantial intervention of government through taxes and
subsidies. This need not involve a take—over of medicine by

government, or an abandonment of the movement toward more cost—
effective medicine. If not done in a timely fashion, however, a
backlash may develop.

Every revolution carries within it the seeds of its own
destruction through excessive preoccupation with one goal. The
present revolution in health care finance is no exception. The
problems it addresses are palpable: over—utilization of medical
services, inadequate evaluation of new technologies, inefficient

and inequitable cross—subsidization, excess supplies of
specialists and hospital beds. But the problems it may create are

39

also significant: inadequate insurance coverage for millions,

erosion of professional ethics as an instrument of control, loss
of trust between physicians and patients, decrease in activities
with large positive externalities. The new challenge is to
capture and preserve the benefits of the revolution while
minimizing its costs. Now that society has decided it can "call
the tune," we must think deeply and carefully about what tune we

want the "piper" to play.

LID

REFERENCES

Luft, Harold S.

1981. Health Maintenance Organizations:

DjmensjpnLferfprmance (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
Manning, Willard G., Arleen Leibowitz, George Goldberg, William

Rogers, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 19814. "A Controlled Trial
of the Effect of a Prepaid Group Practice on Use of
Services," New England Journal of Medicine 310 (June 7)
1505—1510.

Newhouse, Joseph P., Willard G. Manning, Carl N. Morris, Larry L.
Orr, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, Arleen Leibowitz, Kent
H. Marquis, M. Susan Marquis, Charles E. Phelps, and Robert

H. Brook. 1981. "Some Interim Results from a Controlled
Trial of Cost Sharing in Health Insurance," New England
Journal of Medicine 305 (December 17') 1501—1507.

Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations (New York: The Modern
Library), 1937 ed., p. 1423.

41

