NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIELD EXPERIMENTS IN LABOR ECONOMICS
John A. List
Imran Rasul
Working Paper 16062
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16062

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

We gratefully acknowledge financial support from ELSE. We thank the editors, Orley Ashenfelter
and David Card for comments. We thank Alec Brandon, David Herberich, Dana Krueger, Richard
Murphy, and Yana Peysakhovich for excellent research assistance. All errors remain our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by John A. List and Imran Rasul. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Field Experiments in Labor Economics
John A. List and Imran Rasul
NBER Working Paper No. 16062
June 2010
JEL No. C9,C93,J0
ABSTRACT
We overview the use of field experiments in labor economics. We showcase studies that highlight
the central advantages of this methodology, which include: (i) using economic theory to design the
null and alternative hypotheses; (ii) engineering exogenous variation in real world economic environments
to establish causal relations and learning about the underlying mechanisms; and (iii) engaging in primary
data collection and often working closely with practitioners. To highlight the potential for field experiments
to inform issues in labor economics, we organize our discussion around the individual life cycle. We
therefore consider field experiments related to the accumulation of human capital, the demand and
supply of labor, behavior within firms, and close with a brief discussion of the nascent literature of
field experiments related to household decision-making.

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
Imran Rasul
University College London
Department Of Economics
Drayton House
30 Gordon Street
London WC1E 6BT
United Kingdom
i.rasul@ucl.ac.uk

1

Introduction

This chapter overviews the burgeoning literature in field experiments in labor economics. The
essence of this research method involves researchers engineering carefully crafted exogenous variation into real world economic environments, with the ultimate aim of identifying causal relationships and mechanisms underlying them. This chapter describes this approach and documents
how field experiments have begun to yield new insights for research questions that have long been
studied by labor economists.
Given our focus on such long-standing questions, in no way do we attempt to do justice to
the enormous literature on which field experiments are beginning to add. Our aim is rather to
showcase specific field experiments that highlight what we view to be the central advantages of
this methodology: (i) using economic theory to design the null and alternative hypotheses; (ii)
engineering exogenous variation in real world economic environments to establish causal relations
and learn the mechanisms behind them; and (iii) engaging in primary data collection and often
working closely with practitioners.
As with any research methodology in economics, of course not every question will be amenable
to field experiments. Throughout our discussion, we will bring to the fore areas in labor economics
that remain relatively untouched by field experiments. In each case, we try to distinguish whether
this is simply because researchers have not had opportunities to design field experiments related
to such areas, or whether the nature of the research question implies that field experiments are
not the best approach to tackle the problem at hand. Finally, even among those questions where
field experiments can and have provided recent insights, we will argue that such insights are most
enhanced when we are able to combine them with, or take inspiration from, other approaches to
empirical work in economics. For example, a number of studies we describe take insights from
laboratory environments to show the importance of non-standard preferences or behaviors in real
world settings. A second class of papers combine field experimentation with structural estimation
to measure potential behavioral responses in alternative economic environments, and ultimately
to help design optimal policies to achieve any given objective.
The bulk of the chapter is dedicated to documenting the use and insights from field experiments
in labor economics. To emphasize the relevance of field experiments to labor economics, we
organize this discussion by following an individual over their life cycle. More specifically, we begin
by considering field experiments related to early childhood interventions and the accumulation of
human capital in the form of education and skills. We then consider research questions related to
the demand and supply of labor, and labor market discrimination. We then move on to consider
research questions related to behavior within firms: how individuals are incentivized within firms,
and other aspects of the employment relationship. Finally, we conclude with a brief discussion of
the nascent literature on field experiments related to household decision making.
We have chosen these topics selectively on the basis of where carefully designed field experiments have already been conducted. Within each field, we have decided to discuss a small number
of papers using field experiments that, in our opinion, showcase the best of what field experiments
2

can achieve. In no way is our discussion meant to be an exhaustive survey of the literature on
field experiments in labor economics. The literature arising just in the past decade has grown too
voluminous for even a tome to do it justice
In each stage of the life cycle considered, wherever appropriate, we try to discuss: (i) the
link between the design of field experiments and economic theory; (ii) the benefits of primary data
collection that is inherent in field experimentation to further probe theory and distinguish between
alternative hypotheses; and (iii) how reduced form effects identified from a field experiment can
be combined with theory and structural modelling to make out of sample predictions and inform
policy design.
In the remainder of this section, we place our later discussion into historical context by describing the experimental approach in science, and arguing how among economists, labor economists
have for decades been at the forefront of exploiting and advancing experimental approaches to
identify causal relationships. We then lay the groundwork for the discussion in later sections.
We define the common elements at the heart of all field experiments, and then present a more
detailed typology to highlight the subtle distinctions between various sub-types of field experiments. This approach allows us to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of field experiments
over other forms of experimentation, such as large scale social experiments and laboratory based
experiments.1
Our final piece of groundwork is to identify key trends in published research in labor economics
over the past decade. This allows us to organize our later discussion more clearly along two
dimensions. First, we think of nearly all research questions in labor economics as mapping to
particular stages of an individual’s life cycle. We therefore roughly organize research questions
in labor economics into those relating to the accumulation of human capital, labor market entry
and labor supply choices, behavior within firms, and household decision making. Second, we are
able to focus in on those sub-fields in labor economics where extant field experiments have already
begun to make inroads and provide new insights. In turn, this helps us make precise the types of
research question field experiments are most amenable to, areas in which field experiments have
been relatively under supplied, and those research questions that are better suited to alternative
empirical methods.

1.1

The Experimental Approach in Science

The experimental approach in scientific inquiry is commonly traced to Galileo Galilei, who pioneered the use of quantitative experiments to test his theories of falling bodies. Extrapolating his
experimental results to the heavenly bodies, he pronounced that the services of angels were not
necessary to keep the planets moving, enraging the Church and disciples of Aristotle alike. For
his efforts, Galileo is now viewed as the Father of Modern Science. Since the Renaissance, fundamental advances making use of the experimental method in the physical and biological sciences
1

In this Handbook, Charness and Kuhn (2010) provide a useful discussion of extant laboratory studies in the
area of labor economics.

3

have been fast and furious.2
Taking the baton from Galileo, in 1672 Sir Isaac Newton used experimentation to show that
white light is equal to purity, again challenging the preachings of Aristotle. The experimental
method has produced a steady stream of insights. Watson and Crick used data from Rosalind
Franklin’s X-ray diffraction experiment to construct a theory of the chemical structure of DNA;
Rutherford’s experiments shooting charged particles at a piece of gold foil led him to theorize that
atoms have massive, positively charged nuclei; Pasteur rejected the theory of spontaneous generation with an experiment that showed that micro-organisms grow in boiled nutrient broth when
exposed to the air, but not when exposed to carefully filtered air. Even though the experimental
method produced a steady flow of important facts for roughly 400 years, the proper construction
of a counterfactual control group was not given foundations until the early twentieth century.
1.1.1

An Experimental Cornerstone

In 1919, Ronald Fisher was hired at Rothamsted Manor to bring modern statistical methods to the
vast experimental data collected by Lawes and Gilbert (Levitt and List 2009). The data collection
methods at Rothamsted Manor were implemented in the standard way to provide practical underpinnings for the ultimate purpose of agricultural research: to provide management guidelines. For
example, one of the oldest questions in the area of agricultural economics relates to agricultural
yields: what is the optimal application rate of fertilizer, seed, and herbicides?
In an attempt to modernize the experimental approach at Rothamsted, Fisher introduced
the concept of randomization and highlighted the experimental tripod: the concepts of replication, blocking, and randomization were the foundation on which the analysis of the experiment
was based (Street 1990). Of course, randomization was the linchpin, as the validity of tests of
significance stems from randomization theory.
Fisher understood that the goal of any evaluation method is to construct the proper counterfactual. Without loss of generality, define yi1 as the outcome for observational unit i with treatment,
yi0 as the outcome for unit i without treatment. The treatment effect for plot i can then be
measured as τ i = yi1 − yi0 . The major problem, however, is one of a missing counterfactual–plot
i is not observed in both states. Fisher understood that methods to create the missing counterfactual to achieve identification of the treatment effect were invaluable, and his idea was to use
randomization.
As Levitt and List (2009) discuss, Fisher’s fundamental contributions were showcased in agricultural field experiments, culminating with the landmark 1935 book, The Design of Experiments,
which was a catalyst for the actual use of randomization in controlled experiments. At the same
time, Jerzy Neyman’s work on agricultural experimentation showcased the critical relationship between experiments and survey design and the pivotal role that randomization plays in both (Splawa
and Neyman 1923a, 1923b). Neyman’s work continued in the area of sampling and culminated
in his seminal paper, published in 1934. As Rubin (1990) notes, it is clear that randomization
2

For a more complete discussion see List and Reiley (2008).

4

was “in the air” in the early nineteen twenties, and the major influences of the day were by scholars doing empirical research on agricultural related issues. Clearly, such work revolutionized the
experimental approach and weighs on experimental designs in all sciences today.
As emphasized throughout, we view field experimenters as being engaged in data generation,
primary data collection, and data evaluation. Labor economists in particular have been at the
forefront of the use of experimental designs, as highlighted by the following two historic examples.
1.1.2

Early Labor Market Field Experiments at the Hawthorne Plant

In the 1920s the Western Electric Company was the monopoly supplier of telephone equipment
to AT&T. Western opted to have its main factory, the Hawthorne plant located in the suburbs of
Chicago, be the main supplier for this important contract. The Hawthorne plant was considered to
be one of the most advanced manufacturing facilities in America at the time, and employed roughly
35,000 people, mainly first- and second-generation immigrants (Gale 2004). Always open to new
techniques to improve efficiency and profitability, officials of Western were intrigued when the
National Academy of Sciences expressed interest in a hypothesis put forth by electrical suppliers,
who claimed that better lighting improved productivity.
The experimental exercises that resulted have few parallels within social science. The indelible
footprint of these experiments laid the groundwork for a proper understanding of social dynamics
of groups and employee relations in the workplace. Indeed, the data drawn from this research
became the thrust of the human relations movement of the twentieth century, and represent the
underpinnings of contemporary efforts of industry to motivate and deal with workers. In academia,
the Hawthorne data spawned the development of a new field of study–Industrial Psychology–and
remains an important influence on the manner in which scientists conduct experimental research
today. Many of the issues raised in these studies are considered part of mainstream personnel
economics, as discussed in the Chapter in this Handbook on Human Resource Management practices by Bloom and Van Reenen (2010). In a later section of this Chapter we review how a new
generation of field experiments have provided new insights into these age old questions of behavior
within firms.3
The first experiments executed at the Hawthorne plant have been famously denoted the “illumination experiments” because they varied the amount of light in the workplace. More specifically,
between 1924 and 1927 the level of lighting was systematically changed for experimental groups in
different departments (Mayo 1933, pp. 55-56, Roethlisberger and Dickson 1939, pp. 14-18, provide
a more complete account). Workers in these departments were women who assembled relays and
wound coils of wire, and their output was measured as units completed per unit of time.4
Discussions of these data have been widespread and have been an important influence on
3

Frederick Taylor’s seminal book, The Principles of Scientific Management, published in 1911, which creatively
considered techniques to shorten task time, was also an important stimulus for the Industrial Psychology field.
4
A relay was a switching device activated in the telephone exchange as each number was dialed, and was a fairly
mind-numbing task: assemble a coil, armature, contact springs, and insulators by fastening them to a fixture with
four screws. On average, it was roughly one minute’s worth of work.

5

building the urban legend. For instance, Franke and Kaul (1978, p. 624) note that “Inexplicably
worker output. . . generally increased regardless of increase or decrease in illumination.” Yet, the
only account of these experiments published at the time is Snow (1927), published in an engineering
newsletter, and he argues that “The corresponding production efficiencies by no means followed
the magnitude or trend of the lighting intensities. The output bobbed up and down without direct
relation to the amount of illumination.” Unfortunately, the article does not present data or any
statistical analysis. Ever since, the literature has remained at a state of question since people
think that the data are lost. Indeed, an authoritative voice on this issue, Rice (1982) notes that
“the original research data somehow disappeared.” Gale (2004, p. 439) expresses similar thoughts
concerning the illumination experiments: “these particular experiments were never written up,
the original study reports were lost, and the only contemporary account of them derives from a
few paragraphs in a trade journal” (Roethlisberger and Dickson, 1939, Gillespie, 1991).5
Using data preserved in two library archives Levitt and List (2008) dug up the original data
from the illumination experiment, long thought to be destroyed. Their analysis of the newly
found data reveals little evidence to support the existence of a Hawthorne effect as commonly
described. Namely, there is no systematic evidence that productivity jumped whenever changes in
lighting occurred. Alternatively, they do uncover some weak evidence consistent with more subtle
manifestations of Hawthorne effects in the data. In particular, output tends to be higher when
experimental manipulations are ongoing relative to when there is no experimentation. Also consistent with a Hawthorne effect is that productivity is more responsive to experimenter manipulations
of light than naturally-occurring fluctuations.
As mysterious and legendary as the illumination experiments have become, it is fair to say
that the second set of experiments conducted at the plant–the relay assembly experiments–
have kept academics busy for years. Using an experimental area constructed for the illumination
experiments, beginning in April 1927, researchers began an experiment meant to examine the
effect of workplace changes upon productivity. In this case, the task was relay assembly.
The researchers began by secretly observing the women in their natural environment for two
weeks, and then used various treatments, including manipulating the environment in such a way to
increase and decrease rest periods, over different temporal intervals. While their design certainly
did not allow easy assessment of clean treatment effects, the experimenters were puzzled by the
observed pattern: output seemingly rose regardless of the change implemented. When output
remained high after the researchers returned conditions to the baseline–output had risen from
2400 relays per week to nearly 3000 relays per week–management became interested in identifying
the underlying mechanisms at work.
Western Electric subsequently brought in academic consultants, including Elton Mayo, in 1928.
With Mayo’s assistance, the experiments continued and by February of 1929, when productivity
was at a startling rate of a new relay dropped down the chute every 40-50 seconds, the company
5

There are many other evaluations as well. For example, a controversial article written by Bramel and Friend
(1981), heavily laced with Marxist ideology, takes a conspiratorial view of industrial psychologists and argues that
the Hawthorne effect is simply the result of “capitalist bias among modern industrial psychologists.”

6

besieged the five women with attention, besides “a new test room supervisor, an office boy, and
a lady who helped with the statistics” others could be added: “an intermittent stream of other
visitors or consultants: industrialists, industrial relations experts , industrial psychologists, and
university professors.” (Gale, 2004, p. 443). The experiment lasted until June 1932, when the
women in the test room received their notices (except the exceptional worker, Jennie Sirchio, who
worked in the office for a few months before being let go) after the stock market crash of October
24, 1932. The crash induced one in ten US phones to be disconnected in 1932, leading to a decrease
in Western Electric’s monopoly rents of more than 80%.
The five year experiment provided a wealth of data, and much of the Hawthorne Effect’s
statistical underpinnings are a direct result of the relay assembly experiment. Mayo’s (1933)
results concluded that individuals would be more productive when they knew they were being
studied.6 For this insight, Mayo came to be known as the “father of the Hawthorne effect”, and
his work lead to the understanding that the workplace was, importantly, a system that was first
and foremost social, and composed of several interdependent parts. When we present a detailed
typology of field experiments later in this section, we make precise a distinction between those
field experiments in which agents are aware of their participation in an experiment, and those in
which they are unaware of the exogenous manipulation of their economic environment.
Mayo stressed that workers are not merely at work to earn an honest wage for an honest day’s
effort, rather they are more prominently influenced by social demands, their need for attention,
input to decision making, and by the psychological factors of the environment. The notion that
workers effort and behavior are driven by more than the monetary rewards of work, is an idea
that has received close scrutiny among the most recent generation of field experiments in firms,
as reviewed later.
Clearly, Mayo argued, being the object of attention with the study induced a sense of satisfaction among workers that made them feel proud and part of a cohesive unit, generating greater
productivity levels than could ever be imagined. Mayo’s disciples, Frist Roethlisberger and William
Dickson, another engineer at Western Electric, produced a detailed assessment that focused mainly
on the relay experimental data (Roethlisberger and Dickson 1939) and generated similar conclusions. Industrial psychology would soon find an important place in undergraduate and graduate
curricula. Again in later sections, we provide examples of where field experiments have taken
insights from psychology and laboratory environments to check for the existence and quantitative
importance of such behaviors that are not encompassed within neoclassical economic models.
It is difficult to understate the importance of these findings, as they have served as the paradigmatic foundation of the social science of work (Franke and Kaul 1978), providing a basis for
6

Derivative of this path-breaking experiment were two experiments run alongside the relay experiment. Both
were started in August of 1928; one was a second relay experiment, the other a mica splitting experiment. In the
second relay experiment, five women workers were subjected to variations in a small group incentive program from
August 1928 to March 1929. In the mica splitting experiment, the researchers began by secretly monitoring the
output of five women at their regular department workstations. Their job was to split, measure, and trim mica
chips that were to be used for insulation. After observing the workers secretly, they moved the women to a special
test room where, unlike their cohorts, they received 10-minute rest breaks at 9:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.

7

an understanding of the economics of the workplace, and dramatically influenced studies in organizational development and behavior, leadership, human relations, and workplace design. The
results also provide an important foundation for experimental work within the social sciences,
including economics, where one must constantly be aware of the effects argued to be important in
the Hawthorne relay experiment.7
1.1.3

Large-Scale Social Experiments

A second period of interest directly related to field experiments in labor economics is the latter half
of the twentieth century, during which government agencies conducted a series of large-scale social
experiments.8 In the U.S., social experiments can be traced to Heather Ross, an MIT economics
doctoral candidate working at the Brookings Institution. As Levitt and List (2009) discuss, Ross
wrote a piece titled “A Proposal for Demonstration of New Techniques in Income Maintenance”,
in which she suggested a randomly assigned social experiment to lend insights into the policy
debate.
The experiment that resulted began in 1968 in five urban communities in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania: Trenton, Paterson, Passaic, and Jersey City in NJ, and Scranton, PA. and eventually became Ross’ dissertation research (“An Experimental Study of the Negative Income Tax”,
which cost more than $5 million–exceeding $30 million in today’s dollars). The idea behind
the experiment was to explore the behavioral effects of negative income taxation, a concept first
introduced by Milton Friedman and Robert Lampman, who was at the University of Wisconsin’s
poverty institute9 The experiment, which targeted roughly 1,300 male-headed households who had
at least one employable person, experimentally varied both the guaranteed level of income and the
negative tax rate (Ross 1970). The guaranteed level of income ranged from 50% to 125% of the
estimated poverty line income level for a family of four ($1650-$4125 in 1968 dollars) while the
negative income tax rate ranged from 30% to 70%.10 The experiment lasted three years. Families
7

The success of the relay assembly experiments led to in-depth surveys (from 1928-1931) and one final experiment
in the Hawthorne plant–the “bank wiring” experiment, designed by Mayo and others from 1931-1932. The
researchers began by examining the productivity of 14 men who assembled telephone terminals. They then moved
these men to a special test room, without introducing any other changes in work or pay conditions. Despite the
move to a separate experimental setting, the men’s output did not increase.
8
This, and the subsequent subsections, draw from Harrison and List (2004), List (2006), and Levitt and List
(2009). There are many definitions of social experiments in the economics literature. Ferber and Hirsch (1982,
p.7) define a social experiment in economics as “.... a publicly funded study that incorporates a rigorous statistical
design and whose experimental aspects are applied over a period of time to one or more segments of a human
population, with the aim of evaluating the aggregate economic and social effects of the experimental treatments.”
Greenberg and Shroder (2004) define a social experiment as having at least the following four features: (i) random
assignment, (ii) policy intervention, (iii) follow-up data collection, and (iv) evaluation.
9
As the Editors pointed out, the basic idea of a negative income tax was a part of the liberal party platform in
the 1940s, and it is usually argued that it was designed by Juliet Rhys-Williams, an amazing advocate for women
in that period.
10
The negative income tax rate works as follows. Assume that John is randomly inserted into the 100% guaranteed
income ($3300), 50% negative tax rate treatment. What this means is that when the policy binds, for each $1 that
John’s family earns on its own, they receive $0.50 less in federal benefits. Thus, if John’s family earns $2000 in
year one, they would receive $1000 less in program benefits, or $2300, resulting in a total income of $4300. In this
case, if in any year John’s family earns $6600 or more, program benefits are zero.

8

in both the control and treatment groups were asked to respond to questionnaires every three
months during this time span, with the questions exploring issues such as family labor supply,
consumption and expenditure patterns, general mobility, dependence on government, and social
integration.
The most interesting outcome for labor economists involved labor supply. Strong advocates
of the negative income tax program argued that the program would provide positive, or at least
no negative, work incentives. Many economists, however, were skeptical, hypothesizing that the
results would show some negative effect on work effort. Early experimental results discussed in
Ross (1970), argued that work effort did not decline for the treatment groups. In fact, as Ross
(1970, p. 568) indicates “there is, in fact, a slight indication that the participants’ overall work
effort increased during the initial test period.”
Since this initial exploration, other scholars have re-examined the experimental design and
data, coming to a less optimistic appraisal. An excellent elucidation is Ashenfelter (1990), who
notes that because of attrition it is not actually possible to simply tabulate the results. In this
sense, and from the experimenters point of view, the experiments were flawed in part because the
design took little advantage of the inherent advantages of randomization. Of course, the ultimate
policy test is whether the income maintenance programs increased work incentives relative to the
existing welfare system, which as Moffitt (1981) notes at that time had large benefit-reduction
rates that may have discouraged work. In certain cases, the new approach did outperform existing
incentive schemes, in others it did not.
More importantly for our purposes, the New Jersey income maintenance experiment is generally
considered to be the first large-scale social experiment conducted in the U.S., for which Ross is
given credit (Greenberg et al. 1999, Greenberg and Shroder 2004).11 The contribution of Ross,
along with the excellent early summaries of the virtues of social experimentation (Orcutt and
Orcutt 1968), appears to have been instrumental in stimulating the explosion in social experiments
in the ensuing decades.12,13
11

We emphasize large scale because there were a handful of other social experiments–such as the Perry Preschool
Project begun in 1962–that preceded the New Jersey Income Maintenance experiment (Greenberg et al. 1999),
and that are still being evaluated today (Heckman et al. 2009). A prevalent type of social experimentation in recent
years is the paired-audit experiments to identify and measure discrimination. These involve the use of “matched
pairs” of individuals, who are made to look as much alike as possible apart from the protected characteristics. These
pairs then confront the target subjects, which are employers, landlords, mortgage loan officers, or car salesmen.
The majority of audit studies conducted to date have been in the fields of employment discrimination and housing
discrimination (Riach and Rich 2002).
12
The original negative income tax experiment led to three other early experiments on income maintenance,
which drew samples from rural areas of North Carolina and Iowa (1970-72); Seattle and Denver (1970-78); and
Gary, Indiana (1971-74). These experiments went beyond studying urban husband-wife couples that were studied
in the New Jersey income maintenance experiment. For instance, the North Carolina/Iowa study was conducted
by the Institute of Research on Poverty to explore behavior among the rural poor. Only one and two parent black
households were studied in the Gary, IN test. The Seattle-Denver study represented the most comprehensive,
including blacks, Chicanos, and whites who had either one or two parents in the household. By and large, the
evidence gathered in these studies reinforced the main result in the New Jersey study, but these new studies
highlighted additional insights that were important for policy making, such as in differences between male and
female labor force participation, unemployment duration, and welfare participation.
13
An early social experiment in Europe was the study of Intensified Employment Services in Eskilstuna, Sweden.
In 1975, a small-town employment office received a personnel reinforcement for three months and split a group of

9

Such large-scale social experiments have continued in the U.S., and have included employment
programs, electricity pricing, and housing allowances (see Hausman and Wise 1985, for a review).
While this early wave of social experiments tended to focus on testing new programs, more recent
social experiments tended to be “black box” in the sense that packages of services and incentives
were proffered, and the experiments were meant to test incremental changes to existing programs.14
This generation of social experiments had an important influence on policy, contributing, for
instance, to the passage of the Family Support Act of 1988, which overhauled the AFDC program.
Indeed, as Manski and Garfinkel (1992) note, in Title II, Section 203, 102 Stat. 2380, the Act even
made a specific recommendation on evaluation procedures: “a demonstration project conducted . . .
shall use experimental and control groups that are composed of a random sample of participants
in the program.”
Much like the experimental contributions of the agricultural literature of the 1920s and 1930s,
the large-scale social experiments conducted in the twentieth century influenced the economics literature immensely. Since the initial income maintenance social experiment, there have been more
than 235 known completed social experiments (Greenberg and Shroder 2004), each exploring public policies in health, housing, welfare, and the like. The early social experiments were voluntary
experiments typically designed to measure basic behavioral relationships, or deep structural parameters, which could be used to evaluate an entire spectrum of social policies. Optimists even
believed that the parameters could be used to evaluate policies that had not even been conducted.
As Heckman (1992) notes, this was met with deep skepticism along economists and non-economists
alike, and ambitions have since been much more modest.
As Manski and Garfinkel (1992) suggest, this second wave of social experiments had a methodological influence within academic circles, as it provided an arena for the 1980s debate between
experimental advocates and those favoring structural econometrics using naturally-occurring data.
Manski and Garfinkel (1992) provide an excellent resource that includes insights on the merits of
the arguments on both sides, and discusses some of the important methodological issues. Highlighting some of the weaknesses of social experiments helps to clarify important distinctions we
draw between social experiments and the generation of field experiments which has followed.
410 unemployed job seekers who had been registered at the office for at least three months into a treatment group
(n=216) and a control group (n=194). The control group received normal service and used the services of the office
for an average of 1.5 hours over the course of the experiment, while the treatment group used office services for an
average of 7.5 hours, allowing office personnel to work more intensely on the individual problems of the treatment
subjects. The findings were that the percent of workers with a job at the end of the experiment, unemployment
spells during the experiment, and earnings were all favorably influenced by the employment services studied. A
discussion of this study, as well as other European social experiments in labor market policy can be found in
Björklund and Regnér (1996) and the various Digests of Social Experiments due to Greenberg, and Shroder. Two
of the more famous examples are the Norwegian Training Experiment (Raaum and Torp 1993) and the Restart
Programme in the United Kingdom (White and Lakey 1992).
14
For example, whereas over 80% of social experiments from 1962-74 tested new programs, since 1983 only
roughly 33% did so (Greenberg et al. 1999).

10

1.1.4

Potential Shortcomings of Social Experiments

One potential problem arising in social experiments is “randomization bias”, a situation wherein
the experimental sample is different from the population of interest because of randomization. It
is commonly known in the field of clinical drug trials that persuading patients to participate in
randomized studies is much harder than persuading them to participate in non-randomized studies
(Kramer and Shapiro 1984). The same problem applies to social experiments, as evidenced by the
difficulties that can be encountered when recruiting decentralized bureaucracies to administer the
random treatment (Hotz 1992).15
Doolittle and Traeger (1990) provide a description of the practical importance of randomization
bias when describing their experience in implementing the Job Training Partnership Act. Indeed,
in almost any social experiment related to job training programs, it is a concern that those most
likely to benefit from the program select into the program. Moreover as Harrison and List (2004)
discuss, in social experiments, given the open nature of the political process, it is almost impossible
to hide the experimental objective from the person implementing the experiment or the subject,
opening up the possibility of such self-selection. As Heckman (1992) puts it, comparing social
experiments to agricultural experiments: “plots of ground do not respond to anticipated treatments
of fertilizer, nor can they excuse themselves from being treated.”
To see this more formally, we follow the notation above and assume that τ i = yi1 − yi0 is the
treatment effect for individual i. Figure 1 shows a hypothetical density of τ i in the population,
a density assumed to have mean, τ ∗ . In this case, the parameter τ ∗ is equivalent to the average
treatment effect; this is the treatment effect of interest if the analyst is pursuing an estimate of
the average effect in this population.
[Figure 1: Simple Illustration of the Selection Problem]
The concern is that selection into the experiment is not random, but might occur with a
probability related to τ . Using this notion to formulate the selection rule leads to positive selection:
subjects with higher τ values are more likely to participate if offered. In Figure 1, we denote the
cutoff value of τ i as τ + : people above τ + participate, those below do not.
In this case, the treatment effect on the treated is what is measured in the social experiment:
τ T T . τ T T is equal to E(τ i |τ i > τ + ), which represents the estimate of the treatment effect for those
who select to participate. A lack of recognition of selection causes the analyst to mis-measure the
treatment effect for the population of interest. Figure 1 also shows the treatment effect on the
untreated, τ T U . This τ T U is equal to E(τ i |τ i < τ + ), which represents the unobserved estimate of
the treatment effect for those who chose not to participate. Therefore, the population parameter
of interest, τ ∗ , is a mixture of these two effects: τ ∗ = P r × τ T T + (1 − P r)× τ T U , where P r
represents the probability of τ i > τ + . Even if one assumes that the population density of τ i
15

There is a growing body of evidence from laboratory settings on how individuals self-select into treatments
when allowed to do so. See Lazear et al. (2009) for a recent such study, and the discussion in Charness and Kuhn
(2010).

11

among participants is isomorphic to the population density of inferential interest, such selection
frustrates proper inference. A related concern is whether the density of τ i in the participant
population exactly overlaps with the population of interest.
A second issue stems from Heckman (1992), Heckman and Smith (1995), and Manski (1995),
who contend that participants in small-scale experiments may not be representative of individuals who would participate in ongoing, full-scale programs. Such non-representativeness of the
experimental sample could occur because of a lack of information diffusion, the reluctance of some
individuals to subject themselves to random assignment, or resource constraints in full-scale programs that result in program administrators restricting participants to people meeting certain
criteria. As a result, making inference on how individuals would respond to the same intervention
were they to be scaled up is not straightforward.
A third set of concerns stem from the supply side of those implementing the social experiment as it is scaled up. For example, the quality of those administering the intervention might
be very different from the quality of personnel selected to take part in the original social experiment. Moreover, the ability of administrative agencies to closely monitor those charged with the
actual implementation of the programme might also vary as programmes are scaled-up. These
concerns might also apply to field experiments unless they are explicitly designed to allow for
such possibilities. In general, the role played by program implementers in determining program
outcomes remains poorly understood and is a rich area for future study both for field experiments
and researchers in general.
A fourth concern that arises in social experiments is attrition bias. Attrition bias refers to
systematic differences between the treatment and control groups because of differential losses
of participants. As Hausman and Wise (1979) note, a characteristic of social experiments is
that individuals are surveyed before the experiment begins as well as during the experiment,
which in many cases is several years. This within-person experimental design permits added
power compared to a between-person experimental design–because of the importance of individual
effects. But, there are potential problems, as they note (p. 455): “the inclusion of the time factor
in the experiment raises a problem which does not exist in classical experiments–attrition. Some
individuals decide that keeping the detailed records that the experiments require is not worth the
payment, some move, some are inducted into the military.”16
Beyond sampling and implementation shortcomings, social experiments also run the risk of
generating misleading inference out of sample due to the increased scrutiny induced by the experiment. If experimental participants understand their behavior is being measured in terms of
certain outcomes, some of them might attempt to succeed along these outcomes. Such effects have
been deemed “John Henry” effects for the control sample because such participants work harder
to show their worth when they realize that they are part of the control group. More broadly,
some studies denote such effects as “Hawthorne” effects; if these Hawthorne effects do not operate
16

Problems of attrition are well known and detailed discussions can be found in Hausman and Wise (1979) and
the various chapters in Manski and Garfinkel (1992).

12

equally on the treatment and control group, bias is induced.17
Another factor that might lead to incorrect inference in a social experiment is control group
members seeking available substitutes for treatment. This is denoted “substitution bias” in the
literature, a bias that can result in significant understatement of the treatment effect. Substitution
bias can occur if a new program being tested experimentally absorbs resources that would otherwise
be available to members of the control group or, instead, if as a result of serving some members of
a target group, the new program frees up resources available under other programs that can now
be used to better serve members of the control group. The practical importance of substitution
bias is provided in Puma et al. (1990) and Heckman and Smith (1995).
Although these concerns, as well as others not discussed here, need always to be accounted for,
social experiments continue to be an important and valuable tool for policy analysis, as evidenced
by two recent and notable large scale undertakings: Moving To Opportunity (Katz et al. 2001)
and PROGRESA (Schultz 2004), as well as the more recent social experiments documented in
Greenberg and Shroder (2004).

1.2

Field Experiments

Following from the first two periods of experimentation discussed above, the third distinct period
of field experimentation is the most recent surge of field experiments in economics. Harrison and
List (2004), List (2006) and List and Reiley (2008) provide recent overviews of this literature.
The increased use of this approach reflects a long running trend in labor economics and applied
microeconomics more generally, to identify causal effects. This is not surprising given that nearly
all of the central research questions in labor economics are plagued by econometric concerns related
to the simultaneous determination of individual decisions related to the accumulation of human
capital, self-selection into labor markets and careers. Furthermore, many of the key variables that
underlie behavior in labor markets–such as motivation or talent–are either simply unmeasured
or measured with error in standard surveys.
Field experiments form the most recent addition to the wave of empirical strategies to identify causal effects that have entered mainstream empirical research in labor economics since the
mid 1980s. For example, these are based on fixed effects, difference-in-differences, instrumental
variables, regression discontinuities, and natural experiments. Comprehensive reviews of these
developments are provided in Angrist and Krueger (1999). At the same time as these research
strategies have developed, greater emphasis has been placed on econometric methods that are
robust to functional form and distributional assumptions. These include the development of semiparametric and non-parametric estimation techniques. Reviews of these developments are provided
in Moffitt (1999).
17

Note that the development field experiments that have arisen recently often have to confront this issue directly
when making inference from their studies–even though subjects might not know that they are randomized, a survey
is used to measure the outcomes so repeated interactions are a certainty. One paper that attempts to quantify the
effects is due to Gine et al. (2007). In a similar spirit, Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2007) present evidence
from a randomized control trial on educational interventions in India. They also present evidence to distinguish
the effects of the intervention from the mere effects of being part of an observational study per se.

13

We view the increased use of field experiments to have its origins in the last decade in part
because of an acceleration of three long-standing trends in how applied economic research is
conducted: (i) the increased use of research designs to uncover credible causal effects; (ii) the
increased propensity to engage in primary data collection; and (iii) the formation of ever closer
interactions with practitioners and policy makers more generally.
Similar to the experiments at the Hawthorne plant and social experiments, but unlike the firstgeneration agricultural studies, the most recent field experiments typically apply randomization
to human subjects to obtain identification. In contrast to social experiments, however, recent field
experiments strive to carry out this randomization on naturally occurring populations in naturally occurring settings, often without the research subjects being aware that they are part of an
experiment. As a consequence, these more recent studies tend to be carried out opportunistically,
and on a smaller scale than social experiments.18
This current generation of field experiments oftentimes has more ambitious theoretical goals
than social experiments, which largely aim to speak to policy makers and identify whether a
package of measures leads to some desired change in outcomes. Modern field experiments in many
cases are designed to test economic theory, collect facts useful for constructing a theory, and
organize primary data collection to make measurements of key parameters, assuming a theory is
correct. Field experiments can also help provide the necessary behavioral principles to permit
sharper inference from laboratory or naturally-occurring data. Alternatively, field experiments
can help to determine whether lab or field results should be reinterpreted, defined more narrowly
than first believed, or more general than the context in which they were measured. In other cases,
field experiments might help to uncover the causes and underlying conditions necessary to produce
data patterns observed in the lab or the field.
Since nature in most cases does not randomize agents into appropriate treatment and control
groups, the task of the field experimental researcher is to develop markets, constructs, or experimental designs wherein subjects are randomized into treatments of interest. The researcher faces
challenges different from those that arise either in conducting laboratory experiments or relying
on naturally occurring variation. The field experimenter does not exert the same degree of control
over real markets as the scientist does in the lab. Yet, unlike an empiricist who collects existing
data, the field experimenter is in the data generating business, as opposed to solely engaging in
data collection or evaluation. Consequently, conducting successful field experiments demands a
different set of skills from the researcher: the ability to recognize opportunities for experimentation hidden amidst everyday phenomena, an understanding of experimental design and evaluation
methods, knowledge of economic theory to motivate the research, and the interpersonal skills to
manage what are often a complex set of relationships involving parties to an experiment.
18

In this sense, field experiments parallel the research approach that exploits “natural experiments” (Meyer
1995, Rosenzweig and Wolpin 2000, Angrist and Krueger 2001), the difference being that in a field experiment the
researcher actually controls the randomization herself, whereas in the natural experiment approach the researcher
attempts to find sources of variation in existing data that are “as good as randomly assigned.” In addition, the
close involvement of the researcher from the outset allows for primary data collection to perhaps directly help shed
light on the underlying mechanisms driving causal effects.

14

1.2.1

What is a Field Experiment?

Harrison and List (2004) propose six factors that can be used to determine the field context of
an experiment: the nature of the subject pool, the nature of the information that the subjects
bring to the task, the nature of the commodity, the nature of the task or trading rules applied,
the nature of the stakes, and the environment in which the subjects operate. Using these factors,
they discuss a broad classification scheme that helps to organize one’s thoughts about the factors
that might be important when moving from non-experimental to experimental data.
They classify field experiments into three categories: artefactual, framed, and natural. Figure 2
shows how these three types of field experiments compare and contrast with laboratory experiments
and approaches using naturally occurring non-experimental data. On the far left in Figure 2 are
laboratory experiments, which typically make use of randomization to identify a treatment effect
of interest in the lab using a subject pool of students. In this Handbook, Charness and Kuhn
(2010) discuss extant laboratory studies in the area of labor economics.
[Figure 2: A Field Experiment Bridge]
The other end of the spectrum in Figure 2 includes empirical models that make necessary
identification assumptions to identify treatment effects from naturally-occurring data. For example, identification in simple natural experiments results from a difference in difference regression
model: Yit = Xit β + τ Tit + η it , where i indexes the unit of observation, t indexes years, Yit is the
outcome, Xit is a vector of controls, Tit is a binary treatment variable equal to one if unit i is
treated and zero otherwise, η it = αi + λt + εit , and τ is measured by comparing the difference
in outcomes before and after for the treated group with the before and after outcomes for the
non treated group. A major identifying assumption in this case is that there are no time-varying,
unit-specific shocks to the outcome variable that are correlated with Tit , and that selection into
treatment is independent of temporary individual specific effect.
Useful alternatives include the method of propensity score matching (PSM) developed in Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983). Again, if both states of the world were observable, the average treatment
effect, τ , would equal y 1 − y 0 . However, given that only y1 or y0 is observed for each observation,
unless assignment into the treatment group is random, generally τ = y 1 − y 0 . The solution advocated by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) is to find a vector of covariates, Z, such that y1 , y0 ⊥ T |Z,
P r(T = 1|Z) ∈ (0, 1), where ⊥ denotes independence. This assumption is called the “conditional
independence assumption” and intuitively means that given Z, the non-treated outcomes are what
the treated outcomes would have been had they not been treated. Or, likewise, that selection occurs only on observables. If this condition holds, then treatment assignment is said to be ‘strongly
ignorable’ (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983, p. 43). To estimate the average treatment effect (on the
treated), only the weaker condition E[y0 |T = 1, Z] = E[y0 |T = 0, Z] = E[y0 |Z]P r(T = 1|Z) ∈
(0, 1) is required. Thus, the treatment effect is given by τ = E[y 1 −y 0 |Z], implying that conditional
on Z, assignment to the treatment group mimics a randomized experiment.19
19

Several aspects of the approach are not discussed in this discussion. For example, for these conditions to

15

Other more popular methods of estimating treatment effects include the use of instrumental variables (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 2000) and structural modeling. Assumptions of these approaches are well documented and are not discussed further here (Angrist and Krueger 1999,
Blundell and Costas Dias 2002). Between the two extremes in Figure 2 are various types of field
experiment. We now turn to a more patient discussion of these types.
1.2.2

A More Detailed Typology of Field Experiments

Following Harrison and List (2004), we summarize the key elements of each type of field experiment
in Table 1. This also makes precise the differences between field and laboratory experiments.
[Table 1: A Typology of Field Experiments]
Harrison and List (2004) argue that a first useful departure from laboratory experiments using
student subjects is simply to use “non-standard” subjects, or experimental participants from the
market of interest. In Table 1 and Figure 2, these are denoted as “artefactual” field experiments.
This type of field experiment represents a potentially useful type of exploration outside of traditional laboratory studies because it affords the researchers with the control of a standard lab
experiment but with the realism of a subject pool that are the natural actors from the market of
interest. In the past decade, artefactual field experiments have been used in financial applications
(Alevy et al. 2007, Cipriani and Guarino 2009), to test predictions of game theory (List et al.
2009), and in applications associated with labor economics (Cooper et al. 1999).20
Another example of the use of artefactual field experiments is to explain or predict nonexperimental outcomes. An example of this usage is Barr and Serneels (2009), who correlate
behavior in a trust game experiment with wage outcomes of employees of Ghanian manufacturing
enterprises. They report that a one percent increase in reciprocity in these games is associated
with a fifteen percent increase in wages. Another example is Attanasio et al. (2009) who combine
household data on social networks with a field experiment conducted with the same households
in Colombia, to investigate who pools risk with whom when risk pooling arrangements are not
formally enforced. Combining non-experimental and experimental research methods in this way
by conducting an artefactual field experiment among survey respondents provides an opportunity
to study the interplay of risk attitudes, pre-existing networks, and risk-sharing.
hold the appropriate conditioning set, Z, should be multi-dimensional. Second, upon estimation of the propensity
score, a matching algorithm must be defined in order to estimate the missing counterfactual, y0 , for each treated
observation. The average treatment effect on the treated (T T ) is given by,
τ T T = E[E[y1|T = 1, p(Z)] − E[y0 |T = 0, p(Z)]] = E[E[y1 − y0|p(Z)]],
where the outer expectation is over the distribution of Z|T = 1. These and other issues are discussed in List et al.
(2004).
20
Harrison and List (2004) discuss in detail whether student subjects exhibit different behaviors in laboratory
environments that individuals drawn from other subject pools. A parallel trend in laboratory settings has been the
use of ‘real-effort’ experiments, as discussed in Charness and Kuhn (2010).

16

Moving closer to how naturally-occurring data are generated, Harrison and List (2004) denote
a “framed field experiment” as the same as an artefactual field experiment, except that it incorporates important elements of the context of the naturally occurring environment with respect to
the commodity, task, stakes, and information set of the subjects. Yet, it is important to note that
framed field experiments, like lab experiments and artefactual field experiments, are conducted in
a manner that ensures subjects understand that they are taking part in an experiment, with their
behavior subsequently recorded and scrutinized. Framed field experiments include the Hawthorne
plant experiments, the social experiments of the twentieth century, and two related experimental
approaches.
One related approach might be considered a cousin of social experiments: the collection of
studies done in developing countries that use randomization to identify causal effects of interventions in settings where naturally-occurring data are limited. The primary motivation for such
experiments is to inform public policy. These studies typically use experimental treatments more
bluntly than the controlled treatments discussed above, in that the designs often randomly introduce a package of several interventions. On the other hand, this package of measures is directly
linked to a menu of actual public policy alternatives. A few recent notable examples of this type
of work are the studies such as Kremer et al. (2004) and Duflo et al. (2006).
Framed field experiments have also been done with a greater eye towards testing economic
theory, for instance several framed field experiments of this genre have been published in the
economics literature, ranging from further tests of auction theory (Lucking-Reiley 1999, Katkar
and Reiley 2006), tests of the theory of private provision of public goods (Bohm 1984, List 2004a),
tests that examine the relative predictive power of neoclassical theory versus prospect theory (List
2003, 2004b), tests that explore issues in cost/benefit analysis and preference elicitation (List 2001,
2002a, Lusk and Fox 2003, Rozan et al. 2004, Ding et al. 2005), tests that explore competitive
market theory in the field (List 2002b, 2004c, List and Price 2005), and tests of information
assimilation among professional financial traders (Alevy et al. 2007).21
Unlike social experiments, this type of framed field experiment does not need to worry about
many of the shortcomings discussed above. For example, since subjects are unaware that the
experiment is using randomization, any randomization bias should be eliminated. Also, these
experiments tend to be short-lived and therefore attrition bias is not of major importance. Also,
substitution bias should not be a primary concern in these types of studies. The cost of not having
these concerns is that rarely can the long run effects of experimentally introduced interventions
be assessed. This might limit therefore limit the appropriateness of such field experiments for
questions in labor economics in which there are long time lags between when actions are made
and outcomes realized.
As Levitt and List (2007a,b) discuss, the fact that subjects are in an environment in which
they are keenly aware that their behavior is being monitored, recorded, and subsequently scrutinized, might also cause generalizability to be compromised. Decades of research within psychology
21

Of course, this is just a select sampling of the work of this sort, for a more comprehensive list please see
www.fieldexperiments.com.

17

highlight the power of the role obligations of being an experimental subject, the power of the experimenter herself, and the experimental situation (Orne 1962). This leads to our final type of
field experiment–“natural field experiments,” which complete Table 1 and Figure 2.
Natural field experiments are those experiments completed in cases where the environment
is such that the subjects naturally undertake these tasks and where the subjects do not know
that they are participants in an experiment. Therefore, they neither know that they are being
randomized into treatment nor that their behavior is subsequently scrutinized. Such an exercise
is important in that it represents an approach that combines the most attractive elements of the
lab and naturally-occurring data: randomization and realism. In addition, it is difficult for people
to respond to treatments they do not necessarily know are unusual, and of course they cannot
excuse themselves from being treated. Hence, many of the limitations cited above are not an issue
when making inference from data generated by natural field experiments. As we document in later
sections, natural field experiments have already been used to answer a wide range of traditional
research questions in labor economics.
1.2.3

Simple Rules of Thumb for Experimentation

Scholars have produced a variety of rules of thumb to aid in experimental design. Following List et
al. (2009), we provide a framework to think through these issues. Suppose that a single treatment
T results in (conditional) outcomes Yi0 if T = 0 where Yi0 |Xi ∼ N (µ0 , σ 20 ) and Yi1 if T = 1 where
Yi1 |Xi ∼ N(µ1 , σ 21 ). Since the experiment has not yet been conducted, the experimenter must
form beliefs about the variances of outcomes across the treatment and control groups, which may,
for example, come from theory, prior empirical evidence, or a pilot experiment. The experimenter
also has to make a decision about the minimum detectable difference between mean control and
treatment outcomes, µ1 − µ0 = δ, that the experiment is meant to be able to detect. In essence, δ
is the minimum average treatment effect, τ̄ , that the experiment will be able to detect at a given
significance level and power. Finally, we assume that the significance of the treatment effect will
be determined using a t-test.
The first step in calculating optimal sample sizes requires specifying a null hypothesis and a
specific alternative hypothesis. Typically, the null hypothesis is that there is no treatment effect,
i.e. that the effect size is zero. The alternative hypothesis is that the effect size takes on a specific
value (the minimum detectable effect size). The idea behind the choice of optimal sample sizes in
this scenario is that the sample sizes have to be just large enough so that the experimenter: (i)
does not falsely reject the null hypothesis that the population treatment and control outcomes are
equal, i.e. commit a Type I error; and, (ii) does not falsely accept the null hypothesis when the
actual difference is equal to δ, i.e. commit a Type II error. More formally, if the observations for
control and treatment groups are independently drawn and H0 : µ0 = µ1 and H1 : µ0 = µ1 , we
need the difference in sample means Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 (which are of course not yet observed) to satisfy the
following two conditions related to the probabilities of a Type I and Type II errors.
First, the probability α of committing a Type I error in a two-sided test, i.e. a significance

18

level of α, is given by,
Ȳ − Ȳ
 1 2 0 2 = tα/2 ⇒ Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 = tα/2
σ0
σ
+ n11
n0



σ 20 σ 21
+ ,
n0 n1

(1)

where σ 2T and nT for T = {0, 1} are the conditional variance of the outcome and the sample size
of the control and treatment groups. Second, the probability β of committing a Type II error, i.e.
a power of 1 − β, in a one-sided test, is given by,




Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 − δ
σ 20 σ 21
 2
=
−t
⇒
Ȳ
−
Ȳ
=
δ
−
t
+ .
β
1
0
β
σ0
σ 21
n0 n1
+
n0
n1

(2)

Using (1) to eliminate Ȳ1 − Ȳ0 from (2) we obtain,


δ = tα/2 + tβ





σ 20 σ 21
+ .
n0 n1

(3)

It can easily be shown that if σ 20 = σ 21 = σ 2 , i.e. var (τ i ) = 0, then the smallest sample sizes that
solve this equality satisfy n0 = n1 = n and then,
2  σ  2

n∗0 = n∗1 = n∗ = 2 tα/2 + tβ
δ

(4)

If the variance of the outcomes are not equal this becomes,
N

∗

π∗0



 

tα/2 + tβ 2 σ 20 σ 21
=
+
,
δ
π∗0 π ∗1
σ0
σ1
=
, π ∗1 =
,
σ0 + σ1
σ0 + σ1

(5)

0
where N = no + n1 , π o + π 1 = 1, π 0 = non+n
.
1
If sample sizes are large enough so that the normal distribution is a good approximation
for the t-distribution, then the above equations provide a closed form solution for the optimal
sample sizes. If sample sizes are small, then n must be solved by using successive approximations.
Optimal sample sizes increase proportionally with the variance of outcomes, non-linearly with
the significance level and the power, and decrease proportionally with the square of the minimum
detectable effect. The relative distribution of subjects across treatment and control is proportional
to the standard deviation of the respective outcomes. This suggests that if the variance of outcomes
under treatment and control are fairly similar–namely, in those cases when there are expected to
be homogeneous treatment effects–there should not be a large loss in efficiency from assigning
equal sample sizes to each.
In cases when the outcome variable is dichotomous, under the null hypothesis of no treatment
effect, µ0 = µ1 , one should always allocate subjects equally across treatments. Yet, if the null

19

is of the form µ1 = kµ0 , where k > 0, then the sample size arrangement is dictated by k in the
same manner as in the continuous case. If the cost of sampling subjects differs across treatment
and control groups, then the ratio of the sample sizes is inversely proportional to the square root
of the relative costs. Interestingly, differences in sampling costs have exactly the same effect on
relative sample sizes of treatment and control groups as differences in variances.
In those instances where the unit of randomization is different from the unit of observation,
special considerations must be paid to the correlation in outcomes between units in the same
treated cluster. Specifically, the number of observations required is multiplied by 1 + (m − 1)ρ,
where ρ is the intracluster correlation coefficient and m is the size of each cluster. The optimal
size of each cluster increases with the ratio of the within to between cluster standard deviation,
and decreases with the square root of the ratio of the cost of sampling a subject to the fixed cost
of sampling from a new cluster. Since the optimal sample size is independent of the available
budget, the experimenter should first determine how many subjects to sample in each cluster and
then sample from as many clusters as the budget permits (or until the optimal total sample size
is achieved).22
A final class of results pertains to designs that include several levels of treatment, or more
generally when the treatment variable itself is continuous, but we assume homogeneous treatment
effects. The primary goal of the experimental design in this case is to simply maximize the
variance of the treatment variable. For example, if the analyst is interested in estimating the
effect of treatment and has strong priors that the treatment has a linear effect, then the sample
should be equally divided on the endpoints of the feasible treatment range, with no intermediate
points sampled. Maximizing the variance of the treatment variable under an assumed quadratic,
cubic, quartic, etc., relationship produces unambiguous allocation rules as well: in the quadratic
case, for instance, the analyst should place half of the sample equally distributed on the endpoints
and the other half on the midpoint. More generally, optimal design requires that the number of
treatment cells used should be equal to the highest polynomial order of the anticipated treatment
effect, plus one.
1.2.4

Further Considerations

In light of the differences between field experimentation and other empirical methods–lab experiments and using observational data–it is important to discuss some perceived differences and
potential obstacles associated with this research agenda. One shortcoming of field experiments
is the relative difficulty of replication vis-à-vis lab experiments.23 As Fisher (1926) emphasized,
22

Relatedly, there is a recent but steadily expanding literature in statistics and economics on how experimental
evidence on treatment effect heterogeneity may be used to maximize gains from social programs. One example is
Dupas and Bhattacharya (2010) who study the problem of allocating a binary treatment among a target population
based on observables, to maximize the mean social welfare arising from an eventual outcome distribution, when a
budget constraint limits what fraction of the population can be treated.
23
This is especially so if we compare field experiments to laboratory experiments that utilize student subject
pools. Even by changing the subject pool slightly, as in artefactual field experiments, replicability becomes an issue
as more still needs to be understood on the self-selection into experiments of such non-standard subjects (Charness
and Kuhn 2010).

20

replication is an important advantage of the experimental methodology. The ability of other
researchers to reproduce quickly the experiment and therefore test whether the results can be
independently verified not only serves to generate a deeper collection of comparable data but also
provides incentives for the experimenter to collect and document data carefully.
There are at least three levels at which replication can operate. The first and most narrow
of these involves taking the actual data generated by an experiment and reanalyzing the data to
confirm the original findings. A second notion of replication is to run an experiment which follows
a similar protocol to the first experiment to determine whether similar results can be generated
using new subjects. The third and most general conception of replication is to test the hypotheses
of the original study using a new research design.
Lab experiments and many artefactual and framed field experiments lend themselves to replication on all three dimensions: it is relatively straightforward to reanalyze existing data, to run new
experiments following existing protocols, and (with some imagination) to design new experiments
testing the same hypotheses.
With natural field experiments, the first and third types of replication are easily done (i.e.
reanalyzing the original data or designing new experiments), but the second-type of replication
(i.e. re-running the original experiment, but on a new pool of subjects) is more difficult. This
difficulty arises because by their very nature, many field experiments are opportunistic and might
be difficult to replicate because they require cooperation of outside entities or practitioners, or
detailed knowledge and the ability to manipulate a particular market.
Another consideration associated with field experiments relates to ethical guidelines (Dunford
1990, Levitt and List 2009). The third parties that field experimenters often need to work with
can be concerned by the need to randomize units of observation into treatments. The benefits of
such an approach need to be conveyed, as well as a practical sense of how to achieve this. For
example, given resource constraints, practitioners are typically unable roll out interventions to
all intended recipients immediately. The field experimenter can intervene to randomly assign the
order in which individuals are treated (or offered treatment), not whether they eventually receive
the treatment or not.
With the onset of field experiments, new issues related to informed consent naturally arise.
Ethical issues surrounding human experimentation is of utmost import. The topic of informed
consent for human experimentation were recognized as early as the nineteenth century (Vollmann
and Winau 1996), but the principal document to provide guidelines on research ethics was the
Nuremberg Code of 1947. The Code was a response to malfeasance of Nazi doctors, who performed
immoral acts of experimentation during the Second World War. The major feature of the Code
was that voluntary consent became a requirement in clinical research studies, where consent can
be voluntary only if subjects: (i) are physically able to provide consent; (ii) are free from coercion;
and, (iii) can comprehend the risks and benefits involved in the experiment.
What is right for medical trials need not be appropriate for the social sciences. To thoughtlessly
adopt the Nuremberg Code whole cloth for field experiments without considering the implications
would be misguided. In medical trials, it is sensible to have informed consent as the default because
21

of the serious risk potential in most clinical studies. In contrast, the risks posed in some natural
field experiments in economics are small or nonexistent, although such risks are almost certain
to become more heterogeneous across field experiments as this research method becomes more
prevalent. Hence while there might be valid arguments for making informed consent the exception,
rather than the rule, in a field experimental context, it is true to say that covert experimentation
remains hotly debated in the literature. For more detailed discussions, the interested reader should
see Dingwall (1980) and Punch (1986).
There are certain cases in which seeking informed consent directly interferes with the ability
to conduct the research (Homan 1991). For example, for years economists have been interested
in measuring and detecting discrimination in the marketplace. Labor market field studies present
perhaps the deepest lot of work in the area of discrimination. The work in this area can be parsed
into two distinct categories, personal approaches and written applications.
Personal approaches include studies that have individuals either attend job interviews or apply
for employment over the telephone. In these studies, the researcher matches two testers that are
identical along all relevant employment characteristics except the comparative static of interest
(e.g., race, gender, age), and after appropriate training the testers approach potential employers
who have advertised a job opening. Researchers “train” the subjects simultaneously to ensure
that their behavior and approach to the job interview are similar.
Under the written application approach, which can be traced to Jowell and Prescott-Clarke
(1970), carefully prepared written job applications are sent to employers who have advertised
vacancies. The usual approach is to choose advertisements in daily newspapers within some
geographic area to test for discrimination. Akin to the personal approaches, great care is typically
taken to ensure that the applications are similar across several dimensions except the variable of
interest.
It strikes us as unusually difficult to explore whether, and to what extent, race or gender
influence the jobs people receive, or the wages they secured, if one had to receive informed consent
from the discriminating employer. For such purposes, it makes sense to consider executing a
natural field experiment. This does not suggest that in the pursuit of science, moral principles
should be ignored. Rather, in those cases Local Research Ethics Committees and Institutional
Review Boards (IRBs) in the U.S. serve an important role in weighing whether the research will
inflict harm, gauging the extent to which the research benefits others, and determining whether
experimental subjects selected into the environment on their own volition and are treated justly
in the experiment.
1.2.5

Limits of Field Experiments

Clearly, labor economists rarely have the ability to randomize variables directly related to individual decisions such as educational attainment, the choice to migrate, the minimum wage faced,
or retirement ages or benefits. This might in part reflect why some active research areas in labor economics have been relatively untouched by field experiments, as described in more detail

22

below. However, field experiments allow the researcher scope to randomize key elements of the
economic environment faced that determine such outcomes. For example in the context of educational attainment, it is plausible to design field experiments that create random variation over the
monetary costs of acquiring education, information on the potential returns to education, knowledge of the potential costs and benefits of education, or changes in the quality of inputs into the
educational production function. Given the early and close involvement of researchers and the fact
that primary data collection effort is part of a field experiment, there is always the potential to
mitigate measurement error and omitted variables problems that are prevalent in labor economics
(Angrist and Krueger 1997).
Social experiments and field experiments are relatively easy for policy makers to understand.
When designed around the evaluation of a particular policy or intervention, it is more straightforward to conduct a cost benefit analysis of the policy than would be possible through other
empirical methods. As discussed before, a concern of using social experiments relates to sample
attrition. While such attrition is less relevant in many field experiments, it is important to be
clear that this often comes at the cost of field experiments evaluating relatively short run impacts
of any given intervention. How outcomes evolve over time–in the absence of the close scrutiny of
the experimenter, or how interventions should be scaled up to other units and other implementers,
remain questions that field experimenters will have to always confront directly. Along these lines,
we will showcase a number of field experiments in which researchers have combined random variation they have engineered to identify reduced form causal effects, with structural modeling to
make out of sample predictions.
A second broad category of concerns for field experiments relate to sample selection. These
can take a number of forms relating to the non-random selection of individuals, organizations,
and interventions. At the individual level and in cases in which written consent is required, as
for social and laboratory experiments, the self selection of individuals into the field experiment
needs to be accounted for. Relatedly, the timing of decisions over who is potentially eligible to
participate are critical, and potentially open to manipulation or renegotiation.
At the organizational level, there exists concerns related to whether we observe a non-random
selection of organizations or practitioners self-select to be subject to a field experiments. Similar
concerns arise for social experiments often from political economy considerations.
Finally, at the intervention level, a concern is that practitioners with whom field experimenters
typically need to work with, might only be willing to consider introducing interventions along
dimensions they a priori expect to have beneficial effects. On the one hand this begs the question
of why such practices have not been adopted already. On the other hand, one benefit of field
experimentation might be that through closer ties between researchers and practitioners, the
latter are prompted to think and learn about how they might change their behavior in privately
optimal ways, and can be assured they will be able to provide concrete evidence of any potential
benefits of such changes.
A third category of concerns relate to how unusual is the intervention. Although many parameters can be experimentally varied, it is important to focus on those parameters that would
23

naturally vary across economic environments, and to calibrate the magnitude of induced variations based on the range of parameter values actually observed in similar economic environments.
Introducing unusual types of variation, or variations of implausible or unusual magnitude, or those
that do not accord with theory, will be hard to make generalizations from and will not easily map
back to an underlying theory. At the very least, care needs to be taken to separately identify
whether responses to interventions reflect changes in equilibrium behavior that will persist in the
long run, or agent’s short run learning how to behave in new or unusual circumstances induced
by the experimenter.
Fourth, there can sometimes be concerns that the third parties researchers collaborate with,
might be under resource constraints that lead to the same set of implementers simultaneously or
sequentially dealing with treated and control populations. Such implementation might lead to
contamination effects and some of the other biases discussed above in relation to social experiments. This can lead to the use of within subject designs, where the researchers engineers an
exogenously timed change to the economic environment, rather than between subject designs. The
field experiments we discuss in later sections utilize both approaches.
Taken together, most of these concerns can be summarized as relating to the ‘external validity’
of any field experiment–namely the ability to extrapolate meaningfully outside of the specific
economic environment considered. This feature remains key to the worth of many field experiments. Field experiments almost inevitably face a trade-off between understanding the specifics of
a given context and the generalizabilty of their findings. This trade-off can be eased by implementing a field experiment that considers the sources of heterogenous effects, or that combines reduced
form estimates based on exogenous variation with structural modelling to predict responses to
alternative interventions or to the same intervention in a slightly different economic environment.
Finally, it is worth reiterating that although primary data collection is a key element of field
experimentation, this raises the costs of entry and might limit the number of experimenters relative
to other purely lab based approaches. As will be apparent in the remainder of this chapter, there
remain many issues in labor economics in which field experiments have yet to penetrate. In part
these limits might be due to lack of opportunities, in some cases it might be because the activities
under study are clandestine or illegal, although we will discuss carefully crafted field experiments
to explore issues of racial discrimination for example. However, in some cases it is because the
nature of the research question is simply not amenable to field experimentation. For example,
questions relating to the design of labor market institutions are likely to remain outside the realm
of field experimentation. In these and other cases, the controlled environment of the laboratory is
the ideal starting point for economic research. Indeed, in this volume, Charness and Kuhn (2010)
discuss the large laboratory-based literature on multiple aspects of the design of labor markets–
such as market clearing mechanisms and contractual incompleteness. More generally, they discuss
in detail the relative merits of laboratory and field experiments. We share their view that no one
research method dominates the other, and that in many scenarios using a combination of methods
is likely to be more informative.

24

1.3

Research in Labor Economics

An enormous range of research questions are addressed by labor economists today. While the core
issues studied by labor economists have always related to labor supply, labor demand, and the
organization of labor markets, to focus our discussion, we limit attention to a select few topics.
These reflect long-standing traditional areas of work in labor economics.24
First, since the seminal contributions of Gary Becker and Jacob Mincer, research in labor
economics, particularly related to labor supply, has placed much emphasis on understanding individual decision making with regards to the accumulation of human capital. This emphasis has
widened the traditional purview of labor economists to include all decision making processes that
affect human capital accumulation. These decisions are as broad as those taken in the marriage
market, within the household, and those on the formation of specific forms of human capital such
as investments into crime. By emphasizing the role of individual decision making, subfields in
labor related to the accumulation of human capital might be especially amenable to the use of
field experiments.
Second, the empirical study of labor demand has been similarly revolutionized by the rapid increase in the availability of panel data on individuals, the personnel records of firms, and matched
employer-employee data.25 This has driven and fed back into research on various aspects of labor
demand such as labor mobility, wage setting, rent sharing, and more generally, on the provision of
incentives within organizations. This set of questions are again motivated by understanding the
behavior of individuals and firms, there are rich possibilities to advance knowledge in related subfields through the use of carefully crafted field experiments. Field experiments offer the potential
for researchers to lead data collection efforts.
To cover these broad areas, we loosely organize the discussion so as to follow an individual as
they make important labor related decisions over their life cycle. Hence we discuss the role of field
experiments in answering questions relating to early childhood interventions and the accumulation
of human capital in the form of education and skills. We then consider research questions related
to the demand and supply of labor, and labor market discrimination. We then move on to consider
research questions related to behavior within firms: how individuals are incentivized within firms,
and other aspects of the employment relationship. Finally, we end with a brief discussion of the
nascent literature on field experiments related to household decision making.
Table 2 shows the number of published papers in selected subfields of labor economics in the
decade prior to the last volume of the Handbook of Labor Economics (1990-99), and over the
last decade (2000-09). The table is based on all published papers in the leading general interest
journals of The American Economic Review, Econometrica, The Journal of Political Economy,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics and the Review of Economic Studies.26 We use the Jour24

More detailed discussions of how the study of labor economics has evolved over time can be found in Freeman
(1987) and Taber and Weinberg (2008).
25
To understand the magnitude of this change, we note that Stafford (1987) finds that among the 759 papers
published in six leading journals between 1965 and 1983, virtually none was based on microdata with individual
firms or establishments as the unit of analysis.
26
The numbers do not include papers and proceedings volumes.

25

nal of Economic Literature classifications to place journal articles into one subfield within labor
economics.27
[Table 2: Published Research in Labor Economics by Decade]
Table 2 highlights a number of trends in published research in labor economics. First, the
number of labor economics papers published in the top-tier general interest journals has not
changed much over time. There were 278 published between 1990 and 1999, and 315 published
between 2000 and 2009. Some of this increase probably reflects an increased numbers of papers
in these journals as a whole, rather than changes in the relative importance of labor economics to
economists. Examining the data by subfield, we do see changes in the composition of published
papers in labor. There are large increases in the number of papers relating to: (i) education and the
formation of human capital; (ii) firm behavior and personnel economics; (iii) household behavior;
(iv) crime. Some of these increases reflect the wider available of data described above, such as
personnel data from firms and matched employer-employee data sets, and primary data collected
on households. Field experiments–an important component of which is primary data collection–
are well placed to reinforce these trends. Indeed, below we discuss how field experiments have
contributed to the first three of these areas in which there has been an increase in labor economics
papers.
We observe a decline in papers on the organization of labor markets–an area in which not
many field experiments have been conducted, in part because these questions are not well suited
to field experimentation. Finally, the remaining subfields on the demand and supply of labor
and on ageing and retirement remaining relatively stable over the last two decades, and here field
experiments remain scarce, but there might be particularly high returns from such research designs
being utilized.
Second, the balance between theoretical and empirical work has remained relatively constant
over the two decades. In both time periods, there have been approximately double the number
of empirical as theoretical papers published in labor economics. We do not know whether for
other areas of economics approximately a third of published papers are theoretical, but as will be
emphasized throughout, labor economics has no shortage of theories that carefully designed field
experiments can help determine the empirical relevance of. Within each subfield there are nearly
always more empirical papers published than theoretical, with the exception of research into firm
behavior and personnel economics, a pattern that holds across both decades. In other subfields,
the ratios of theory to empirical papers vary considerably. Some areas such on the demand for
education and formation of human capital have four to five times as many empirical papers, and
the subfield of crime has been largely empirically driven.
27

Earlier reviews of trends in published papers in labor economics include Stafford (1986), Manser (1999), and
Moffitt (1999).

26

1.3.1

How Have Labor Economists Used Field Experiments?

Table 3 presents evidence on the approach used by published papers in labor economics over the
last decade.28
[Table 3: Composition of Published Papers by Subfield and Empirical Method]
Three factors stand out. First, field experiments have been widely used in labor economics
over the past decade, with there being 25 published papers using this research methodology in
some form. For example, despite the surge in papers using laboratory experiments, over the last
decade more papers published in the top-tier journals have employed field experiments. However,
the number of empirical papers employing field experiments is still dwarfed by other empirical
methodologies–there are 25 papers employing field experiments compared to 60 utilizing natural
experiments, and 129 using non-experimental methods.
Second, the use of field experiments has thus far been concentrated to address research questions in a relatively small number of subfields in labor economics. Of the 25 published field
experiments, three framed field experiments have been concerned with investments into education
early in the life cycle, three natural field experiments have focused on the evaluation of specific
labor market programs, and five natural field experiments have focused on incentives within firms.
In other subfields, such as on the determinants of wages and labor market discrimination,
currently only one field experiment has been published, in contrast to four laboratory experiments.
We view many research questions on discrimination in labor markets to be particularly amenable
to study using field experiments. Hence this is one area in which field experiments have been
relatively under supplied in. Finally, the subfield of crime, which as documented in Table 2,
has grown due almost exclusively to empirical papers, remains completely untouched by field
experiments.
The third major fact to emerge from Table 3 is that there is a large supply of theory in labor
economics, as previously noted in Table 2. Table 3 shows that this supply of theory is across
all the subfields in labor economics. As we view carefully crafted field experiments to be able to
potentially test between different theories, it would seem as if many areas of study of labor–across
the life cycle from birth to retirement–are amenable to this method, and can give feedback on
directions for future theoretical advancements.
To develop this point further, the next Table provides a breakdown of how theory and evidence
have been combined in labor economics, broken by empirical method.
[Table 4: Testing Theory by Empirical Method]
28

The total number of papers reported in Table 2 is not quite reflected in the totals recorded in Tables 3. This
is because in Table 3 we sometimes record a paper in more than one column if it utilizes a range of empirical
techniques. For example, the total number of non-theory papers by subfield and method in Table 3 is greater than
total non-theory papers found in Table 2 (224>219) is because five papers used multiple methods and so were
counted twice.

27

Two factors stand out. First, non-experimental papers are slightly more likely to use no theory
than field experiments. Second, testing between more than one theory remains scarce, irrespective
of the empirical approach. Although not all empirical papers should necessarily test theory, it
is as important to establish facts on which future theory can be built. When testing between
theories, it is important to both establish the power of these tests, to provide refutability or
falsification checks, and to present evidence of the internal validity of the results. Natural field
experiments might have a comparative advantage along such dimensions. Given such settings
relate to real world behaviors, individuals are typically not restricted in how they respond to
a change in their economic environment, which opens up the possibility of detecting behavior
consistent with multiple theories.
Mirroring the discussion in Moffitt (1999), a second feature of on how best to use field experiments that we aim to emphasize throughout, is the need to combine the use of field experiments
with other research methodologies. For example, they might be combined with structural estimation, utilize a combination of evidence from the laboratory and the field, or draw inspiration from
lab findings to establish plausible null and alternative hypotheses to be tested between.
Applying the full spectrum of approaches in trying to answer a single question can yield extra
insights. A first example of such research relates to the importance of social preferences, that have
been documented in numerous lab and field settings. To explore social preferences using a variety
of approaches, List (2006) conducts artefactual, framed, and natural field experiments analyzing
gift exchange. The games have buyers making price offers to sellers, and in return sellers select
the quality level of the good provided to the buyer. Higher quality goods are costlier for sellers
to produce than lower quality goods, but are more highly valued by buyers. The artefactual field
experimental results mirror the typical findings with other subject pools: strong evidence for social
preferences was observed through a positive price and quality relationship. Similarly constructed
framed field experiments provide similar insights. Yet, when the environment is moved to the
marketplace via a natural field experiment, where dealers are unaware that their behavior is being
recorded as part of an experiment, little statistical relationship between price and quality emerges.
A second example comes from the series of field experiments presented in List (2004d)–
from artefactual to framed to natural–in an actual marketplace to help distinguish between the
major theories of discrimination: animus and statistical discrimination. Using data gathered from
bilateral negotiations, he finds a strong tendency for minorities to receive initial and final offers
that are inferior to those received by majorities in a natural field experiment. Yet, much like
the vast empirical literature documenting discrimination exists, these data in isolation cannot
pinpoint the nature of discrimination. Under certain plausible scenarios, the results are consonant
with at least three theories: (i) animus-based or taste-based discrimination, (ii) differences in
bargaining ability, and (iii) statistical discrimination. By designing allocation, bargaining, and
auction experiments, List (2004d) is able to construct an experiment wherein the various theories
provide opposing predictions. The results across the field experimental domains consistently reveal
that the observed discrimination is not due to animus or bargaining differences, but represents
statistical discrimination.
28

1.4

Summary

We now move to describe, by various stages of the life cycle, how field experiments have been
utilized in labor economics and the insights they have provided. Where appropriate, we discuss
how these results have complemented or contradicted evidence using alternative research methods,
and potential areas for future field experiments. We begin with the individual at birth and the
accumulation of human capital before they enter the labor market. We then consider research
questions related to the demand and supply of labor, and labor market discrimination. We then
move on to consider research questions related to behavior within firms: how individuals are
incentivized within firms, and other aspects of the employment relationship. Finally, we end
with a brief discussion of the nascent literature on field experiments related to household decision
making.

2

Human Capital

The literature associated with human capital acquisition prior to labor market entry is vast, and
there is not room here to do it justice. As in the sections that follow, we therefore focus our
discussion on a select few strands of this research and describe how field experiments can and
have advanced knowledge within these strands. Even within this narrower branch of work, we
are limited to focusing on select studies of inputs into the educational production function, where
these inputs might be supplied by the school system, students, or their families.29
To see the issues, we follow Glewwe and Kremer’s (2006) presentation of a framework for the
education production function with the following reduced form representation,
S = f (C, H, Q, P ),

(6)

A = h(C, H, Q, P ),

(7)

where S is years of schooling, A is skills learned (achievement), C is a vector of child characteristics
(including “innate ability”), H is a vector of household characteristics, Q is a vector of school and
teacher characteristics (quality), and P is a vector of prices related to schooling. Q and P are
both functions of education policies (EP ) and local community characteristics (L), which can be
substituted into equations (6) and (7) to yield the following reduced form,
S = f (C, H, L, EP ),

(8)

A = h(C, H, L, EP ).

(9)

Similar to Mincerian human capital earnings functions, this framework estimates the partial
equilibrium effects of educational inputs and policies, rather than general equilibrium effects that
29

For related reviews of the literature, see the excellent work of Card (1999), and in this Handbook, the Chapter
by Fryer (2010).

29

alter returns to education and thereby demand. Broadly, there are two approaches to estimating
the production function.
The first focuses on measuring the effect of direct inputs, such as per pupil expenditure, class
size, teacher quality and family background (i.e. estimating equations (6) and (7)). The second
examines the effects of educational policies governing the structure of the school system (i.e.,
estimating equations (8) and (9)). In both cases, non-experimental and experimental estimates
have shed insights into the relationships in the education production function (for a literature
survey see Hanushek (1986)). To help place field experiments in this area in a wider context, we
now turn to a non-exhaustive discussion of select work using both approaches, but not based on
field experiments.

2.1

Measuring the Effects of Direct Inputs

An early measurement study focusing on the effect of direct inputs is the report due to Coleman et
al. (1966), who explored what fraction of the variation in student achievement could be explained
by direct inputs. The Coleman report found only a weak association between school inputs and
outputs. Subsequent regression based approaches largely replicated the findings in the Coleman
report. Yet, one remarkably consistent result did emerge from these early studies: students
situated in classrooms with a larger number of students outperformed children in smaller classes
on standardized tests. This result is robust to inclusion of several conditioning variables, such as
key demographic variables.
One aspect that this robust empirical finding highlights is the care that should be taken to
ensure reverse causality and omitted variable bias do not frustrate proper inference. Given that the
simple regression approach potentially suffers from biases due to endogeneity of policy placement,
omitted variables, and measurement error–i.e., it is almost always the case that some unobserved
element of the vectors C, H, Q, P or L will be correlated with both the outcome and the observed
variables of interest–researchers have sought out other means to explore the parameters of the
production function.
One such approach uses natural experiments. One neat example is the work of Angrist and
Lavy (1999), who use legal rules to estimate the effect of class size on student performance.
Assume legal limits on class size prevent the number of students in a classroom from exceeding
25. Then consider a particular school that has cohorts ranging from 70-100. Thus, if a cohort
includes 100 children, we would have four classrooms of size 25, whereas if the cohort includes 76
children, we end up with 4 classrooms with 19 children occupying each. Angrist and Lavy (1999)
compare standardized test scores across students placed in different sized classrooms and find that
a ten-student reduction raises standardized test scores by about 0.2 to 0.3 standard deviations.
As Keane (2010) points out, this type of approach has similar drawbacks associated with the
simple regression framework in the Coleman report. For instance, incoming cohort sizes might not
be determined randomly because high performing schools attract more students. Likewise, cohort
size might be affected by parents reacting to large class sizes by sending their kids elsewhere for
30

schooling. Similar issues revolve around teacher assignment to small and large classrooms, which
might not be randomly determined.
In this way, the Angrist and Lavy (1999) estimates should be viewed as a first step in understanding the importance of class size on student performance. The next step is to deepen our
understanding by exploring the robustness of these results. One approach is to look for more observational data, another is to use randomization directly–similar to the accidental randomization
of natural experiments, purposeful randomization can aid the scientific inquiry.
A central figure in using randomization in the area of education is William McCall, an education
psychologist at Columbia University who, at odds with his more philosophical contemporaries,
insisted on quantitative measures to test the validity of education programs. For his efforts,
McCall is credited as an early proponent of using randomization rather than matching as a means
to exclude rival hypothesis, and his work continues to influence the field experiments conducted
in education today.30
A landmark social experiment measuring the effects of classroom size is the Tennessee STAR
experiment. In this intervention, more than 10,000 students were randomly assigned to classes of
different sizes from kindergarten through third grade. Similar to the social experiments discussed
in the first Section, the STAR experiment had both attrition bias and selection problems in
that some students changed from larger to smaller classrooms after the assignment had occurred.
Nevertheless, even after taking these problems into account, Krueger (1999) put together a detailed
analysis that suggests there are achievement gains from studying in smaller classes.
Combined, these two examples indicate that there very well might be a statistically meaningful
relationship between class sizes and academic achievement, but the broader literature has not
concluded that to be necessarily true. Scanning the entire set of estimates from natural experiments
and field experiments one is left with mixed evidence on the effects of class size at various tiers
of the education system (Angrist and Lavy 1999, Case and Deaton 1999, Hoxby 2000a, Kremer
2003, Krueger 2003, Hanushek 2007, Bandiera et al. 2010).
Lazear (2001) theorizes that class size is dependent upon the behavior of students. As disruptive
students are a detriment to the learning of their entire class, he proposes that the optimal class
size is larger for better-behaved students. In his model, larger classes may be associated with
higher student achievement, and may in part explain the mixed results in previous studies. This
is one area where a natural field experiment might be able to help. One can envision that a test
of Lazear’s (2001) theory is not difficult if the researcher takes the data generation process in
her own hands: designing experimental treatments that interact class size with student behavior
would permit an estimation of parameters of interest for measures of both class size and peer
inputs into the educational production function.
The results from this literature, more generally, make it clear how one could move forward with
a research agenda based on field experimentation. For instance, are there critical non-linearities
in the relationship between class sizes and academic performance, as suggested for university class
30

Rockoff (2009) presents an overview of a substantial, but overlooked, body of field experiments class size that
developed prior to World War II.

31

sizes in Bandiera et al. (2010)? One might argue that the effects of smaller class sizes drop to zero
at some critical threshold due to lost peer effects. What about the composition of classrooms?
Even though the effects of peer composition are mixed (Hoxby 2000b, Zimmerman 2003, Angrist
and Lang 2004, Hoxby and Weingarth 2006, Lavy et al. 2008, De Giorgi et al. 2009, Duflo et al.
2009), it might be the case that gender balance plays a key role in the classroom.
Even if we were to find strong evidence that class size matters for academic performance and
answer the questions posed above, equations (6) to (9) highlight other features that we must
be aware before pushing such estimates too far. What is necessary is proper measurement of
the estimates of the parameters of the production function, as well as an understanding of the
decision rules of school administrators and parents. The next step is to deepen our understanding
by exploring whether other more cost effective approaches to improve student achievement exist,
say by understanding the optimal investment stream in students: at what age level are resources
most effective in promote academic achievement?
One line of work that addresses this question is the set of social experiments that explore
achievement interventions before children enter school. Given that Fryer (2010) presents a lucid
description of such interventions, we only briefly mention them here. The landmark social experiment in this area is the Perry Preschool program, which involved 64 students in Michigan
who attended the Perry Preschool in 1962. Since then, dozens of other programs have arisen
that explore what works with early childhood intervention, including Head Start, the Abcedarian
Project, Educare, Tulsa’s universal pre-kindergarten program, and several others too numerous to
list (see Fryer’s Table 5).31
As Fryer (2010) notes, outcomes in these programs exhibit substantial variance. And, even in
those cases that were met with great success, the achievement gains faded through time. Indeed,
in many cases once school started the students in these programs gave back all academic gains
(Currie and Thomas 1995, 2000, Anderson, 2008). Another fact with the bulk of these programs
is that they exhibit much homogeneity, mostly following from the general design in the Perry
Preschool program. Much has been learned about early childhood development in the previous
several decades, and this presents the field experimenter with a unique opportunity to make large
impacts on childrens’ lives. As Fryer (2010) notes, incorporating new insights from biology and
developmental psychology represent opportunities for future research.
Such estimates cause us to pause and ask whether resource expenditures affect academic performance at all. In this spirit, there is a large literature that explores how direct school inputs,
such as school expenditures, influence student performance. As a whole, the early literature found
only a weak relationship between overall school expenditures and student achievement, primarily
31

There is evidence that the first five years of life are critical for lifelong development. Hence resource poor or unstimulating environments early in life are likely to detrimentally impact children’s cognitive, motor, social-emotional
development, and their health status (Grantham-McGregor et al. 1991, Heckman and Masterov 2005, Engle et al.
2007, Grantham-McGregor et al. 2007). As adults, they are more likely to have high fertility rates and less likely
to provide adequate stimulation and resources for their own children, thus contributing to the intergenerational
transmission of poverty and economic inequality (Sen 1999). The current debate, to which social experiments
have contributed, focuses on understanding the types of intervention that might be effective for the child and their
families, and cost-effective from society’s viewpoint.

32

because resources tend to be allocated inefficiently (see Hanushek 2006, and Glewwe and Kremer
2006 for a review of the recent literature). In response to these findings, a growing area of research
uses both natural experiments and field experiments to examine a wide range of targeted investments in order to identify the effects and compare the cost-effectiveness of various interventions.
For example, experiments have been carefully designed to identify the returns (in terms of schooling or achievement) to inputs such as school supplies, additional teachers, remedial education, or
computer programs (Banerjee et al. 2001, Angrist and Lavy 2002, Kremer et al. 2002, Glewwe et
al. 2004, Glewwe et al. 2006, Banerjee 2007).

2.2

Teacher Quality

While the evidence on the effect of per pupil expenditure, class size, and peer composition is
mixed, teacher quality has been found to be clearly important. Hanushek (2007) finds that the
differences between schools can be attributed primarily to teacher quality differences. Little of this
variation, however, can be explained by either teacher salaries or observable characteristics such
as education and experience (Rivkin et al. 2005, Hanushek 2006). Just as it is difficult to identify
high quality teachers, little is known about how to improve teacher quality and performance.
Given the evidence that education and professional development are largely ineffective, there is a
growing interest in the use of performance-based incentives to improve teacher quality and effort.
The design and implementation of such incentives raises several areas of future study that observational data and field experiments can adequately fill, including: (i) what are the performance
effects on the incentivized tasks and how can incentives be designed to cost-effectively maximize
these effects; (ii) what are the effects on non-incentivized tasks, and how can incentives be designed to avoid diversion of effort in multitasking; (iii) how do teachers (of different quality) sort
into different incentive and pay structures; and (iv) how does sorting affect general equilibrium
teacher quality.
Evidence from non-experimental studies, natural experiments, and field experiments suggests
that incentives can improve teacher performance (Lavy 2002, Glewwe et al. 2003, Figlio and Kenny
2006, Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2007, Lavy 2009, Duflo 2009). Clearly, tighter links can be
established between this literature and the larger labor literature on incentive design (Prendergast
1999) to which, as discussed below, field experiments are also beginning to contribute.
More broadly, field experiments exploring mechanism design issues, such as comparing piece
rate and tournament incentives, are rare. Also, these programs generally load incentives onto
a single performance measure such as teacher attendance or student test scores, raising concerns
that teachers might divert effort away from non-incentivized tasks (Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991).
Here, the evidence is mixed with some studies finding broad improvements in teacher effort (Duflo
2009, Lavy 2009) and others finding evidence of narrow efforts, such as teaching to the test, that
divert effort from other tasks and do not improve long term student achievement (Kremer 2006,
Jacob 2005).
Similarly, teacher sorting into incentive and pay structures is largely unexplored. Lazear (2001)
33

applies his analysis of performance pay and productivity in a company (discussed in further detail
below) to teacher incentives, suggesting that the effects of incentives on sorting could be comparable to effects on teacher effort. A well-designed field experiment could explore whether and
how teacher sorting on incentives occurs. In general, field experiments that apply theories about
incentive design, sorting and selection from other areas of labor could make a large contribution
to the teacher incentives literature. Many of these issues arise in the later section when we discuss
the role of field experiments in understanding behavior within firms.
Along with the school inputs, the primary inputs into the educational production function come
from students and their families. A large literature models the effect of individual characteristics,
family background and parental resources on schooling and achievement (Cameron and Heckman
2001, Cameron and Taber 2004). While it is impossible to randomly assign characteristics to
individuals or to randomly assign children to families, quasi-experimental studies have exploited
variation due to adoption in order to separately identify genetic inputs (“nature”) from parental
inputs (“nurture”) (Plug and Vijverberg, 2003). Other studies focus on potential barriers to
individual investment in human capital production. These include high costs to education, perhaps
due to credit constraints or high discount rates, and low marginal returns to education due, for
example due to poor health or lack of human capital investment prior to entering school.
Estimates from non-experimental studies and natural experiments suggest that credit constraints are of limited importance in schooling decisions (Cameron and Taber 2004, Stanley 2003).
However, estimates from natural experiments and field experiments of Conditional Cash Transfer
programs (CCTs) find largely positive and significant effects, suggesting that (at least among the
population targeted by CCTs) reducing present costs of education can affect schooling and human
capital investment decisions. Non-experimental studies, natural experiments and field experiments
have also find positive and significant effects from conditional cash transfer programs based on enrollment, attendance, and performance (Cornwell et al. 2006, Barrera-Osorio et al. 2008, Angrist
and Lavy 2009, Maxfield et al. 2003, Kremer et al. 2009). Few of these experiments, however,
explore how conditional cash transfers can be most effectively designed.
Berry (2009) develops a model of household education production in which parents’ ability to
motivate their children is dampened by moral hazard. He then designs incentives to test several
predictions of the model including the ability of parents to commit and the relative efficacy of
incentives awarded to parents or to children based on the relative productivity of the two parties.
Similarly, Levitt et al. (2010) implement a field experiment that compares both the incentive
recipient (parent or student) and the incentive mechanism (piece rate or lottery). They also
compare a year long broad-based incentive program that motivates sustained effort to an immediate
one-time incentive aimed solely at increasing effort on a single standardized test. This design
allows the authors to test a model of family investment, responsiveness to incentive mechanisms,
and human capital returns from varying levels of effort. Both of these field experiments illustrate
researchers can design instruments that build on and test economic theory.
While conditional cash transfers aim to induce improvements in achievement by motivating
greater effort and investment, a second strand of interventions attempts to directly improve abilities
34

that can improve achievement. A growing of interest in this area focuses on investment in early
childhood. Researchers argue that improving the abilities of young children can have long run
returns on educational achievement, attainment and other outcomes such as employment, crime,
fertility and health (Cunha and Heckman 2008). Evidence from non-experimental studies, natural
experiments and field experiments suggest that early education interventions can have significant
effects on lifetime outcomes (Currie and Thomas 2005, Currie 2001, Garces et al. 2002, Behrman
et al. 2004, Todd and Wolpin 2006, Ludwig and Miller 2007, Heckman et al. 2010).
Most of these studies require econometric techniques, such as matching, to correct for lack
of valid randomization. And all of them are limited to identifying the effect of the intervention
as a whole. They are not able to explore, for example, the relative importance of educational
interventions compared to interventions that increase parental investments in early childhood.
Given the evidence that early childhood is a key period of development and the relatively sparse
body of empirical work, field experiments could address open questions related to: (i) the short
and long run returns of the various inputs of the educational production function; (ii) to collect
primary data and design field experiments to help decompose overall changes in outcomes from
any given intervention into those arising from the behavioral responses of children, parents and
teachers. Akin to the literature on public and private transfers to households (Albarran and
Attanasio 2003), this second strand of research can help shed light on whether altering some
inputs lead to other inputs in the educational production function to be crowded in or out.
A final strand of the literature focuses on improving child health as a means of increasing school
attendance rates. Estimates from natural experiments and field experiments find that health
interventions have a positive and significant effect on school attendance (Bleakley 2007, Bobonis
et al. 2004, Miguel and Kremer 2004). Miguel and Kremer (2004) expand beyond identification of
individual returns to health interventions, modeling the positive externalities of deworming ignored
in previous estimations. They use a field experiment randomized over schools to estimate positive
externalities on the health and school attendance of untreated children in treated schools and
schools neighboring treated schools. They also examine effects on test performance and estimate
the health care and educational cost effectiveness of the program. As the authors argue, studies
that ignore positive externalities in the comparison groups will underestimate the effect of the
intervention by missing the external effects of deworming and underestimating the direct effect in
comparison with an inflated baseline, biasing treatment effects towards zero. They point out that
this identification problem is well recognized in the labor literature estimating the effects of job
training programs on both participants and non-participants. The authors suggest an extension
of their study that randomizes treatment at various levels such as within schools, across schools,
and within clusters of schools.

2.3

Measuring the Effects of Policies Governing the System

Recent studies of educational policy exploit natural experiments with randomized lotteries and
variation in school district density to estimate the effects of school competition, school choice,
35

school vouchers, school accountability and the presence of relatively autonomous public schools,
such as charter schools (Clark 2009, Cullen et al. 2006, Hoxby 2000, Jacob 2004, Rouse 1998,
Angrist et al. 2002, Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2009). While proponents of expanding school choice
argue that, as in other markets, choice and competition will improve overall school quality and
efficiency, the empirical studies find somewhat mixed evidence on these educational policies.32
For example, non-experimental studies, natural experiments and field experiments finding that
vouchers improve educational achievement include Peterson et al. (2003), Kruger and Zhu (2004),
Angrist et al. (2002, 2006). On the other hand, using randomized school lotteries, Cullen et
al. (2006) find that school choice programs have little or no effect on academic achievement,
and they suggest that this result may be due to parents making poor choices. Hastings and
Weinstein (2008) explore this hypothesis using both a natural experiment and a natural field
experiment to examine how reducing information costs affects parental choices. In the natural
experiment, parents listed their preferences for schools within a district both before and after
receiving information mandated by No Child Left Behind (NCLB). The natural field experiment
randomized distribution of a simplified version of the NCLB information to parents who had also
received NCLB information and to parents who had received no information.
This design allows the authors to measure the effect of each piece of information alone as well as
their interaction. They find that information on school-level academic performance pushes parents
to choose higher scoring schools (with no differences across the types of information received).
Using IV estimation, they also argue that these choices lead to increased academic achievement.
Similarly, a growing body of research has begun to identify the right tail of the distribution
of treatment effects among heterogeneous charter schools (Dobbie and Fryer 2009, Hoxby and
Murarka 2009, Angrist et al. 2010). These studies rely on randomized lotteries in oversubscribed
schools and can only identify the effect of a school (or school system) as a whole. They have
reported suggestive evidence, however, on specific features that correlate with successful schools,
such as longer days, longer school years, highly academic environments and so on. Field experiments could be used to complement this work by separately identifying the effects of charter school
innovations, such as length of school day, school time, and general environmental conditions on
the educational production function.
The field experiments discussed in this section highlight several important advantages of their
usage for labor economists. For example, they can address biases in previous empirical estimates,
including those from non-experimental studies. They are able build on empirical and theoretical
literature in from several fields, such as education, health, and labor. Finally, they can be used to
identify parameters beyond the direct return of an input into an individual educational production
function and explore mechanism design issues.
In the end, it is clear that empirical explorations into human capital acquisition prior to labor
market entry is invaluable, and that there are several approaches that can be used in concert to
32

Several theoretical papers suggest that school vouchers will lead to overall welfare gains, increased stratification,
and efficiency gains (Epple and Romano 1998, Ferreyra 2007, Nechyba 2000, Rouse 1998, Figlio and Rouse 2006,
Hsieh and Urquiola, 2006, Epple et al. 2006, Arcidiacono 2005).

36

learn more about the important parameters of interest. We argue that in this area field experiments can usefully add to the knowledge gained from naturally-occurring data, and the many low
apples that are left to be picked gives us great confidence that field experiments will only grow in
importance to tackle particulars in the educational production function.

3

Labor Market Discrimination

Philosophers as far removed as Arcesilaus, Heraclitus, and Plato have scribed of injustice and
extolled upon the virtues of removing it for the betterment of society. Perhaps taking a lead from
these scholars, social scientists have studied extensively gender, race and age based discrimination
in the marketplace. In this section we explore the stage of the life cycle where individuals are
entering the labor market. We focus mainly on discrimination in labor markets and how field
experiments can lend insights into this important social issue.
We begin with a statistical overview of the data patterns in labor market outcomes across
minority and majority agents. To make precise how field experiments might be carefully designed,
we need to discuss theories for why such discrimination exists. The two major economic theories
of discrimination that we discuss are: (i) certain populations having a general “distaste” for minorities (Becker 1957) or a general “social custom” of discrimination (Akerlof 1980); (ii) statistical
discrimination (Arrow 1972, Phelps 1972), which is third-degree price discrimination as defined
by Pigou (1920)–marketers using observable characteristics to make statistical inferences about
productivity or reservation values of market agents.
Empirically testing for marketplace discrimination has taken two quite distinct paths: regressionbased methods and field experiments. The former technique typically tests for a statistical relationship between an outcome measure, such as wage or price, and a group membership indicator.
By and large, regression studies find evidence of discrimination against minorities in the marketplace.33 Field experimental studies, which have arisen over the past 35 years, typically use
matched pairs of transactors to test for discrimination. Due to the control that field studies offer
the experimenter, they have become quite popular and have by now been carried out in at least ten
countries (Riach and Rich 2002). Across several heterogeneous labor markets, as well as product
markets as diverse as home insurance and new car sales, field studies have made a strong case that
systematic discrimination against minorities is prevalent in modern societies.
While regression-based empirical studies have served to provide an empirical foundation that
indicates discrimination is prevalent in the marketplace, they have been less helpful in distinguishing the causes of discrimination. As Riach and Rich (2002) note, findings from field studies
appear to be more consistent with the majority white populations having a general “distaste”
for minorities in the sense of Becker (1975) or a general “social custom” of discrimination in line
with Akerlof (1980); but statistical discrimination (Arrow 1972; Phelps 1972), or marketers using
observable characteristics to make statistical inference about productivity or reservation values of
33
A comprehensive summary of the regression-based literature on discrimination are contained in Altonji and
Blank (1999) and Yinger (1998).

37

market agents, for example, cannot be ruled out, ex ante or ex post.
Before one can even begin to discuss social policies to address discrimination, it is critical to
understand the causes of the underlying preferential treatment that certain groups receive. As has
been emphasized throughout, the potential for field experiments to be explicitly designed to test
between theories, is a key advantage of this approach over other methodologies. In this section,
we provide a framework for how field experiments can be used to advance our understanding of
not only the extent of discrimination in the marketplace but also the nature of discrimination
observed.

3.1

Data Patterns in Labor Markets

As Altonji and Blank (1999) noted, researchers have observed labor market differences across race
and gender lines for decades. Yet, the magnitude of market differences, and hence what a new
generation of field experiments seek to explain, has changed substantially over time. For example,
there was convergence in the black/white wage gap during the 1960s and early 1970s, but such
convergence lost steam in the two decades afterwards. In addition, the Hispanic/white wage gap
has risen among both males and females in the 1980s and 1990s. Of course, the world has not
remained stagnant since the 1990s, and this section is meant to update the results in Altonji and
Blank (1999).
Table 5 presents the labor outcomes of whites, blacks, and Hispanics by gender in 2009. Table
5 includes a set of labor market outcomes by race and gender that labor economists have studied
for decades. The data are based on tabulations from the Current Population Survey (CPS) from
May 2009. Row 2 of Table 5 indicates that white men earn 13% (21%) more than white women
(black and Hispanic men) on an hourly basis. Black and Hispanic women earn less than minority
men and majority women.
[Table 5: Labor Market Outcomes by Race and Gender]
When one focuses on annual earnings, row 3 of Table 5, the differential between white men
continues: they earn more than 20% higher wages than minority men. Yet, for women the racial
difference becomes markedly higher–50% for white women to black and 30% for white women to
Hispanic. The differentials remain when we focus on full-time employees–rows 7 and 8 of Table
5. In general Table 5 tells a story that has been told often before: white men earn more money
for hours worked than other groups, and white women earn more than their female counterparts.
Figures 3 and 4 complement these wage data by showing for each gender, the time series of
annual median weekly income from 1969 to present for whites and blacks and 1986 to present for
Hispanics.34 These figures bring to light some interesting trends. Regardless of racial or ethnic
34
Weekly earnings figures are taken from the Current Population Survey. They are for all employed people over
age 25 that reported weekly earnings above zero. Data before 1979 is taken from the May supplement of the CPS.
After 1979 data is taken from the CPS Annual Earnings File. Earnings from the May supplement for 1969-1972
were reported in ranges. The midpoint of each range was assumed to be the actual earnings for each individual.

38

group, wage rates for women continue to grow faster than for men. Within each gender, though,
the 2000s did very little for racial or ethnic differentials. In fact, for both genders any local trend of
convergence is reversed by the mid-2000s. In part this could be a function of the well documented
rise in wage inequality during the second half of the 2000s.
[Figure 3: Median Weekly Earnings of Male Workers]
[Figure 4: Median Weekly Earnings of Female Workers.]
Another important set of data points on Table 5 is the extent to which whites face lower
unemployment rates. Figures 5 and 6 extend this information by showing, by gender, the time
series of unemployment rates for whites, blacks, and Hispanics. One interesting element is the
magnitude of unemployment changes for whites versus blacks and Hispanics. The mid-2000s saw
no change to this trend, with the impact of recessions falling harder on blacks and Hispanics
relative to whites. This trend does not seem to depend strongly on gender either, even though
neither gender nor any racial or ethnic group seems to be immune from being hit by the 2009/10
recession.
[Figure 5: Male Unemployment Rates (annual averages), Men Aged Over 20]
[Figure 6: Female Unemployment Rates (annual averages), Women Aged Over 20]
Wages and unemployment rates are a function of labor force participation rates as well. Figure
7 shows the time series of labor force participation. The convergence in participation rates from the
70s through 90s continued into the 2000s, although the pace of that convergence has slowed. Men
of every race/ethnicity have dropped out of the labor force at a very slow rate while Hispanic and
white females have increased participation. Interestingly, African American women have higher
labor force participation than white women.
[Figure 7: Labor Force Participation Rates, Aged Over 20]
In considering the causes for these labor market disparities, economists have explored whether
the workers themselves bring heterogeneous attributes to the workplace. To shed insights into this
issue, we provide Table 6, which shows educational differences, family differences, and regional
composition.
[Table 6: Composition of the Labor Force by Race and Gender]
Rows 2 through 6 in Table 6 shows that whites obtain more years of education than blacks and
Hispanics. Interestingly, white women are almost uniformly more educated then their ethnic/racial
counterparts. This result is also reflected in the years of experience variable. Rows 8 through 10
in Table 6 give a sense of the different family choices (marriage and fertility) that are made by
whites, blacks, and Hispanics–another important input to wages, especially for women. Row 8
39

shows that whites are more likely to be married (and perhaps enjoy the efficiencies of household
trade), but row 10 shows that white women are likely to have fewer children to spend time caring
for than black and Hispanic women. Rows 11 through 20 show the geographic breakdown of
each race/ethnic group. Local labor market opportunities are surely influential for wages and in
general, whites are from higher earning regions like New England and the Pacific.
Overall, these data are in line with Altonji and Blank (1999), who find that large educational
differences among these groups, with race and ethnicity mattering much more than gender. Of
course, what these education differences represent is difficult to parse. On the one hand, they
might be mostly due to different preferences. Alternatively, they might reflect behavior of agents
who expect to face discrimination later on in the labor market–referred to as “pre-market" discrimination. As Altonji and Blank (1999) note, there is evidence that some minorities have been
denied market opportunities, perhaps leading to less than efficient levels of schooling investment.
While the labor market outcomes disparities observed in Table 5 and Figures 3 to 7 might
represent differences mainly due to these individual investment choices, perhaps investment varies
because of preferences, comparative advantage, and the like. For example, another hypothesis put
forth is that such outcomes are at least partly due to discrimination on the labor market. The
remainder of this section briefly discusses theories of discrimination and attempts to test these
theories, contrasting regression-based approaches to field experiments.

3.2

Theories of Discrimination

We follow the literature and define labor market discrimination as a situation in which persons
who provide labor market services and who are equally productive in a physical or material sense
are treated unequally in a way that is related to an observable characteristic such as race, ethnicity,
or gender. By ‘unequal’ we mean these persons receive different wages or face different demands
for their services at a given wage.
We consider two main economic models: entrepreneurs are willing to forego profits to cater
to their ‘taste’ for discrimination, as first proposed by Becker (1957). The second model is ‘statistical’ discrimination: in an effort to maximize profits, firm owners discriminate based on a set
of observables because they have imperfect information. This could be as simple as employers
having imperfect information on the relative skills or productivity of minority versus majority
agents. The models in both of these literatures are deep, and rich with good intuition. We do not
have the space to do them justice, but strive simply to provide a sketch of each model to give the
reader a sense of how one can test between them. We urge the reader to see Altonji and Blank
(1999) for a more detailed presentation of these models and their implications.35
35

As far as the law is concerned, both types of discrimination–taste based and statistical–are illegal. For
example, in credit markets, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (sec. 701, as amended in March 1976) states that it
“shall be unlawful for any creditor to discriminate against any applicant, with respect to any aspect of the credit
transaction. . . on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or martial status, or age. . . ” The law implies
that while it is allowed to differentiate among customers based on characteristics of the customer (e.g., credit
history) or the product that are linked to the expected return of the transaction, it is illegal to use the customer’s
membership in a group to distinguish among customers. In other words, firms should make decisions about the

40

3.2.1

Taste-Based Discrimination

In his doctoral dissertation, Becker (1957) modeled prejudice or bigotry as a ‘taste’ for discrimination among employers. Becker modeled employers as maximizing a utility function that is the
sum of profits plus a disutility term from employing minorities,
U = P F (NN M + NM ) − WNM NNM − WM NM − dNM ,

(10)

where P is product price, F is the production function, which takes on two arguments: the
number of employees that are non-minority NNM and minority NM . The second term is the wage
bill and the final term is the disutility from employing minorities, dNM . For prejudiced employers,
the marginal cost of employment of a minority worker is WM NM + dNM . Accordingly, d is the
‘coefficient of discrimination,’ or the level of distaste of the employer for employing a minority
worker. The higher d, the more likely the employer will hire non-minority workers, even if they
are less productive than minority workers.
The Becker model then shows that the wage premium for non-minority workers is determined
by the preferences of the least prejudiced employer who hires minority workers. Several extensions
to this model have been proposed in the literature, including the possibility that d is a function
of the job type, wage level, or the extent of segregation in the labor market. For example, Coate
and Loury (1993) develop a model that restricts all employers to have identical preferences, but
makes d a factor only when the employer hires minority workers for skilled jobs; an important
consideration in the model then becomes the ratio of minority and non-minority people working
in skilled jobs.
A logical conclusion of many of the studies in this area is that with certain assumptions–
in many cases free entry, constant returns to scale, segmenting, etc.–in the long run nondiscriminating employers will increase to the point that it is no longer necessary for minority
workers to work for prejudiced employers, eliminating any wage discrepancies between minority
and non-minority workers. This is a testable implication.
3.2.2

Statistical Discrimination

Arrow (1973) and Phelps (1972) discuss discrimination that is consistent with the notion of profitmaximization, or Pigou’s (1920) “third-degree price discrimination.” In this class of model, in
their pursuit of the most profitable transactions, marketers use observable characteristics to make
statistical inference about reservation values of market agents. The underlying premise implicit
in this line of work is that employers have incomplete information and use observables to guide
their behavior. For example, if they believe that women might be more likely to take time out of
the labor force, employers with high adjustment costs might avoid those expected to have higher
attrition rates. Firms then have an incentive to use gender to ‘statistically discriminate’ among
customer as if they had no information regarding the customer’s race, sex, etc. This, for example, is true regardless
of whether race is or is not a good proxy for risk factors in the credit market (Ladd 1998).

41

workers if gender is correlated with attrition.
Of course, employers can discriminate along second moments of observable distributions too.
Sobel and Takahashi (1983) develop a model along such lines, and their model is reconsidered in
List and Livingston (2010), which we closely follow here. In this framework, employers look at
second moments and use prior beliefs about the productivity of group members to influence hiring
and wage outcomes.
In the case where workers approach employers in an effort to sell their labor services, the
employer proposes the wage (price) in each period. The worker can accept or reject the offer.
If the offer is rejected, the employer makes another offer. If the offer is rejected in the terminal
period, no exchange occurs. To keep the analysis simple and without losing focus on the critical
incentives, we consider a two-period model. The results can all be extended to an n-period model.
Consider the situation where the employer’s reservation value is public information and denoted
vb , where vb ∈ [0, 1], and the employer knows only the distribution from which the worker’s
reservation valuation is drawn. An employer confronts a potential worker, who has reservation
value vs , which is drawn from a distribution F (v) on support [0, 1]. It is assumed that this c.d.f.
is continuously differentiable, and that the resulting p.d.f. f (v) is positive for all vs ∈ [0, 1]. The
employer discounts future payoffs by q, q ∈ [0, 1]. Further assume that the worker discounts future
payoffs at the rate of p, p ∈ [0, 1]. p and q can be thought of as the costs of bargaining and are
known by both players.
The bargaining process proceeds as follows: the employer proposes a price (wage) to the worker
in period 1. The worker can accept or reject the offer. If the offer is rejected, the employer proposes
a new price. It is assumed that the new proposal must be a wage (price) that is no lower than the
original offer. The worker can accept or reject this proposition. If it is rejected, the game ends
and no transaction occurs.
Following a no-commitment equilibrium, the employer is assumed to make the period 1 offer
at the beginning of period 1, and subsequently chooses the period 2 offer using the information
gained from the worker’s rejection of the period 1 offer. Let x1 be the employer’s offer in period
1, and let x2 be the employer’s offer in period 2. Also, define, for period i = 1, 2,

Si =







0
(x1 −px2 )
(1−p)

x2

if i = 0
if i = 1
if i = 2

(11)

A worker whose reservation value is vs will prefer accepting in period i to accepting in period
i + 1 if x1 − vs > p(xi+1 − vs ), or if vs < Si . A worker’s most preferred time to accept is period i
if Si − 1 < v < Si, so F (Si ) − F (Si− 1) is the employer’s ex ante probability of hiring in the ith
period and (vb − xi )[F (Si ) − F (Si−1 )] is the employer’s ex ante undiscounted expected profit in
period i.
The employer’s maximization problem can be stated in terms of his choice of the period 2
1 −px2 )
offer, x2 , and of S1 , which implies a choice of x1 , since S1 = (x(1−p)
. The employer’s optimal
42

strategies are found via backwards induction, starting with his period 2 decision. If the period 1
offer is rejected, then the employer knows vs ≥ S. The employer chooses an offer x2 to maximize
his expected profits. Let π(S) be this maximum value,
π(S) = max
x2

(vb − x2 )[F (x2 ) − F (S)]
.
1 − F (S)

(12)

Let x2 (S) be the unique value of x2 that solves (12). The first order condition of this problem,
which implicitly defines x2 (S), implies that,
(vb − x2 (S))f (x2 (S)) = F (x2 (S)) − F (S).

(13)

Since the offer x2 (S) must be less than the employer’s valuation vb , the left-hand side of (13) is
positive, so the right-hand side must also be positive. For this to be the case, it must be true that,
vb > x2 (S) > S.

(14)

In other words, in equilibrium, the second period offer must be greater than the first period offer,
and both offers must be less than vb .
The no-commitment equilibrium is fully characterized by x2 (S) and a first period price, x1 ,
that solves,
max(vb − x)[F (S(x))] + qπ(S(x))[1 − F (S(x))],

(15)



(16)

x

subject to,
S(x) =

S, where S =

x−px2 (S)
1−p

0

if such as S ∈ [0, 1] exists
otherwise

Substituting in the constraint and the definition of π(S), the problem becomes,
max vb F (S) − (1 − p)SF (S) − px2 (S)F (S) + q(vb − x2 (S))[F (x2 (S)) − F (S)].

0≤S≤1

(17)

If S solves (17), then x1 = (1 − p)S + px2 (S) and x2 = x2 (S) are the no-commitment equilibrium
offers. The first-order condition of (17) implies,
(1 − q)vb f(S) − (1 − p)[F (S) − Sf (S)] + (q − p)x2 (S)f(S) + px′2 (S)F (S) = 0.
3.2.3

(18)

Optimal Employer Behavior

Within this framework one can analyze differences in how an employer will behave when he
confronts members of the various groups. To obtain insights on the impact of changes in the
variance of the worker’s reservation value on both offers that the employer may make, we consider
a simple example where the worker’s value is drawn from a uniform distribution. There are two
groups of potential workers. Members of group 1 draw their reservation value from a uniform
distribution with lower bound a1 and upper bound b1 . Members of group 2 draw their value from
43

a uniform distribution with lower bound a2 and upper bound b2 . Assume a1 > a2 and b1 < b2 ,
so the variance of group 2’s distribution is larger than the variance of group 1’s distribution.
Without loss of generality, further assume that the bounds are such that the distributions have
equivalent means. Now, consider the employer’s equilibrium offers, when confronting a worker
who is a member of group i, i = 1, 2.
Solving through backwards induction, the employer first calculates his period 2 offer, as in
(12). Substituting in the uniform distribution and simplifying, the problem becomes,
max(vb − x)
x2



x−a
b−S




S−a
− (vb − x)
.
b−S


(19)

The solution of this problem is,

S + vb
.
(20)
2
Hence, the period 2 decision is a function of S, which is chosen in period 1. The employer’s period
1 problem is to solve (17). Substituting in the distribution and the solution x2 (S), the first order
x2 = x2 (S) =

condition is given by,

1
1
1
(1 − p)2S − (1 − p)a + q(S − vb ) = 0,
2
2
2

which implies the solution,

(21)

(1 − p2 )ai + 12 qvb
,
2 − p + 2q

(22)


1
q
p 
1+
vb + (1 − )ai ,
4 − 2p + q
2
2

(23)

S=
making the optimal period 2 offer,
x2 =
and the optimal period 1 offer,
x1 = (1 − p)


(1 − p2 )ai + 12 qvb
1
q
p 
)ai .
+
p
1
+
v
+
(1
−
b
2 − p + q2
4 − 2p + q
2
2

(24)

Note that the optimal offers x1 and x2 are both increasing in ai , and therefore decreasing in
the variance of reservation values. Group 2’s reservation value is drawn from a distribution with a
larger variance, hence a1 > a2 . In this example, then, the analysis shows that when the employer
believes he is dealing with a member of a group whose reservation value is widely distributed
(group 2), he will offer to hire at a lower wage than he would if the worker were a member of a
group with a lower variance (group 1). This is true despite the fact that the first moments of the
distributions are identical. This prediction provides one means to test the statistical discrimination
model against the taste-based discrimination model. We return to this notion below.

44

3.3

Empirical Tests

Scholars have concerned themselves primarily with the question “is there discrimination in market
X?” and much less time has been spent on answering the question “why do firms discriminate?”
As economists interested in public policy, however, we should be interested in not only the extent
of discrimination but also the source of discrimination. Conditional on the existence of discrimination, it is imperative to understand the source of discrimination, since one cannot begin to craft
social policies to address discrimination if its underlying causes are ill-understood. We now turn
to an overview of a select set of studies that measure discrimination.
3.3.1

Observational Data

One of the most important means to empirically test for marketplace discrimination in labor markets is to use regression-based methods. The focus using this approach has ranged from measuring
labor force participation to modeling wage determination. Within the line of work that explores
wages, the overarching theme is to decompose wage differentials, using an Oaxaca decomposition, between groups into what can be explained by observables and what cannot be explained by
observables. More specifically, consider a simple model that makes wages for minorities as follows,
WM = β M XM + eM ,

(25)

WNM = β NM XNM + eNM ,

(26)

and wages for non-minority agents as,

where W represent wages, X is a vector of individual specific observables that affect wages, and
e is a classical error term. The wage difference between minority and non-minority agents can be
computed by differencing these equations as follows,
WM − WNM = [β M XM + eM ] − [β NM XNM + eN M ] = [XM − XNM ]β M + [β M − β NM ]XNM .
The first term in the right most expression, [XM − XNM ]β M , is the component of the wage
difference that is explained: it arises because of differences in the average characteristics of group
members, such as region of residence, experience, or education level. The second term, [β M −
β NM ]XNM , is the part of the wage difference that is not explained by the regression model–the
differences in the response coefficients of the regression, or the rate of return differences across
minorities and non-minorities. This last term encompasses differences in wages due to differences
in the returns to similar characteristics between groups. For example, returns to education may
differ across minorities and non-minorities. The fraction of wage difference due to this second term
is typically called the ‘share’ of wage differences due to discrimination.
Before discussing some of the general results from various regression-based approaches, it is
important to qualify the results. First, the approach of assuming that the entire second component,
45

[β M − β NM ]XNM , is due solely to discrimination is likely not correct. For example, for this
to be true the wage equation must be well specified. If omitted variable bias exists, then the
response coefficients will be biased. Second, this equation captures only discrimination in the labor
market as measured today. That is, even if no discrimination is found to exist in such a model
in today’s wages, that does not imply discrimination is unimportant. For example, if women are
constantly denied market opportunities for skilled jobs, they might not invest optimally to obtain
such positions. In the literature, such under investment is denoted as market discrimination before,
or ‘pre’ market discrimination. Clearly, it is difficult to parse the effects of years past with the
current effects of discrimination, and this should be kept in mind when interpreting the empirical
results below–both those from the regression based model as well as from field experiments.
The regression models can be applied to the data discussed above from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) from May 2009. Yet, given that Altonji and Blank (1999) summarize a series of
regression results from such wage equations that do not differ markedly from ours, we simply
restate the main results. First, we find white men receive significantly higher wages than black
men, even after controlling for education, job experience, region of residence, and occupation.
Following the letter of the model, this is evidence of discrimination in the data.
Second, even after controlling for key factors, Hispanic men and minority female workers have
lower wages than their non-minority counterparts. Once again, if one sticks to the interpretation of
the model, this is suggestive evidence that discrimination exists between these groups. One should
highlight, however, that there are certain difficulties in using CPS data for such an exercise–such
as the problem of not having individual ability measures, such as cognitive and non-cognitive
abilities. Altonji and Blank (1999) extend the CPS results by modeling data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NSLY). In general, their results with NSLY data confirm that an
improved specification reduces the unexplained effects for blacks and for women.
While this line of work is suggestive that discrimination exists in the labor market, due to
productivity unobservables the nature of discrimination is not discernible without rather strong
assumptions: are minority men receiving lower wages because of tastes or because of statistical
discrimination?
Some headway has been made in these regards recently in several clever studies. One such
study is the ingenuous paper of Goldin and Rouse (2000), who use audition notes from a series of
auditions among national orchestras in order to determine whether or not blind auditions–those in
which musicians auditioned behind a screen–help women relatively more than men. The authors
use a panel data set and identify discrimination by the change in hiring practices toward blind
auditions that occurred in the 1970s. Goldin and Rouse study the actual audition records obtained
from orchestra personnel managers and orchestra archives from eight major symphony orchestras
from the late 1950’s to 1995. These records contain lists of everyone auditioning (first and last
name) with notation around the names of those who advance. There are three rounds of auditions
considered: preliminary, semifinal, and final. The gender of the participants is determined by their
name (96% of the records are distinctly masculine or feminine).
Eighty-four percent of all preliminary rounds were blind, seventy-eight percent of all semifinal
46

rounds were blind, and seventeen percent of all final rounds were blind. In addition, the authors
have personnel rosters that describe final assignments (members of the orchestra). There is variation in hiring practices over time, so that within one orchestra, the same audition may be blind
or non-blind over time and across categories (preliminary, semifinal, and final). In addition, since
success is rare, the same musician sometimes auditions more than once.
In the authors’ data, 42 percent of individuals competed in more than one round and 24 percent
competed in more than one audition. Including musician fixed-effects, the authors identify the
effect of a screen to hide gender from those individuals who auditioned both with and without a
screen. Without this “ability” control (individual fixed-effects) the data suggests that women are
worse off with blind auditions. However, controlling for individual fixed effects, the authors find
that for women who make it to the finals, a blind audition increases their likelihood of winning by
33 percentage points.
In their main specification, the authors find that women are significantly less likely to advance
from semifinals when auditions are blind, but significantly more likely to advance from preliminary
auditions and final auditions when they audition behind a screen. Turning to the final outcome
space–what is the effect of the screen on the hiring of women?–the authors estimate that though
they are unable to obtain a statistically significant effect (since the likelihood of winning an
audition is less than three percent), women are five percentage points more likely to be hired than
men when auditions are completely blind and there is no semifinal round. There is no difference
between the likelihood that women are hired relative to men when there is a semifinal round and
auditions are blind.
Ultimately, the effects discussed give pause to reported ‘traditional’ orchestra practices. In
particular, “a strong presumption exists that discrimination has limited the employment of female
musicians.” Before the implementation of blind auditions, committees were instituted to overthrow
the biased hiring practices of conductors (who reportedly hired select males from a small set of
well known instructors). However, sex-based biases seemed to dominate hiring, even in the face
of “democratization.” As the authors demonstrate, the institution of blind hiring significantly
increased the success rate of women in most auditions.
However, it is difficult for the authors to parse whether or not the discrimination is taste-based
or statistical. The authors note that an orchestra is a team, which requires constant improvement
and study together. In this sense, female-specific absences–maternity leave–can impact the
quality of the orchestra significantly and may motivate statistical discrimination against women.
Using their data, the authors note that the average female musician took 0.067 leaves of absence
per year, compared to the average males’ 0.061 leaves. The length of leave was negligibly different
between genders. These statistics imply that taste-based discrimination, assuming no performance
differences between hired males and females, are at least in part the cause of the discrimination
against female musicians. Again, without the strong assumption that conditional on being hired,
women and men of the same audition caliber perform indistinguishably in their careers, it is
difficult for this innovative work to parse the type of discrimination observed.
A second clever piece of work based on the regression approach is due to Altonji and Pierret
47

(2001), who create a model that generates strict predictions on the effect of race on wages over
time under a hypothesis of statistical discrimination based on race by employers. Notably, they
conclude that if firms do not statistically discriminate based on race (if they follow the law), but
race is negatively related to productivity, then: (i) the race gap will widen with experience, and,
(ii) adding a favorable variable that the hiring firm cannot observe will reduce the race difference
in the experience profile. The authors find that the data satisfy these predictions: the race gap
widens with experience and the addition of a “skill” variable reduces the race gap in experience
slopes. Thus, the authors conclude that employers “do not make full use of race as information.”
Fundamentally, the authors’ model studies the differential effect on wages of “easy to observe”
s variables and “hard to observe” z variables that predict worker productivity. While s variables
such as schooling should have a smaller and smaller effect on wage over time, since an employer’s
experience with the worker reveals far more important predictors of productivity, those variables
that are difficult to observe such as skill have a relatively larger effect on wages as time goes on.
This implies that the authors can identify whether or not the easily observable characteristic of
race is acting as an s variable, or if employers are ignoring it. If employers are ignoring race, but
race remains negatively correlated with productivity, then race acts as a z variable, appearing
more important–more predictive of wage–over time. Again, the authors find support for the
latter case.
The authors estimate their model using NLSY 1979 data–a panel study of men and women
aged 14-21 in 1978 that have been surveyed annually since 1979. The data on white and black men
with eight or more years of education forms the basis of their empirical analysis. The authors use
AFQT (the Armed Forces Qualification Test) scores as a variable that employers do not observe,
but that predicts productivity. In addition, the authors control for the first job held by all subjects
in order to ensure that their results are not driven by the effect that a high AFQT may have on a
worker’s access to jobs in which skill is observed, rather than “dead-end jobs” where skill is never
observed. Because the authors control for secular shifts in the wage structure, their identification
of the interactions between time and observable (s) characteristics and unobservable or ignored
(z) characteristics comes from variation across age cohorts.
The authors find that a one standard deviation shift in AFQT rises from having no effect on
wages when experience is zero to increasing log wages by .0692 when experience is 10. This supports
the result that employers learn about productivity. The coefficient on education interacted with
experience declines from 0.0005 to -0.0269 when the variable AFQT*experience is added. With an
intercept of 0.0832 with the addition, we can conclude that the effect of an extra year of education
declines from 0.829 to 0.0595 over ten years. This suggests that employers statistically discriminate
on the basis of education because they have limited information about labor market entrants. In
short, the effect of easy-to-observe variables like education dwindles as hard-to-observe variables
like ability become more available–as time goes on and the employer becomes more familiar
with the quality of the worker. The authors find similar effects with their other hard-to-observe
variables that correlate with productivity such as father’s education and sibling wage rate: as
experience increases, these variables become more and more predictive of higher wages (though
48

the effect of father’s education is never significant).
The main analysis is on whether or not employers statistically discriminate based on race. If
firms use race as information–that is, as easily-observable predictors of performance similar to
education–then the effect of race over time on wages should decline as hard-to-observe variables
like skill (predicted by the AFQT) become more transparent over time. If firms ignore race,
however, the initial (experience = 0) race gap should be small, and should widen with experience
if race is negatively related to productivity. Also, when race is ignored (a z variable) adding another
z variable like AFQT*experience will reduce the race gap in experience slopes. The authors note
that the effect of a “black” dummy will not necessarily be zero even if firms do not statistically
discriminate on the basis of race, since race may be correlated with legally usable information
available to the employer but not to the econometrician.
Empirical analysis shows that the effect of adding AFQT*experience decreases the race gap
in experience slopes (from -0.1500 to -0.0861); this is the opposite of what we would expect if
employers fully used race as a predictor of performance (as they do with schooling–recall, the
addition of AFQT*experience increases the amount by which the impact of education changes
over time). Using another prediction of their model, that the effect of learning on the s variables
will equal the effect of learning on the z variables times the relationship between the s and z
variables–that there are spillover effects from learning–the authors are able to reject race as an
s variable but not able to reject race as a z variable.
A few points are of note. First, if the quantity of training is influenced by the employer’s beliefs
about a worker’s productivity, effects of training cannot be separated from the effects of statistical
discrimination with learning. In addition, if taste-based discrimination becomes more prevalent
at higher level positions, a widening of the race gap based on experience may be a reflection of
increased taste-based discrimination rather than employer learning. Finally, the authors model
the effect of statistical discrimination on wages, but not on the extended hiring decision. Based
on these considerations, the authors note that any of their results on race-based discrimination
should be interpreted cautiously.
To summarize, Altonji and Pierret test for statistical discrimination in a very reasonable way:
they argue that if firms statistically discriminate, an observable characteristic such as race will
be very important in predicting wages early in the employment history–before productivity is
well observed–but becomes less important in predicting wages as time goes on and the worker
accumulates experience. In the data the opposite is true, suggesting that under the assumption
that the model is well specified firms attempt to ignore race in their hiring decisions, but that race
is correlated with productivity (which is revealed) and so it becomes more and more predictive of
wages as time goes on.
A third innovative regression-based study is due to Charles and Guryan (2008), who use statelevel variation in historical wage and survey data to empirically test the impacts of discrimination
on the labor market, focusing on taste for discrimination. The main theoretical result from Becker’s
work explored by Charles and Guryan is the assertion that black workers are hired by the least
prejudiced employers in the market due to sorting in the labor market. Furthermore, they examine
49

whether racial wage gaps are determined by the prejudice of a marginal employer, not the average.
This sorting mechanism provides Charles and Guryan with two empirical regularities to verify
Becker’s work: (i) the level of prejudice observed by the employers displaying large amounts of
prejudice (in the upper tail of a distribution of prejudice) should not impact wages; (ii) holding
prejudice constant, wages should be lower with more blacks in the labor market.
Although they do not target the question of taste versus statistical based discrimination directly, they do include a variable for the skill difference between blacks and whites in regressions
run as robustness checks. This and other robustness checks do not alter the main results which
find support for Becker’s theory of marginal prejudice affecting wages: marginal and low percentile
prejudice levels negatively impact the black white wage gap while higher percentile and average
prejudice levels have no impact; also the percent of the population that is black has a negative
impact on the wage gap.
Charles and Guryan (2008) begin by empirically motivating the relationship between the blackwhite wage gap and prejudice by displaying the correlation between wage data from the CPS and
white survey responses to questions concerning racial sentiments from the General Social Survey
(GSS). After displaying the positive wage gap to prejudice relationship, Charles and Guryan
review the theoretical findings to clarify the hypotheses of interest and then discuss the data.
The data being used for prejudice is a non-uniform (the same questions are not asked every year)
nationally representative survey with state-level data from 1972-2004. The survey questions used
in this analysis are those from white responders and are vetted to reflect prejudice as much as
possible (for example a question on whether “the government was obligated to help blacks” was
not used due to the possible response aimed at the government). The survey responses were used
to formulate a prejudice index relative to the responses given in 1977 and a prejudice distribution
and the data on prejudice is combined with CPS may monthly supplement from 1977 and 1978
and CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) for analysis.
The empirical results come from a hedonic wage regression. The regressions are run at the state
level under the assumptions that employment markets are at the state level and interstate moves
are costly. Because the prejudice measure they have is at the state level, Charles and Guryan
take an additional step to allow for more reasonable standard errors than ones that would come
from a full regression with observations at the individual level. This additional step comprises
of removing the prejudice index but including a black dummy variable for each state (stateblack dummy interaction) in the first stage wage hedonic, and then using the coefficient from
this interaction term as the dependent variable in a second stage regression which includes the
prejudice index. Five main measures of the prejudice index are analyzed: average, marginal, 10th
percentile, median and 90th percentile. The marginal level of prejudice is calculated as the “pth
percentile of the prejudice distribution, where p is the percentage of the state workforce that is
black” and the prejudice distribution is calculated from the GSS data. Additionally, the fraction
of the population that is black in the state is included in the second stage.
The second stage regression results all support Becker’s theory. The first result of a negative
impact on the black-white relative wages (negative means lower wages for blacks) attributed to
50

the average level of prejudice is not significant and becomes positive when the marginal level
of prejudice is included. The impact of the marginal prejudice measure is always negative and
significant. This is also the case for the coefficient on the measurement of the fraction of the
state population that is black (always negative and significant). These first results are taken as
indication that the average prejudice measures fail to explain the wage gap, while the marginal
and fraction of black have the assumed relationship from Becker’s work.
The additional prejudice measurements: 10th percentile, median and 90th percentile, provide
further support for Becker’s theory. When included together in a regression, both with and
without the percent of the state’s population that is black, the 10th percentile is the only variable
of significance (it is negative). This result is taken as further support of Becker’s theory because of
the indication that higher measurements of prejudice do not affect the wage gap (note that when
the proportion of the state’s population that is black is included, the 10th percentile increase in
both absolute magnitude and significance).
Various robustness checks are completed such as the inclusion of variables to indicate skill as
mentioned above. Two skill measures are used: (i) separate reading and math variables which
measure the difference between black and white test scores at the state level from a National
Assessment of Educational Progress-Long Term Trend (NAEP-LTT) test, and, (ii) black-white
relative school quality measures used and Card and Krueger (1992) (for which they reduce the
sample to just southern states). In both cases the results are similar to when the skill proxies
are not included. Although this identification strategy does not disentangle the impact of taste
and statistical based discrimination, the inclusion of skill level measures does suggest that this
is taste-based discrimination under the assumption that the skill measures accurately reflect the
difference in work-place abilities between races and that these differences in abilities are known by
the employers. In a best case scenario, identifying statistical discrimination would require some
measure of employee productivity by race and employment.
Further robustness checks investigate other possible endogeneity issues. An instrument of the
proportion black in the state workforce in 1920 was used to account for possible endogeneity issues
with the percent of the state’s current population that is black. No difference in results was found.
Finally, Charles and Guryan (2008) include a measure from the National Education Longitudinal
Survey of 1988 (NELS) to account for the fraction of co-workers that were of the same race. The
results again supported Becker’s theory that market sorting results in blacks being more segregated
towards lower prejudiced employers: the wage gap is larger when the co-workers are more mixed
when accounting for racial prejudice and the black proportion of the population.
The overall result is best restated directly from the last paragraph in the paper: “Our various
results suggest that racial prejudice among whites accounts for as much as one-fourth of the gap in
wages between blacks and whites. . . a present discounted loss in annual earnings for blacks between
$34,000 and $115,000, depending on the intensity of the prejudice of the marginal white in their
states.”
Similar to the above studies, making an assumption on the regression specification, allows
Charles and Guryan (2008) to begin to parse the type of discrimination observed. As such, as all
51

of these incredibly insightful studies illustrate, one can go a long way in detecting discrimination,
and its sources, but pinpointing exactly the extent that taste based and statistical discrimination
is the underlying motive, is only possible with additional assumptions.
3.3.2

Field Experiments

A complementary approach to measuring and disentangling the nature of discrimination is to
use field experiments. Although a very recent study thoroughly catalogues a variety of field
experiments that test for discrimination in the marketplace (Riach and Rich 2002), a brief summary
of the empirical results is worthwhile to provide a useful benchmark. Labor market field studies
present perhaps the broadest line of work in the area of discrimination. The work in this area can
be parsed into two distinct categories: personal approaches and written applications.
Personal approaches include studies that have individuals either attend job interviews or apply
for employment over the telephone. In these studies, the researcher matches two testers who are
identical along all relevant employment characteristics except the comparative static of interest
(e.g., race, gender, age). Then, after appropriate training, the testers approach potential employers
who have advertised a job opening. Researchers “train” the subjects simultaneously to ensure that
their behavior and approach to the job interview are similar.
Under the written application approach, which can be traced to Jowell and Prescott-Clarke
(1970), carefully prepared written job applications are sent to employers who have advertised
vacancies. The usual approach is to choose advertisements in daily newspapers within some
geographic area to test for discrimination. Akin to the personal approaches, great care is typically
taken to ensure that the applications are similar across several dimensions except the variable of
interest.
It is fair to say that this set of studies, including both personal and written approaches, has
provided evidence that discrimination against minorities across gender, race, and age dimensions
exists in the labor market. But due to productivity unobservables, the nature or cause of discrimination is not discernible. This point is made quite starkly in Heckman and Siegelman (1993, p.
224), who note that “audit studies are crucially dependent on an unstated hypothesis: that the
distributions of unobserved (by the testers) productivity characteristics of majority and minority
worker are identical.” They further note (p. 255): “From audit studies, one cannot distinguish
variability in unobservables from discrimination.” Accordingly, while these studies provide invaluable insights into documenting that discrimination exists, care should be taken in making inference
about the type of discrimination observed.
Much like the labor market regression studies discussed above, the literature examining discrimination in product markets has yielded important insights. Again, rather than provide a broad
summary of the received results, we point the reader to Yinger (1998) and Riach and Rich (2002),
who provide nice reviews of the product market studies.36 We would be remiss, however, not to
36

The interested reader should also see the recent special Symposium issue on Discrimination in Product, Credit,
and Labor Markets that appeared in the Journal of Economic Perspectives (Spring 1998).

52

at least briefly discuss the flavor of this literature.
One often cited, recent study is the careful work due Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), who
utilize a natural field experiment to determine whether or not blacks are discriminated against by
employers. By sending resumes with randomly assigned white- or black-sounding names to wantads advertised in Boston and Chicago newspapers, Bertrand and Mullainathan find that white
names receive 50% more callbacks for an interview than black names. This racial gap is uniform
across occupation, industry, and employer size. Additionally, whites receive greater benefits to a
higher-quality resume than blacks. Although Bertrand and Mullainathan are unable to test the
type of discrimination, whether taste-based or statistical, as it is uncertain what information the
employer is utilizing from the resumes, the authors use the results to suggest an alternate theory
be considered, such as one based on lexicographic searches.
To choose names that are distinctly white-sounding or black-sounding, Bertrand and Mullainathan use name frequency data calculated from birth certificates of all babies born in Massachusetts between 1974 and 1979. Distinctiveness of a name is calculated as having a sufficiently
high ratio of frequency in one racial group to that of the other racial group. The 9 most distinct
male and 9 most distinct female names for each racial group, along with corresponding whiteor black-sounding last names, are used. To verify this method of distinction, a brief survey was
conducted in Chicago asking respondents to identify each name as “White”, “African-American”,
“Other”, or “Cannot Tell.” Names that were not readily identified as white or black were discarded.
The authors sampled resumes posted more than six months prior to the start of the experiment
on two job search websites to use as a basis for experimental resumes. The resumes sampled
were restricted to people seeking employment in sales, administrative support, clerical services,
and customer service in Boston and Chicago, and were purged of the original owner’s name and
address. To minimize similarities to actual job seekers, Chicago resumes are used in Boston and
Boston resumes are used in Chicago (after names of previous employers and schools are changed
appropriately). The quality of the resumes were sorted into two groups (high and low), with
high-quality resumes having some combination of more labor market experience; fewer gaps in
employment history; being more likely to have an e-mail address, certification degree, or foreign
language skills; or been awarded honors of some kind. Education is not varied between high- and
low-quality resumes to ensure each resume qualifies for the position offered, and approximately
70% of all resumes included a college degree of some kind.
Fictitious addresses were created and randomly assigned to the resumes based on real streets
in Boston and Chicago. The authors selected up to three addresses in each 5-digit zip code in
both cities using the White Pages. Virtual phone lines with voice mailboxes were assigned to
applicants in each race/sex/city/resume quality cell to track callbacks. The outgoing message for
each line was recorded by someone of the appropriate race and gender, and did not include a name.
Additionally, four e-mail addresses were created for each city, and were applied almost exclusively
to the high-quality resumes.
The field experiment was carried out between July 2001 and January 2002 in Boston and
between July 2001 and May 2002 in Chicago. In most cases, two each of the high- and low-quality
53

resumes were sent to each sales, administrative support, and clerical and customer services helpwanted ad in the Sunday editions of The Boston Globe and The Chicago Tribune (excluding ads
asking applicants to call or appear in person to apply). The authors logged the name and contact
information for each qualifying employer, along with information on the position advertised and
any specific requirements applicants must have. Also recorded was whether or not the ad explicitly
stated that the employer is an “Equal Opportunity Employer.”
For each ad, one high-quality resume and one low-quality resume were randomly assigned a
black-sounding name (with the remaining two resumes receiving white-sounding names). Male
and female names were randomly assigned for sales jobs, while primarily female names were
used for administrative and clerical jobs to increase the rates of callbacks. Addresses were also
randomly assigned, and appropriate phone numbers were added before formatting the resumes
(with randomly chosen fonts, layout, and cover letters) and faxing or mailing them to the employer.
A total of 4,870 resumes were sent to over 1,300 employment ads. Of these, 2,446 were of highquality while 2,424 were of low-quality.
Results are measured by whether a given resume elicits a callback or an e-mail back for an
interview. Resumes with white-sounding names have a 9.65% chance of receiving a callback
compared to 6.45% for black-sounding names, a 3.2 percentage point difference. This difference
can only be attributed to name manipulation. According to these results, whites are 49% (50%)
more likely to receive a callback for an interview in Chicago (Boston). This gap exists for both
males and females, with a larger, though statistically insignificant, racial gap among males in sales
occupations. An additional year of workforce experience increases the likelihood of a callback by
approximately 0.4 percentage point, thus the return to a white name is equivalent to 8 additional
years of experience. High-quality resumes receive significantly more callbacks for whites (11%
compared to 8.5%, p = 0.0557), while blacks only see a 0.51% increase (from 6.2% to 6.7%). Whites
are favored (defined as more whites than blacks being called back for a specific job opening) by 8.4%
of employers, where blacks are favored by only 3.5% of employers, a very statistically significant
difference (p = 0.0000). The remaining 88% of employers treat both races equally, with 83% of
employers contacting none of the applicants.
A probit regression of the callback dummy on resume characteristics (college degree, years
experience, volunteer experience, military experience, e-mail address, employment holes, work in
school, honors, computer skills, special skills, fraction of high school dropouts in the neighborhood,
fraction of neighborhood attending college or more, fraction of neighborhood that is white, fraction
of neighborhood that is black, and log median per capital income) is created from a random
subsample of one-third of the resumes. The remaining resumes are ranked using the estimated
coefficients by predicted callback. Under this classification, blacks do significantly benefit from
high-quality resumes, but they benefit less than whites (callback rates for high versus low are 1.6
for blacks and 1.89 for whites). The presence of an e-mail address, honors, or special skills have a
positive significant effect on the likelihood of a callback. Interestingly, computer skills negatively
predict callback and employment holes positively predict callback. Additionally, there is little
systematic relationship between job requirements and the racial gap in callback.
54

Applicants living in whiter, more educated, or higher-income neighborhoods have a higher
probability of receiving a callback, and there is no evidence that blacks benefit any more than
whites from living in a whiter, more educated zip code. There is, however, a marginally significant
positive effect of employer location on black callbacks.
Of all employers, 29% state that they are “Equal Opportunity Employers” and 11% are federal
contractors, however these two groups are associated with a larger racial gap in callback. The
positive white/black gap in callbacks was found in all occupation and industry categories except
for transportation and communication. No systematic relationship between occupation earnings
and the racial gap in callback was found.
Bertrand and Mullainathan did not design their study specifically test the two theories of
discrimination, statistical and taste-based, and do not believe that either of the two can fully
explain their findings. While both models explain the average racial gap, their results do not
support animus. There is no evidence of a larger racial gap among jobs that explicitly require
communication skills and jobs for which customer or co-worker contacts are more likely to be
higher, which would be expected by theory. Further, as blacks’ credentials increase the cost of
discrimination should increase, but this doesn’t explain why blacks get relatively lower returns to
a higher-quality resume. This, combined with the uniformity of the racial gap across occupations,
casts doubt on statistical discrimination theories as well.
The authors suggest that other models may do a better job than statistical or taste models at
explaining these particular findings. For example, a lexicographic search by employers may result
in resumes being rejected as soon as they see a black name, thus experience and skills are not
rewarded because they are never seen. This theory may explain the uniformity of the race gap if
this screening process is similar across jobs. The results could also follow from employers having
coarser stereotypes for blacks. In any case, Bertrand and Mullainathan acknowledge the need for
a theory beyond statistical discrimination and taste to explain their findings in full.
Another nice example of a natural field experiment is due to Riach and Rich (2006), who extend
the literature by using carefully matched written applications made to advertised job vacancies in
England to test for sexual discrimination in hiring. They find statistically significant discrimination
against men in the “female occupation” and against women in the “male occupation.” This is
important evidence to begin to uncover the underlying causes for labor market discrimination.
This study is also careful to point out that it is difficult to parse the underlying motivation for
why such discrimination exists. Even without such evidence, however, the paper is powerful in
that it provides a glimpse of an important phenomenon in a significant market, and provocatively
leads to questions that need to be addressed before strong policy advice can be given.
There are a number of other studies that examine discrimination and differential earnings in
labor markets based on sexual orientation (Arabshibani et al. 2005, Weichselbaumer 2003, Berg
and Lien 2002), but like these two natural field experiments, they also have difficulties parsing the
type of discrimination observed.
One might then ask, if field experiments have similar difficulties as regression based methods
in parsing the nature of discrimination, why bother with this approach. Our answer is that
55

field experiments in labor economics have the potential to parse both the nature and extent of
discrimination observed in markets.
As a starting point, consider List (2004), who made use of several settings in a naturallyoccurring marketplace (the sports card market) to show that a series of field experiments can
parse the two forms of discrimination. More specifically, after first demonstrating that dealers
treat “majority” (white men) and “minority” (older white men, nonwhite men and white women)
buyers and sellers in the marketplace differently, List provides evidence suggesting that sportscard
dealers knowingly statistically discriminate. By executing a variety of field experiments, the
evidence provided parses statistical discrimination from taste based discrimination and an agent’s
ability to bargain when interacting with a dealer. The experiments conducted by List demonstrate
a framework for potentially parsing the two forms of discrimination which could be utilized and
moved forward to inform discrimination discussions in other markets.
The first experiment discussed in List (2004) is similar to an audit study in that dealers are
approached by buyers from both majority and minority groups with an offer of buying or selling
a sportscard (unlike most audit studies, the subjects do not know that they are part of a study
on discrimination, just that it’s an economic study). The results from this first experiment are
highly suggestive that dealers base offers on group membership: buyers in the minority groups
of white women and older white men received initial offers that were 10-13% greater than white
male buyers when buying cards and minority groups received 30% lower initial offers when selling
their cards.
Further, this initial framed field experiment shows that the gap between minority and majority
subjects’ offers remain from the initial to final offers for inexperienced subjects but to a large part
converges for subjects with experience. But, this convergence comes at a cost of time: subjects in
the minority group having to invest a significantly larger portion of time to achieve better final
offers.
This result provides support for non-taste based discrimination due to the convergence of the
gap in offers through bargaining, a result that would not hold under a theory of taste based
discrimination where the dealer would simply hold to one price. Finally, by surveying dealers in
addition to subjects that were buying and selling, List controls for dealer experience in the marketplace and finds a positive relationship between dealer experience and discrimination as measured
by the difference between a dealer’s average majority and average minority offers. Suggesting
that statistical discrimination may be evident unless one believes that taste based discrimination
increases with experience as a dealer at sportscard shows.
Although this initial experiment can measure discrimination, more treatments are necessary to
parse statistical discrimination from alternative explanations. In total, List runs four experiments
in addition to the framed field experiment described in the previous paragraph: (i) a dictator
game artefactual field experiment with dealers as the dictator and four descriptions as the receiver:
white men, non-white men, white women and white mature men; (ii) two framed field experiment
treatments that are bilateral exchange markets with dealers selling to agents with randomly drawn
reservations values, where in one market dealers know that the reservation value is random and in a
56

second it is ambiguous; (iii) a Vickrey second price auction that is a natural field experiment; and,
(iv) a framed field experimental game designed to determine dealers’ perceptions of the reservation
value distributions of sportscard market participants. Each additional experiment helps parse the
two forms of discrimination and the bargaining ability of the subjects and the results of all the
experiments are necessary for List to suggest that dealers knowingly statistically discriminate.
First, the relatively uniform offers made to receivers across majority and minority groups in
the dictator game suggests that dealers do not display taste based discrimination, at least in
artefactual field experiments. Second, through the bilateral exchange markets, three results are
found which each point towards statistical discrimination by testing hypotheses drawn directly
from the theories of taste based and statistical discrimination. First, experienced dealers are
found to lose less surplus than inexperienced dealers. Second, minority and majority buyers
perform similarly with the randomly set reservation prices but not in the treatment where dealers
think that reservation values are ‘homegrown values.’ Finally, experienced dealers perform worse
when it is ambiguous whether the reservation value is drawn randomly — suggesting that they
are utilizing inferences which are not performing well (i.e. their statistical discrimination rubric
fails due to the randomly set reservation value). These two additional experiments point toward
statistical discrimination.
Yet, it is only through the final two experiments that sufficient evidence is provided for statistical discrimination through a discovery of a variation in reservation value distributions of sportscard
market participants and dealer knowledge of the variation. The results from the Vickery second
price auction are used for two purposes: (i) to determine whether the reservation value distributions of the majority and minatory are indeed different and (ii) to provide distributions to
determine the dealers’ abilities to accurately assign distributions in the final experimental game.
The results from the Vickery auction do show that the reservation values for the minority group
have a larger variance than the reservation values for the majority group, suggesting that statistical discrimination could be utilized for profit maximization–see the above model. Further, when
different reservation value distributions are shown to dealers in the final experiment, a majority
of all dealers are able to determine which distributions are from which groups and experienced
dealers are able to correctly assign distributions more often than inexperienced dealers.
Although List focuses on a market that every consumer does not necessarily approach, the
framework of multiple field experiments to move towards identifying the form of statistical discrimination is one that should be considered for use elsewhere. Most importantly, this study
highlights that a series of field experiments can be used to uncover the causes and underlying
conditions necessary to produce data patterns observed in the lab or in uncontrolled field data.
This study shows highlights that a deeper economic understanding is possible by taking advantage of the myriad settings in which economic phenomena present themselves. In this case,
field experimentation in a small-scale field setting is quite useful in developing a first understanding when observational data is limited or experimentation in more “important” markets is not
possible. Yet, it is important to extend this sort of analysis to more distant domains.
This is exactly what is offered in Gneezy and List (2010), who explore the incidence of discrim57

ination against the disabled by examining actual behavior in a well-functioning marketplace–the
automobile repair market. This study uses a traditional audit study, but combines it with a specific
field experimental treatment to allow the authors to parse the type of discrimination observed.
The audit portion of the study was standard: the assignment given to subjects is clear: approach body shop j to receive a price quote to fix automobile i. The authors included subjects
from two distinct groups–disabled white males age 29-45 and non-disabled white males age 2945–who each visited six body shops. The disabled subjects in this experiment were all confined to
a wheelchair and drove a specialized vehicle. All of the automobiles, which were personally owned
by our disabled subjects, had visible body problems. Importantly, both testers in any given pair
approached body shops with the identical car.
The authors find that overall, the disabled received considerably higher average price quotes,
$1,425, than the non-disabled, $1,212. Inference as to why this disparate treatment exists, of
course, is an open issue. Several clues provide potential factors at work: (i) access–many body
shops are not easily approachable via wheelchairs; this considerably restricts the set of price offers
the disabled can receive; and (ii) time–while the non-disabled can easily park and proceed to
the front desk, the process is much more complex for the disabled. First, he must find a suitable
parking place: it is very uncommon to have designated places for the disabled in body shops. As
a result, the disabled must have special parking which permits the use of a wheelchair. Moreover,
it must be a space that will be unoccupied when he returns to pick up the repaired vehicle. After
finding an appropriate parking space, the disabled must commit much more effort and time to
approach the service desk. An additional related problem which makes the expected search cost
higher for the disabled person is that in some cases it is necessary to leave the car for the day in
order to obtain a price quote. Using a taxi is much more complex for the disabled than for the
non-disabled.
To investigate the search cost explanation further, the authors obtained data on search effort at
the tester level and perceived search effort at the body shop level to examine if realizations of these
variables are consistent with the pattern of discrimination observed. From this survey, the authors
find that the non-disabled typically consult far fewer body shops: on average, the non-disabled
visit 3.5 different mechanics whereas the disabled visit only 1.67 mechanics, a difference that is statistically significant. Concerning the supply side, the authors asked body shops questions revolving
around body shop perceptions of the degree of search among the disabled and non-disabled. The
results are consonant with the consumer-side statements observed above: the disabled are believed
to approach 1.85 body shops for price quotes while the non-disabled are expected to approach 2.85,
a difference of more than 50 percent and one that is significant. This evidence is consistent with
statistical discrimination based on mechanics’ beliefs about relative search costs and how they
map into reservation value distributions. Yet, the survey evidence alone is only suggestive and
further investigation is necessary to pinpoint the underlying mechanism at work.
For these purposes, the authors provide a sharper focus on the underlying reason for discrimination by running a complementary field experiment. In this experiment, the authors not only
replicated the initial results, with new testers and new vehicles in need of repair, but in another
58

treatment had these exact same agents approach body shops explicitly noting that [they’re] “getting a few price quotes” when inquiring about the damage repair estimate. If differential search
costs cause discrimination, then the authors should observe the offer discrepancies disappearing
in this treatment.
This is exactly the result they observe. Although in the replication treatment the disabled
continued to receive higher asks, when both agent types noted that they were “getting a few price
quotes,” the disabled agents were able to secure offers that were not statistically distinguishable
from the offers received by the non-disabled. We provide support of this insight in Figure 8,
which highlights the discrepancies observed when search is believed to be heterogeneous across
the disabled and non-disabled. In this case, the first two bars show that the differences are nearly
20%. Yet when both agents clearly signal that this particular mechanic visit is just one part of
their entire search process, these disparities are attenuated and indeed change signs.
[Figure 8: Gneezy and List Disability Study]
While these two examples are not directly related to labor market outcomes, they display the
power of the field experimental method to test important theories within labor economics, and
especially the theories of discrimination discussed earlier. In this regard, we believe that similar
treatments can be carried out in labor markets to explore wage differences, job offer differences,
and other labor market outcomes.

4

Firms

In the third stage of the life cycle, most individuals work within firms or some other hierarchical
organization. In this section we describe how field experiments have contributed to knowledge
on how workers and employees behave in such settings. Following the research areas described
in Tables 2 and 3, we frame our discussion on the following research themes: (i) the effects on
monetary incentives on worker behavior; (ii) the interplay between monetary and non-monetary
incentives; (iii) aspects of the employment relationship, such as gift-exchange between employers
and employees, and the link between employer monitoring and employee shirking behavior.37,38
37

The field experiment approach shares many of the characteristics of the insider econometrics approach to
understand the causes and consequences of behavior within firm (Ichniowski and Shaw 2008). However a key
distinction is that field experiments explicitly rely on exogenous variation created with the specific influence of
researchers in order to identify causal effects. Clearly, not every intervention that a researcher could design and
implement is socially useful — there is little value added in implementing practices that firms are never otherwise
observed engaging in. However, this does not preclude the fact that carefully designed interventions can help
researchers to uncover causal relations and the mechanisms behind them.
38
Our discussion focuses predominantly on natural field experiments within firms. There also exists a separate
branch of artefactual field experiments where subject pools are drawn from manufacturing workers (Barr and
Serneels 2007), fishermen (Carpenter and Seki 2010) and employees in large firms (Charness and Villeval 2009).

59

4.1

Monetary Incentives

A core principle in economics is that incentives matter. The role of monetary incentives within
firms and organizations has been long studied in sociology and management literatures. With
the application of contract theory to behavior within firms (Hart and Holmstrom 1987) and the
development of personnel economics (Lazear 1995), such questions are now integrated within
mainstream labor economics. For economists, the basic questions have been: (i) how do workers
respond to a given set of incentives?; (ii) what are the optimal set of incentives an employer should
provide?39
An earlier generation of empirical studies exploited firm’s personnel data to measure the productivity effects of compensation schemes on individual workers. An econometric challenge facing
these studies is that observed incentive contracts might well be endogenous to firm’s performance
(Prendergast 1999, Chiappori and Salanie 2003). In other words, identifying causal effects of incentives on behavior is confounded by the presence of unobservables, such as managerial practices,
that determine both which compensation schemes are chosen, and worker productivity. In earlier
research this concern has been addressed in between firm studies using instrumental variables
approaches (Groves et al. 1994). However, this concern applies even if such effects are identified
from a within worker or within firm comparison as incentives change over time (Jones and Kato
1995, Ichniowski et al. 1997, Paarsch and Shearer 1999, 2000, Lazear 2000). A related concern is
that such changes in incentives might be reflective of a wider package of changes in management
practices. Hence, akin to social experiments, what is actually being evaluated is potentially the
sum total of many concomitant changes in the firm’s organization rather than an isolated change
in worker incentives all else equal. This is of particular concern given the view that there exist
complementarities between organizational practices so that firms are better off choosing a package
of practices rather than in isolation (Milgrom and Roberts 1990, Ichniowski et al. 1997). With
such multiple underlying changes, mapping the evidence, however cleanly identified is the change
in behavior, to any underlying theory is less clear cut.40
Field experiments introduce exogenously timed variation in incentive structures that are orthogonal to other management practices. This opens up the possibility to identify the causal
impact of monetary incentives on the behavior of individual workers, and on firm performance
as a whole. Combining personnel files from human resource departments within the firm, with
primary data collection that is inherent in field experimentation, allows researchers to examine
39

Many of the wider literature related to the research questions we touch upon, such as incentive pay and
teams, are discussed in greater detail in the Chapter on Human Resource Management by Bloom and Van Reenen
(2010), also in this Handbook. They summarize the evidence from across countries showing the increasing use of
performance pay over time. In the Chapter on Personnel Economics in this Volume by Oyer and Schaeffer (2010),
further issues related to incentive pay and firm hires is discussed at greater length.
40
Due to these empirical challenges, it is not surprising that much of the early evidence testing theories in personnel economics originated from laboratory environments. For example, Bull et al. (1987) provide evidence from
the lab on the predictions of rank order tournament theory; Fehr and Fischbacher (2002) review the experimental
evidence on social preferences in workplace environments. The wider availability of personnel data and ever closer
links being forged between researchers and firms has allowed the literature in field experiments within firms to
flourish.

60

the effect of monetary incentives on a range of margins of worker behavior, capturing both the
intended and unintended consequences of incentive provision.
There are good theoretical reasons for collecting such extensive information on worker behaviors
when evaluating the response to incentives. For example, multi-tasking theory suggests that when
monetary incentives are provided based on a subset of tasks that the firm can directly measure
performance in, workers may reallocate their effort away from other tasks they are engaged in,
their employer is affected by, but their compensation is not based on (Holmstrom and Milgrom
1991). Similarly, if the provision of incentives alters the distribution of pay across workers in the
same tier of the firm hierarchy, this might alter worker’s behavior towards co-workers, say through
cooperation or sabotage (Lazear 1989). Finally, there might be ways in which workers can game
against any incentive scheme. All such unintended consequences of monetary incentives need to
be accounted for to both accurately understand how workers respond to incentives and to begin
to think through the optimal incentive design.41
Employers might not collect such information ex ante. Hence the need to engage in primary
data collection efforts to complement the rich information available in firm’s personnel files. Field
experiments — that involve close cooperation between researchers and firm management — are well
placed to advance in this direction. Ultimately, as witnessed in some of the field experiments
described below, this allows a closer mapping between the evidence and underlying theory, and to
draw implications for optimal incentive provision.
4.1.1

Theoretical Framework

To understand some of the theoretical questions and empirical challenges faced in this literature, it
is instructive to first reconsider Lazear’s (2000) original analysis of the Safelite Glass Corporation,
a large auto-glass firm in which the primary task of worker’s at the bottom-tier of the firm’s
hierarchy is to install automobile windshields. Lazear used non-experimental methods to estimate
the productivity effects of the firm moving from a compensation scheme in which workers were
paid and hourly wage scheme, to one in which they were paid a piece rate for each windshield
installed, with a minimum guarantee. This pioneering work brings to the fore many of the issues
that have influenced all the subsequent literature, and allows us to highlight the specific issues
that field experiments help address.
The model is as follows. Worker’s utility depends on income Y and effort e, U (Y, e) with
U1 > 0, U2 < 0.42 Worker’s output q depends on effort and her ability, θ, so q = q(e, θ) with
output assumed to be observable and q1 , q2 > 0. For any given output q0 , there is a unique effort
41

Charness and Kuhn (2010) review the extensive evidence from laboratory settings on sabotage.
There is a long-standing idea in psychology that rewards may hinder performance (Kruglanski 1978, Deci et
al. 1999). There is some evidence on this from laboratory settings where offering small amounts of monetary
compensation is found to decrease effort relative to paying nothing (Gneezy and Rustichini 2000), and where
explicit incentives sometimes result in worse compliance than incomplete labor contracts (Fehr and Falk 1999, Fehr
and Scmidt 2000). This might either be because small monetary incentives crowd out intrinsic motivation, an idea
formalized by Benabou and Tirole (2000), or because the individual is reluctant to signal his willingness to accept
low wages. We do not know of field evidence that examines such non-monotonic effects of monetary incentives on
effort.
42

61

∂e
level that achieves this, denoted e0 (θ). It is then straightforward to see that ∂θ
= − qq21 < 0 so
that higher ability workers need exert less effort to achieve a given output. If workers choose
not to work at any firm, their outside option from leisure is denoted U (0, 0). Hence the lowest
ability worker that would accept employment at a firm with a required output level and wage W,
is denoted θ0 and is such that,
U (W, e0 (θ 0 )) = U (0, 0).
(27)

All workers of higher ability earn rents from employment over leisure. Similarly, suppose a worker
of a given ability could take up employment at another firm offering a wage-minimum effort pair
 , e). Hence with inter-firm competition there might exist an upper cutoff in ability, θh , such
(W
that,
(θ h ), e(θh )),
(28)
U (W, e0 (θh )) = U (W

where workers of ability higher than θh prefer to take the alternative employment contract.
This framework makes clear that incentive structures will affect two types of behavior, an

idea developed in more detail in Lazear (2005). First, there will be change in effort e exerted by
individual workers in response to monetary incentives. This is referred to as the ‘incentive effect’.
Second, the compensation scheme will induce a differential composition of workers within the firm
over time. Some workers will prefer to join this firm from other employers. These changes in
workforce composition can be thought of as the ‘selection effect’ of monetary incentives.
The incentive effect can be easily understood graphically. Figure 9 shows the relationship
between output, q, and compensation for the two schemes relevant for Lazear’s study: (i) a fixed
hourly wage subject to a minimum output requirement q0 , resulting in total compensation W ; (ii)
a linear piece rate scheme bq − K with a minimum guarantee of W. As Figure 9 shows, for output
levels between q0 and q ∗ the worker receives W under both compensation schemes, and for output
higher than q∗ earns strictly more under the piece rate scheme.43
[Figure 9: Compensation Before and After At Safelite]
On the incentive effect, the model makes clear that moving from the fixed hourly wage scheme
to the piece rate scheme does not cause the output of any individual to fall, and causes average
output to rise. Low ability workers, indicated with a solid indifference curve in Figure 9, remain
indifferent between the two schemes and would produce output q0 at point A under both. Higher
ability workers, indicated with a dashed indifference curve in Figure 9, would prefer to increase
their effort and move to point B. This is because the piece rate scheme allows higher ability workers
to raise their utility through increased compensation that more than offsets any increase in their
effort. As a result, the dispersion in worker effort and output rises as long as there is at least one
worker that chooses to produce more than q ∗ .44
43

Firms typically provide workers some insurance by allowing their output to occasionally fall below the required
minimum q ∗ , but a worker that consistently fails to meet this performance threshold is likely to be fired or assigned
to another task.
44
Whether workers exert more or less effort in response to a higher piece rate b of course depends on the balance

62

On the selection effect, under plausible conditions, the average ability of workers rises with the
move to piece rates. This is because low ability individuals remain indifferent between working
for this firm under either incentive scheme. If they were willing to work for the firm under the
fixed wage scheme, they should remain willing to do so under piece rates all else equal. On the
other hand, high ability workers might be attracted to this form from other firms that for example,
have higher minimum output standards or pay piece rates but at a lower rate b. In short, theory
predicts that there should be no change in the number of low ability workers who are willing to
work at the firm, but that piece rates attract high ability workers so the right tail of the ability
distribution in the firm should thicken.
As described in more detail below, existing field experiments have focused on identifying the
incentive effects, and the research designs used have been less amenable pin down these types of
selection effect. Yet it is important to emphasize the need for future research to provide credible
research designs to uncover both effects.45
In Lazear’s study, he documents the total effect of the change in monetary incentives to workers
was around a 44% increase in worker productivity, defined to be the number of windshields installed
by the worker per eight hour day. Around half the increase was due to incentive effects, namely a
change in effort of the same worker as he moved from a fixed hourly wage to a piece rate scheme.
However, the other half was entirely due to the selection effect, namely productivity changes due
to endogenous changes in the composition of workers in response to change in monetary incentives.
A legacy of Lazear’s study is to show that both motives likely underlie why firms choose to alter
their output based incentive structures in the first place. A carefully crafted field experiment that
begins to measure whether and how the compensation policies of a given firm have such spillover
effects on other firms that compete for similar workers, would open up a rich research agenda tieing
together the study of within-firm compensation policies on equilibrium wage-setting behavior in
labor markets.46
Linking to the Design of Field Experiments
The model provides a series of implications that have impinged on the first generation of field
experiments over the last decade. First, given worker heterogeneity, changes in compensation
scheme will nearly always affect average effort and output, as well as the dispersion of effort and
of income and substitution effects. Evidence from the lab and field in Gneezy and Rustichini (2000) suggested
that the relationship between piece rates and effort was U-shaped with low piece rates eliciting less effort than a
zero piece rate. One explanation would be that small levels of financial compensation crowd out workers’ intrinsic
motivation to exert effort.
45
Laboratory experiments have begun to explore in more detail the selection effects of incentives (Dohmen and
Falk 2006, Cadsby et al. 2007, Vandegrift et al. 2007, Niederle and Vesterlund 2007, Eriksson et al. 2008). These
studies are described in more detail in Charness and Kuhn (2010).
46
This links together with recent development in structural estimation of search and matching models in labor
markets. For example, Cahuc et al. (2006) develop and estimate an equilibrium model with strategic wage
bargaining and on-the-job search. An important innovation on their paper is that when an employed worker
receives an outside job offer, a three-player bargaining process is started between the worker, her/his initial employer
and the employer which made the outside offer. They use the model to examine wage determination in France
using matched employer-employee data from 1993 to 2000. They find that inter-firm competition is quantitatively
important for wage determination, and raising wages above reservation levels.

63

output. Given the linkage between performance and pay, this inevitably results in changes in the
distribution of earnings across workers at the same tier of the firm hierarchy. Hence linking pay
to performance might have unintended negative consequences on worker and firm performance as
a result of such increased earnings inequality. This might manifest itself in the form of workers
reducing cooperation with co-workers (Baron and Pfeffer 1994, Bewley 1999, Lazear 1989), workers sabotaging the performance of others, or workers being directly worse off in utility terms, all
else equal, as a result of them being structurally averse to pay inequality (Fehr and Schmidt 1999,
Charness and Rabin 2002). Field experiments are particularly adept at detecting and quantifying
such unintended consequences because researchers are engaged in primary data collection, and the
firm would have no incentive to collect such information ex ante as part of its personnel files, especially in pay for performance type compensation schemes have not been previously implemented.
Some of the field experiments described below have collected qualitative evidence from workers to
explore these channels, in additional to using personnel files to measure the direct productivity
effects of incentives.
Second, given the selection effect of monetary incentives, there is inevitably a change in workers’
peer group over time. The composition of peers, or their social ties with each other, play no role
in the standard neoclassical model in which worker preferences are only defined over their own
income and effort. There are good reasons to probe this assumption in the field. First, if peer
effects determine workplace behavior because they alter the marginal return to worker’s effort, then
understanding how workers respond to changes in monetary incentives requires an understanding
of the mechanisms underlying such peer effects. Second, extending the neoclassical model to take
into account such peer effects or social concerns, as has been down in Kandel and Lazear (1992),
Lazear (1989), Rotemberg (1994) and Fershtman et al. (2003), has implications for many aspects
of firm behavior including the optimal design of incentives. Such concerns are a recurring them in
the series of natural field experiments conducted by Bandiera et al. that are described below.
Third, the model highlights that under fixed hourly wage schemes, there should not be much
heterogeneity in workers output or effort, despite workers being heterogeneous in ability. This does
not fit the evidence very well. For example, in Lazear’s study there was considerable dispersion in
worker productivity even under the fixed hourly wage scheme. To better explain behavior in fixed
wage settings, theory suggests workers might respond to other forms of non-monetary or implicit
incentives, such as gift-exchange motives where workers exert more effort in response to employers
paying higher than market clearing wages, the ability to shirk (Shapiro and Stiglitz 1984, Macleod
and Malcolmson 1989), or promotion prospects and career concerns (Dewatripont et al. 1999).
Such mechanisms might also predict how workers sort across firms (Stiglitz 1975). Some of these
aspects are highlighted by the field experiments discussed below on the employment relationship.
Fourth, the model implies that low ability workers should not leave the firm with the move to
piece rates. If they were willing to work for the firm under the fixed wage scheme, they should
remain willing to do so under piece rates all else equal. On the other hand, given output differences
among workers under price rates, management can more easily identify low ability workers when
pay is tied to their performance. Over a longer time period, this might lead to them being fired.
64

This type of selection effect caused by employer learning the true ability of workers, has not been
studied by field experiments.47
Finally, given worker heterogeneity, the first best for the firm would be to set a worker specific
piece rate, bi . This would be chosen to equate the marginal benefit of effort to its marginal
cost. However, we generally observe firms being constrained to offer bottom-tier workers the same
compensation scheme. This may be because of legal, technological or informational constraints
(Lazear 1989, Bewley 1999, Encinosa et al. 1997, Fehr et al. 2004). To overcome this, one
hypothesis is that firms can get closer to this first best by linking managers’ pay to the firm’s
performance. Managers then have greater incentives to target their effort to specific workers, and
from the worker’s point of view it is then as if they face an individual specific incentive scheme.
This idea is developed in the natural field experiment by Bandiera et al. (2007) described below,
which then links managerial incentives to pay inequality among workers.
4.1.2

Evidence From the Field

In the decade following the wave of studies using personnel data and insider econometrics to
understand responses to monetary incentives (Ichniowski and Shaw 2008), field experiments have
begun to exploiting exogenous and randomly timed variation in compensation pay to both reinforce
these existing results using non-experimental methods, as well as providing new insights.
Among the first of these studies was Shearer’s (2004) natural field experiment, designed to
estimate the productivity gains moving from a piece rate to a fixed wage scheme for tree planters
in British Columbia, Canada. In contrast to Lazear (2000), this setting is one in which tree planters
are usually paid a piece rate with no guaranteed minimum, and fixed wages are rarely used ex ante.
Workers were randomly assigned at the start of a work day, to plant under one of the incentive
schemes. Hence a within worker comparison can be exploited to estimate the incentive effects. To
reduce the likelihood of this comparison confounding other effects unrelated to the compensation
schemes in place, work took place on fields of similar conditions, and there was a constant length
of the work day. The incentive effect estimate is then based on a total of 120 observations on
daily worker productivity, 60 under each scheme. The relatively small sample size — nine male
workers were randomly selected from the firm — reflects the difficulty researchers initially faced in
real world settings in convincing firms to randomly assign individuals to alternative compensation
schemes. As more field experiments are conducted, some of these constraints are being eased.
For example, some of the field experiments described below are based on data on hundreds of
workers.48
Shearer’s field experiment reveals the incentive effect of having a piece rate rather than a
47

A related concern has been on the existence of rachet effects in response to pay for performance (Gibbons
1987), whereby workers deliberately underperform to keep the piece rate high. Such ratchet concerns have been
documented in firms where productivity shocks are uncommon such as shoe making (Freeman and Kleiner 2005)
and bricklaying (Roy 1952). Cooper at al. (1999) present evidence from an artefactual field experiment on Chinese
students and managers on such ratchet concerns, that might be of particular concern in planned economies.
48
The small sample size used in Shearer (2004) also reflects the nature of tree planting firms. They typically
employ less than 100 planters.

65

fixed wage compensation schemes to be a 20% productivity increase. The magnitude of this
is comparable to Lazear’s (2000) findings — moving from a fixed wage scheme — based on nonexperimental data, although this is wholly by chance There is no reason a priori to expect the
behavioral response of workers to these two incentive schemes to be of the same magnitude given
the very different types of worker involved, nature of the production function, and that the piece
rate b was not the same across settings. In line with theory, Shearer finds the standard deviation
of output across workers was higher under piece rates. Overall, it was found that unit costs under
piece rates were around 13% lower than under fixed wages.
To shed more light on how workers would have responded in a slightly different environment
and to alternative compensation schemes, Shearer then develops and estimates a structural model.
In terms of altering the economic environment, the structural model is used to shed slight on what
would have been the productivity gains if management was imperfectly informed about planting
conditions. This yields comparable estimates of the productivity gains of moving to pierce rates.
To shed light on alternative compensation schemes, Shearer explores how workers would have
responded to an efficiency wage scheme. The efficiency wage that would induce effort levels equal
to those observed under fixed wages in the field experiment,is calculated and its implied unit costs
are compared with those achieved under piece rates. This exercise suggests that fixed wages would
lead to a 2.7% increase in unit costs relative to piece rates.
Shearer (2004) uses a close to best practice methodology in combining estimates from a field
experiment with structural modelling within the same setting. This combination, following from
discussions in Heckman and Smith (1995) and Keane and Wolpin (1997), first identifies the existence and magnitude of important causal effects using reduced form evidence. To then move away
from such black-box findings, the researcher then uses structural modelling to posit an underlying
behavioral mechanism behind the effects, assess the sensitivity of the estimates to slight alterations
in the economic environment, and to make headway in understanding the optimal compensation
structure. Of course, the validity of the structural model can itself be tested by exploring whether
it predicts the responses observed to the exogenous variation engineered by the field experiment.
Another example of how field experiments can and should learn from other methodologies is at
the heart of the natural field experiment of Hossain and List (2009). They use theoretical insights
on framing effects from behavioral economics that have previously found empirical support in
laboratory experiments (Kahneman and Tversky 1979, Thaler 1980, Samuelson and Zeckhauser
1988, Ellingsen and Johannesson 2008), to see if in the field, framing manipulations affect worker
responses to bonus incentives. Their setting is a high tech Chinese firm producing consumer
electronics, where workers are organized into both individual and team production. They find that
bonuses framed as both ‘losses’ and ‘gains’ increase productivity, for both individuals and teams.
Teams respond more to bonuses posed as losses than as comparable bonuses posed as gains. The
comparable effects for individuals are of the same sign but are not statistically significantly different
to each other. Team productivity is enhanced by 1% purely due to the framing manipulation.
Neither the framing nor the incentive effect lose their importance over the six month study period.
Nor are there any detrimental effects on the quality of work as measured by product defect rates.
66

On a practical note, the results highlight that conditional on bonuses being provided, framing
matters for matters, and as framing can be adjusted almost costlessly, there are simply ways in
which firms can further enhance productivity responses to monetary incentives. Theoretically,
these results from the field provide an example of the prevalence of loss aversion in a natural labor
market setting. As such the results provide external validity to laboratory evidence, and should be
seen to provide a strong argument in favor of field and laboratory experiments being complements,
not substitutes.

4.2

Non-Monetary Incentives

Organizations use a variety of non-pecuniary based incentives to motivate their employees. We
discuss three forms of non-monetary incentive: status goods, feedback, and social incentives.49
Under status incentive schemes, employees are given some positional good, such as an ‘employee
of the month’ job title. The notion that individuals crave status has been long studied (Veblen
1934, Friedman and Savage 1948, Duesenberry 1949, Frank 1985) and more recently formalized
in the context of organizations providing status incentives in Moldavanu et al. (2007) and Besley
and Ghatak (2008). They emphasize that for status incentives to be effective, the positional good
must be valued by employees, it must be scarce, and its allocation rule rewards the deserving.
Recent evidence on these effects have been found in laboratory settings (Ball et. al 2001,
Brown et al. 2007) but few field experiments in which researchers have worked closely with a firm
to exogenously vary such status rewards. One exception is Greenberg (1988), who reports results
from a field experiment based on 198 employees in the underwriting department of a large insurance
company. These employees were randomly assigned on a temporary basis to the offices of either
higher, lower, or equal-status co-workers while their own offices were being refurbished. Relative
to those workers reassigned to equal-status offices, those reassigned to higher status offices raised
their performance, and those reassigned to higher status offices lowered their performance. The
size of these performance changes were directly related to the magnitude of the status changes
encountered. The results are interpreted as providing real world evidence on equity theory for
non-monetary rewards.
In the future, we envisage field experiments being designed that randomly vary the first two
margins on effective status incentives described above: how valued the positional good is, and its
scarcity. In contrast, a field experiment that randomly allocated such positional goods might not
be as informative, unless it was clearly related to some reallocation that would have occurred in
any case, such as in Greenberg’s clever study described above. Otherwise, such random allocations
would not be representative of the kinds of allocation rule employers actually use, and so cloud
the interpretation of any such results.50
49

This list is not meant to be exhaustive. We focus on these because field experiments have provided insights
on these margins to a greater extent than for other types of non-monetary incentive such as those discussed in
Francois (2000), Dixit (2001), Prendergast (2001), Benabou and Tirole (2003), Seabright (2003), Delfgaauw and
Dur (2004), Akerlof and Kranton (2005), and Besley and Ghatak (2005).
50
There are field experiments on charitable giving that have exogenously varied the visibility of donations to

67

A second class of non-monetary incentive in organizations relates to the provision of feedback.
While there is a long tradition in psychology on feedback effects (Thorndike 1913), economists
have only recently begun to investigate its causes and consequences. Much of this research has
focused on the theory of optimal feedback provision as mid-term reviews (Lizzeri et al. 2002,
Ederer 2008). Theory indicates that feedback on past performance can affect current performance
either directly if past and current performances are substitutes or complements in the agent’s
utility function, labelled a preference effect, or indirectly by revealing information on the marginal
return to current effort, labelled a signaling effect.51 The direct preference effect is relevant if, for
instance, agents are compensated according to a performance target or fixed bonus scheme, so that
being informed of high levels of past performance induces the agent to reduce her current effort
relative to her past effort, and still meet her overall performance target. The indirect signaling
effect is relevant if, for instance, the agent’s marginal return to effort depends on her ability and
this would be unknown if feedback were not provided.52
Both these mechanisms imply the effect of feedback is heterogeneous across individuals and
it might increase or reduce current effort, so the socially optimal provision of feedback remains
ambiguous. Research in psychology also suggests feedback effects are heterogeneous and may
crowd in or crowd out intrinsic motivation (Butler 1987, Deci et al. 2001). Consistent with
such heterogeneous effects, the organizational behavior literature finds that performance feedback
within firms is far from ubiquitous (Meyer et al. 1965, Beer 1987, Gibbs 1991).53
While there is a growing empirical literature on the effect of feedback in laboratory settings
(Erikkson et al. 2008), and in natural experiments (Bandiera et al. 2009, Azhmat and Irriberri
2009, Blanes-i-Vidal and Nossol 2009), evidence from field settings remains scarce. Bandiera et
al. (2009) provide one such analysis, in which the focus is on the provision of feedback to teams.
This study is described in detail below.54
assess whether such status concerns or prestige motives drive giving behavior Soetevent (2005), something that has
been found to be the case in laboratory settings of public goods games (Andreoni and Petrie 2004, Rege and Telle
2004). Echoing some of the results below on gift-exchange in the field and the lab, Soetevent (2005) finds evidence
that for some times of charitable cause, contributions increase when they can be socially recognized, but that this
effect diminishes over time.
51
The organizational behavior and psychology literatures have also emphasized the signaling effects of feedback,
as well as other related comparative statics such as how individuals change strategies in response to feedback
(Vollmeyer and Rheinberg 2005), and the specific type of information that should be conveyed in feedback (Butler
1987, Cameron and Pierce 1994).
52
Two strands of the economics literature have explored aspects of the signaling effect of feedback. The first
strand focuses on whether individuals update their priors in response to feedback consistent with Bayes’ rule (Slovic
and Lichtenstein 1971). The second strand focuses on whether agents react more to positive than negative feedback
because of self serving biases such as confirmatory bias (Rabin and Schrag 1999), or overconfidence (Malmendier
and Tate 2002, van den Steen 2004).
53
On the heterogeneous effects of feedback, the meta-analysis of Kluger and DeNisi (1996) covering 131 studies
in psychology with 13,000 subjects finds that two thirds of studies report positive feedback effects. On the optimal
provision of feedback, when the agent knows her ability so that there is no indirect signaling effect of feedback,
whether feedback should be optimally provided or not is sensitive to the specification of the agent’s cost of effort
function (Lizzeri et al. 2002, Aoyagi 2007). More general results have been derived when agents learn their ability
through feedback and ability is complementary to effort (Ederer 2008).
54
A separate branch of the literature has focused on the strategic manipulation of feedback by the principal
(Malcolmson 1984, Gibbs 1991, Aoyagi 2007), of which there is anecdotal evidence from the field (Longlecker et al.
1987) and laboratory (Ederer and Fehr 2007). Evidence from field experiments on feedback remains scarce.

68

The third class of non-monetary incentives relate to changes in behavior induced because of the
presence and identity of co-workers — namely social relations in the workplace. The idea that there
exists an interplay between social relations and monetary incentives in the workplace goes back to
the old Hawthorne studies mentioned earlier and have been long considered in the organizational
and business sociology literatures (Mayo 1933, Barnard 1938, Roethlisberger and Dickson 1939,
Roy 1952, Williams and O’Reilly 1998). Such concerns have begun to be incorporated in economic
theory (Kandel and Lazear 1992, Rotemberg 1994, Prendergast and Topel 1996), and credible
evidence on their existence, magnitude and underlying mechanisms have begun to emerge in a
nascent literature using non-experimental methods in combination with personnel data (Mas and
Moretti 2009, Bandiera et al. 2010).
In a series of natural field experiments, Bandiera et al. provide evidence on the effect of
incentives on individual and firm performance within the same firm. These field experiments
engineer exogenously timed variation in the incentive structures faced by workers in the firm. The
common thread running through these studies is to provide evidence on the interplay between
monetary and non-monetary incentives in the workplace. The specific form of non-monetary
incentive considered are those arising from social relations in the workplace, so that workers
behavior, and response to monetary incentives, might differ depending on the nature of the social
ties they have with co-workers, their superiors, and their subordinates. Given that this form of
non-monetary incentive is what field experiments have predominantly focused on, we first develop a
framework that makes precise how such incentives can be incorporated into an otherwise standard
model, and then map this framework to the empirical evidence from the field.
4.2.1

Theoretical Framework

Suppose worker i’s payoff depends on three components. First, she derives some benefit from exerting effort ei towards a productive task. This benefit, B(ei , .), reflects in part how her effort maps
into income through the monetary compensation scheme. To cover a wide range of compensation
schemes including absolute performance evaluation incentive schemes such as piece rates, relative
performance evaluation schemes such as rank order tournaments, or team incentives, these benefits
will in general also depend on co-workers’ effort, e−i . Second, the worker faces a convex cost of
effort, C(θi , ei ), where workers are of heterogeneous ability, θi . Finally, we assume worker i places
some weight on the utility of co-worker j, πij . In turn, such social preferences πij might depend
on the existence or strength of the social tie between individuals i and j. This third component
of the worker’s payoff function generates social incentives.55 Workers simultaneously choose their
55

Social preferences can be thought of as a reduced form representation of a number of models. They depict
behavior consistent with reciprocity or altruism (Fehr and Schmidt 1999), or the evolutionary equilibrium of a
repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma game in which workers learn which strategies to play (Levine and Pesendorfer 2002,
Sethi and Somanathan 1999). In the field experiment reported in Bandiera et al. (2005), they attempt to distinguish
between models in which workers’ preferences display altruism towards others, and models in which workers behave
as if they are altruistic because, for instance, they play trigger strategies to enforce implicit collusive agreements.

69

efforts to maximize their total payoff,
max Bi (ei , e−i ) − C(θi , ei ) +
ei



πij [Bj (ej , e−j ) − Cj (θj , ej )].

(29)

j=i

The first order condition is56 ,
∂Bi (.) ∂C(θi , ei )  ∂Bj (.)
−
+
π ij
.
∂ei
∂ei
∂ei
j=i

(30)

The monetary compensation scheme determines the marginal benefit of effort, ∂B∂ei (.)
≥ 0. As the
i
worker has social incentives, she takes account of the fact that on the margin, her effort also affects
∂B (.)
the benefits that accrue to others, ∂ej i ≶ 0. As mentioned above, the precise sign of this social
interaction depends on the nature of peer effects between workers that are socially connected, and
the monetary compensation scheme in place.
The theoretical predictions of such models generate a wide range of behavioral responses.
For example, working alongside friends might make work more enjoyable, generate contagious
enthusiasm among friends, provide positive role models, or generate incentives to compete to be
the best in the network of friends. All such mechanisms, that effectively increase the net benefits
of effort, imply workers exert more effort in the presence of their friends relative to themselves
when they work in the absence of their friends. Alternatively, working with friends might create
contagious malaise, or lead to low effort norms within friends or co-workers more generally. All
such mechanisms, that effectively decrease the net benefits of effort, imply workers exert less effort
in the presence of their friends. Finally, the presence of friends might have heterogeneous effects
across workers in that some exert more effort in the presence of their friends relative to when they
work solely with non-friends, and others exert less effort. For example, friends or co-workers may
conform to a common norm (Bernheim 1994), or workers might be averse to pay inequality within
their network (Fehr and Schmidt 1999, Charness and Rabin 2002). In either case, relative to when
they work only with non-friends — (i) low ability workers exert more effort in the presence of their
friends, and; (ii) high ability workers exert less effort in the presence of their friends. These aspects
are highlighted by the field experiments discussed below on non-monetary incentives.
The field experiments in Bandiera et al. are designed to engineer exogenous variation in the
incentives faced by workers to identify ∂B∂ei (.)
, corresponding to a similar reduced form parameter
i
as in Lazear (2000) and Shearer (2004). They then combine this variation with primary data
collected on social networks and plausibly exogenous variation in the assignment of friends as
∂B (.)
co-workers over time, to identify social incentives as embodied in ∂ej i . In these experiments, the
authors examine the effects of social incentives both within and across tiers of the firm hierarchy.
Namely in some studies i and j are co-workers engaged in the same tasks, and in other studies
the pair correspond to a manager and her subordinate. Moreover, they study cases in which: (i)
56

The model would be complicated if there were also knowledge spillovers such that effort exerted by worker
i reduced the cost of effort of worker j. While such knowledge spillovers have been found in workplace settings
(Moretti 2004, Ichniowski et al. 1997) we abstract from them here.

70

∂B (.)

individual effort hurts co-workers ∂ej i < 0, as in the case of relative incentive schemes; (ii) where
∂B (.)
it benefits them ∂ej i > 0, as in the case of team incentives, and; (iii) where it has no effect
∂Bj (.)
= 0, as in the case of a piece rate scheme. We now summarize the main insights from these
∂ei
natural field experiments.
4.2.2

Evidence from the Field

Social Incentives Among Bottom Tier Workers
The firm studied in Bandiera et al. is a leading UK producer of soft fruit. Managerial staff
belongs to three classes. The first class consists of a single general manager whom we refer to as
the Chief Operating Officer (COO), the second comprises ten field managers, and the bottom-tier
of the firm hierarchy consists of workers whose main task is to pick fruit. Field managers are
responsible for field logistics, most importantly to assign workers to rows of fruit within the field
and to monitor workers. Managerial effort can therefore be targeted to individual workers and
is complementary to worker’s effort. The main task of the COO is to decide which workers are
selected to pick fruit each day, and which are assigned to non-picking tasks. The field experiments
described below together provide insights on behavior at each tier of the firm’s hierarchy.
In each natural field experiment, the researchers worked closely with the CEO of the firm to
engineer exogenously timed changes in monetary incentives to workers or managers. The same
workers and managers are observed under both incentive schemes and therefore it is possible
to control for time invariant sources of heterogeneity across workers, such as their ability, and
across managers, such as their management style.57 The most important remaining empirical
concern is that the estimates of such changes might still reflect naturally occurring time trends in
productivity. This is addressed using a battery of tests in each paper. In addition, the time span
of study allows the authors to check in each case whether the behavioral response to incentives is
long-lasting, or whether they reflect Hawthorne effects, as discussed earlier, whereby individuals
respond in the short run to any change in their workplace environment. Being able to use field
experiments to estimate short and long run responses to changes in management practice is a
theme we will return to below when we present field experimental evidence on gift-exchange in
firms, and contrast the evidence from the field and the laboratory.58
In each natural field experiment, the authors collected primary data on the social networks of
each individual worker. With such a precise mapping of the structure of friendship networks in
the firm, personnel data providing workers productivity over time, and the field experiment on
monetary incentives, the authors are able to shed light on the interplay between monetary and
57

Hence this empirical strategy is informed by the evidence that individual ‘styles’ of managers affect firm
performance over and above firm level characteristics themselves (Bertrand and Schoar 2003, Malmendier and Tate
2004).
58
Bandiera et al. study the behavior of nearly all the workers in the firm for each field experiment. However,
given the experiment takes place in one firm, to avoid contamination effects across treated and control groups, all
workers were simultaneously shifted from one incentive scheme to the other. In contrast, Shearer (2004) exogenously
varied the incentive scheme workers were in on each day. In non-experimental studies such as Lazear (2000) on
individual pay and Hamilton et al. (2003) on team pay, workers might have had some say on which compensation
scheme they would be paid under.

71

social incentives in this setting.
Finally, they have daily information on the pool of workers available to pick fruit. This allows
them to precisely identify the effect of monetary incentives on the selection of workers from this
pool. The entire pool of workers is observed in this context because individuals are hired seasonally
from Eastern Europe, and they live on the farm for the duration of their stay. This margin of
selection — driven by the COO’s demand for workers — from the firm’s internal labor market proves
to be an important margin of response to some changes in incentives, particularly in relation to
changes in managerial incentives. Still, these field experiments, like Shearer (2004), are silent on
the selection effect highlighted by Lazear (2000) in relation to workers choice of which firm to
supply their labor to.
Another obvious similarity between Shearer (2004) and Bandiera et al. is that they study
agricultural environments in which worker productivity is easy to measure, comparable across
workers at the same moment in time, and comparable within a worker over time. The fact that
worker productivity is measured electronically with little measurement error, also makes analysis
of the impact of the field experiment on the distribution of productivity, again as highlighted
by Lazear (2000), particularly amenable to quantile regression methods for example. However,
it remains true that settings in which worker’s output is hard to measure, verify or compare,
that might represent the bulk of tasks in the modern service based economy, remain relatively
unexplored in field experiments.
In Bandiera et al. (2005) the natural field experiment exogenously changes the monetary
incentives to the bottom-tier workers whose primary task to pick fruit. The study compares the
behavior of these workers under a relative incentive scheme to a piece rate scheme. The comparison
is revealing because under relative incentives individual effort imposes a negative externality on coworkers’ pay whereas under piece rates individual effort has no effect on others’ pay. The difference
in workers’ performance under the two schemes, if any, then provides evidence on whether and to
what extent workers internalize the externality they impose on their colleagues. To see this, the
framework above is tailored to this specific field experiment as follows.
Consider a group of N workers, each worker i exerts effort ei ≥ 0 which determines her
θ e2
productivity. The cost of effort is assumed to be i2 i . Under relative incentives the benefit from
 

pay depends on the worker’s productivity relative to all her co-workers, B eei , where e = N1 i ei .
The relative scheme has the key characteristics that an increase in worker i’s effort — (i) increases
her pay; (ii) increases average effort and hence imposes a negative externality by reducing the pay
of co-workers. The effort choice under relative incentives then depends on whether workers have
social incentives and therefore internalize this externality. Assuming worker i places the same
social weight on all co-workers, so π ij = π i , the equilibrium effort for worker i solves,
max B
ei

e 
i

e

  

θj e2j
ej
θi e2i
+ πi
B
−
−
.
e
2
2
j=i


(31)

Assuming worker i chooses her effort taking the effort of others as given, the Nash equilibrium

72

effort for worker i solves,
′
 e  1   ej  π 
e  e
i
i
j
j=i

j
B
−
= θi ei .
B
e e ( i ei )
e j=i
e ( i ei )
′

(32)

Under piece rates, individual effort is paid at a fixed rate b per unit and worker i chooses her effort
as follows,


θj e2j

θi e2i
B (bej ) −
−
(33)
max B (bei ) + π i
ei
2
2
j=i

The equilibrium effort level solves the first order condition,
B ′ (bei ) b = θi ei .

(34)

As worker i’s effort does not affect her co-workers’ pay, her optimal choice of effort is independent
of πi . To compare effort choices under the two schemes, evaluate (34) at b = 1e so that for a given
e, the pay per unit of effort is the same under both incentive schemes. The first order condition
under piece rates then is,
 1
′ ei
B
= θi ei ,
(35)
e e
so the difference between the first order conditions (32) and (35) can be ascribed to two sources.
The first is the externality worker i imposes on others under relative incentives, the magnitude
of which depends on π i . When π i > 0 worker i’s productivity is lower under relative incentives
compared to piece rates. Second, by exerting more effort, each worker lowers thepay she receives
ej
for each unit of effort under relative incentives. This effect, captured by the j=ie term, also
( i i)
reduces productivity under relative incentives but is negligible in large groups.
The main results from Bandiera et al. (2005) are then as follows. First, the reduced form
estimates suggest that the exogenously timed switch from relative incentives to piece rates had a
significant and permanent impact on worker productivity. For the average worker, productivity
increased by at least 50% moving from relative incentives to piece rates. As in the earlier literature,
both the mean and dispersion of productivity significantly increase with the move to piece rates.
The productivity gains achieved under piece rates are not found to be at the expense of a lower
quality of picking.
The authors then assess whether this productivity change is consistent with the standard
assumption that workers ignore the externality they impose on others under the relative scheme
(π i = 0), or whether they fully internalize it (π i = 1). To do this they use the structural model
above, imposing a functional form assumption on B(.) and a production function linking effort
to observed output, to calibrate the first order conditions of the workers’ maximization problem
to compute an estimate of each worker’s cost parameter, θi , under each incentive scheme and
behavioral assumption. Since worker’s ability is innate, they ought to find the same implied
distributions of costs across workers under both incentive schemes if the underlying behavioral
assumption is correct.
73

Calibration of the first order conditions for worker’s efforts reveals that the observed change
in productivity is too large to be consistent with the assumption that workers ignore the negative
externality they impose on others. At the same time, the observed change in productivity is also
too small to be consistent with the assumption that workers maximize the welfare of the group
and fully internalize the negative externality. The authors then uncover the distribution of social
weights π i across workers that would explain the productivity increases. To do so they assume
the true cost of effort θi of each worker is that derived under piece rates, and then substitute into
the first order condition (32). They find the data is consistent with the average worker placing a
weight of π =.65 on the benefits accruing to all other co-workers, assuming they place a weight of
one on their own benefits.
Further analysis combines the experimental variation induced by the change in incentive
scheme, with non-experimental variation of the assignment of workers to work alongside their
friends on some days but not on other days. The field experiment method allows the collection
of primary data on social networks of each worker on the farm. This reveals that under relative
incentives workers internalize the externality more when the share of their personal friends in the
group is larger and this effect is stronger in smaller groups. In line with the interpretation that
social preferences explain the difference in productivity across the two schemes, the relationship
among workers does not affect productivity under piece rates. Finally, they find that productivity
under relative incentives was significantly lower only when workers were able to monitor each
other. Given that monitoring is necessary to enforce collusion while it does not affect altruism,
they take this finding to support the hypothesis that workers are able to sustain implicit collusive agreements when relative incentives are in place. Hence, building on a large body of evidence
from laboratory settings, this evidence from the field suggests workers behave as if they have social
preferences but do not, in structural form, have social preferences that make them unconditionally
altruistic towards others.
The results beg the question of why, given the large gains to productivity and profits, of
the move to piece rates, were relative incentives ever employed in the first place. The farm
management suggested the relative scheme was mainly adopted to difference out common shocks
that are a key determinant of workers productivity in this setting. While this is in line with
the predictions of incentive theory, the superiority of relative incentives relies on the assumption
that workers ignore the externality their effort imposes on others.59 This assumption on worker
behavior is not supported by this field experiment. Relative incentives led to lower productivity
because workers internalized the negative externality to some extent. The results of this natural
field experiment then speak directly to Lazear’s (1989) observation on how rarely workers are
compensated according to rank-order tournaments, and point to new and interesting directions
for theory to develop on the optimal provision of incentives under more robust assumptions on
worker preferences.
59

See Lazear and Rosen (1981), Green and Stokey (1983), and Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983). Relative performance
evaluation may also be preferred to piece rates as it lowers informational rents to high types (Bhaskar 2002), and
reduces incentives of workers to exert effort in influence activity (Milgrom 1988).

74

Social Incentives Among Managers
While the evidence from field experiments discussed thus far has focused on the monetary
incentives provided to bottom-tier workers, Rosen’s (1982) magnification principle implies the
incentives provided higher up in the firm hierarchy can have larger effects on firms performance.
Bandiera et al. (2007) present evidence from a field experiment in the same setting as previously
described to explore this issue.
They examine the effects of providing bonuses to managers based on the average productivity
of their subordinates. They extend the framework above to highlight that, as in most firms, in
their context managers can affect worker productivity through two channels — (i) they can take
actions that affect the productivity of existing workers, and, (ii) they can affect the identity of the
workers selected into employment. A simple theoretical framework indicates that, when workers
are of heterogeneous ability and managers’ and workers’ effort are complements, the introduction
of managerial performance pay makes managers target their effort towards the most able workers.
This is labeled a “targeting effect” of managerial incentives. In addition, the introduction of
managerial performance pay makes managers select the most able workers into employment. This
is labeled this a “selection effect” of managerial incentives.
As in Lazear’s framework, such targeting and selection effects influence both the mean and the
dispersion of workers’ productivity. Mean productivity unambiguously raises as managers target
the most able workers and fire the least able. The effect on the dispersion is however ambiguous.
On the one hand, targeting the most able workers exacerbates the natural differences in ability
and leads to an increase in dispersion. On the other hand, if only more able and hence more
similar workers are selected into employment in the first place, the dispersion of productivity may
fall, depending on the underlying distribution of ability across workers.
They key findings from Bandiera et al. (2007) are at follows. First, the introduction of managerial performance pay increases both the average productivity and the dispersion of productivity
among lower-tier workers. The average productivity increases by 21 percent and the coefficient of
variation increases by 38 percent.
Second, the increase in the mean and dispersion of productivity is due to both targeting
and selection effects. The analysis of individual productivity data reveals that the most able
workers experience a significant increase in productivity while the productivity of other workers
is not affected or even decreases. This suggests that the targeting effect is at play — after the
introduction of performance pay, managers target their effort towards more able workers. The
individual data also provides evidence of a selection effect. More able workers, namely those who
had the highest productivity when managers were paid fixed wages, are more likely to be selected
into the workforce when managers are paid performance bonuses. Least able workers are employed
less often and workers at the bottom of the productivity distribution are fired.60
60

The results from this natural field experiment has implications for environments outside the workplace. For
example, the provision of teacher incentives based on the average performance of students may have important consequences for the distribution of test scores among students, and the composition of students, and possibly teachers,
admitted into schools. For example, Burgess et al. (2005) find that the introduction of school accountability based
on test pass rates improved the performance of students in the middle of the ability distribution, at the expense

75

Third, the selection and targeting effect reinforce each other, as workers who experience the
highest increase in productivity are also more likely to be selected into employment. The introduction of managerial performance pay thus exacerbates earnings inequality due to underlying
differences in ability both because the most able workers experience a larger increase in productivity and because they are selected into employment more often.
Finally, they evaluate the relative importance of the targeting and selection effects through a
series of thought experiments. They find that at least half of the 21 percent increase in average
productivity is driven by the selection of more productive workers. In contrast, the change in
dispersion is nearly entirely due to managers targeting the most able workers after the introduction
of performance pay. Namely, the dispersion of productivity would have increased by almost the
same amount had the selection of workers remained unchanged. The reason is that the distribution
of ability across workers is such that even when the least able workers are fired, the marginal worker
selected to pick is still of relatively low ability. Hence there remains considerable heterogeneity in
productivity among selected workers.
These findings shed some light on why firms provide performance related pay to managers
in the first place. While such incentive schemes are obviously designed to increase unobservable
managerial effort, these results suggest another more subtle reason for their use. This stems from
the general observation that firms are typically constrained to offer bottom-tier workers the same
compensation scheme. This may be because of legal, technological or informational constraints
(Lazear 1989, Bewley 1999, Encinosa et al. 1997, Fehr et al. 2004). To the extent that bottomtier workers are of heterogeneous ability, however, offering the same compensation scheme to all
of them will be sub-optimal. When managers’ pay is linked to firm’s performance, their interests
become more aligned with those of the firm and they have greater incentives to target their effort to
specific workers in order to offset the inefficiency that arises because of the common compensation
scheme. From the worker’s point of view it is then as if they face an individual specific incentive
scheme. This opens a broad research agenda to examine whether firms are indeed more likely to
offer managers performance pay in settings where lower tier workers are of heterogeneous ability,
managers are able to target their effort towards specific workers, and workers are offered the same
compensation scheme.
The findings from this field experiment also highlight the interplay between the provision
of managerial incentives and the earnings inequality among lower-tier workers. Such a linkage
exists whenever managers can target their efforts towards some workers and away from others,
and managers choose which individuals are selected into the workforce. Hence there might be
an important interplay between managerial incentives and earnings inequality among workers
highlights a possible link between two important trends in labor markets over the past twenty years
that have previously been unconnected in the economics literature — the rising use of managerial
of both high achieving and low achieving students. Similarly, Hanushek and Raymond (2004) and Reback (2005)
provide evidence on the distributional consequences on student achievement under the No Child Left Behind policy.
Finally, Jacob (2002) and Figlio and Getzer (2002) provide evidence on the selection effect. They show that the
introduction of accountability schemes lead to an increase in grade retention and special educational placement in
Chicago and Florida public schools, respectively.

76

performance pay, and the rising earnings inequality among observationally similar workers.61
In Bandiera et al. (2009), the authors use the same introduction of managerial bonuses to
understand whether managers favor workers they are socially connected to. In general, social
connections between managers and workers can help or harm firm performance. On the one hand,
social connections may be beneficial to firm performance if they allow managers to provide nonmonetary incentives to workers, or help reduce informational asymmetries within the firm. On the
other hand, managers may display favoritism towards workers they are socially connected with,
to the detriment of other workers and overall firm performance.62
In this experiment, as managerial compensation becomes more closely tied to firm performance,
we would expect managers to utilize social connections to a greater extent if indeed, such connections are beneficial for firm performance. On the other hand, if social connection are bad for the
firm, we might expect managers to reallocate their effort across workers in response to managerial
incentives, towards high ability workers, and away from workers they are socially connected to.
To be precise, if the managers’ behavior towards connected workers changes once their interests
are more closely aligned with the firm’s, their previous behavior under fixed wages could have not
been maximizing the firm’s average productivity.
To measure social connections the authors use a survey they designed to exploit three sources
of similarity between managers and workers — whether they are of the same nationality, whether
they live in close proximity to each other on the farm, and whether they arrived at a similar time
on the farm. The underlying assumption is that individuals are more likely to befriend others if
they are of the same nationality, if they are neighbors, or if they share early experiences in a new
workplace.63
The main findings are as follows. First, when managers are paid fixed wages, the productivity
of a given worker is 9% higher when he is socially connected to his manager, relative to when
he is not. As workers are paid piece rates, this translates into the same proportionate change in
earnings. Second, when managers are paid performance bonuses that tie their pay to the average
productivity of workers they manage, being socially connected to the manager has no effect on
workers’ productivity.
Third, the introduction of managerial performance pay significantly decreases the productivity
of low ability workers when they are connected to their manager relative to when they were
61

Residual, or within-group wage inequality, is a sizeable contributor of the growth in overall wage inequality in
the US. This has been argued to have increased throughout the 1970s and 1980s (Juhn et al., 1993), and into the
1990s (Acemoglu, 2002, and Autor et al., 2005).
62
Both the positive and negative effects of social connections have been stressed in the organizational behavior
and sociology literatures. Examples of such work includes that on the effect of manager-subordinate similarity on
subjective outcomes such as performance evaluations, role ambiguity, and job satisfaction (Tsui and O’Reilly 1989,
Thomas 1990, Wesolowski and Mossholder 1997), and on how social networks within the firm influence within firm
promotions (Podolny and Baron 1997).
63
Lazear (1989), Kandel and Lazear (1992), and Rotemberg (1994) develop models incorporating social concerns
into the analysis of behavior within firms. While they emphasize that individuals have social concerns for others at
the same tier of the firm hierarchy, their analysis is equally applicable across tiers of the hierarchy. Bewley (1999)
offers extensive evidence from interviews with managers arguing that concerns over fair outcomes for workers and
the morale of employees are important determinants of their behavior.

77

connected to their manager and she was paid a fixed wage. The introduction of managerial
performance pay increases the productivity of high ability workers, especially when they are not
connected to their managers. These findings indicate that when managers face low powered
incentives, they favor the workers they are socially connected to, regardless of the workers’ ability.
In contrast, when they face high powered incentives, managers favor high ability workers regardless
of the workers’ connection status.
Fourth, an increase in the level of social connections between managers and workers has a
detrimental effect on the firms’ average productivity when managers are paid fixed wages and
has no effect when managers are paid performance bonuses. In this setting, social connections
are therefore detrimental for the firm because their existence distorts the allocation of managerial
effort in favor of lower ability workers.
This natural field experiment paper contributes to the growing empirical evidence on the
interplay between social networks and individual and firm performance. In particular, the design
allows the authors to identify not only whether social connections matter within the firm, but
also exploit the exogenous variation in incentives to understand whether they are to the benefit
or detriment of the firm.
Feedback
In a final natural field experiment from this setting, Bandiera et al. (2010) present evidence to
evaluate the effect of performance feedback and monetary prize tournaments, when the workforce
is organized in teams. Hence in this set-up workers effort imposes a positive externality on their
∂B (.)

team members, ∂ej i > 0. They compare the effects of these form of non-monetary and monetary
incentives relative to when teams are paid piece rates, and analyze their effect on two outcomes:
how workers sort into teams and team productivity.
This field experiment provides important contributions to the literature along three margins.
First, despite the pervasiveness of teams in the workplace, field evidence on team incentives is
scarce.64 The existing evidence from individual reward schemes provides limited guidance because
the margins along which individuals and teams can respond to incentives differ. Specifically, in
addition to changes in individual effort, changes in team incentives can lead to changes in team
composition. To the extent that workers effort depends on the identity of their team members because of social incentives, changes in team composition can affect the productivity of the individual
teams and of the firm as a whole.65
Second, tournaments are widely used to provide incentives across diverse organizations such as
salespeople competing for bonuses, managers competing for promotions, and politicians competing
64
More than 70% of major US firms use some form of team based rewards (Ledford et al 1995). Lazear and
Shaw (2007) cite evidence that between 1987 and 1996, the share of large firms that have more than a fifth of
their employees in problem solving teams rose from 37 to 66%. The percentage of large firms with workers in
self-managed teams rose from 27 to 78% over the same period. In academia, Wuchty et al (2007) document the
increased use of team production in research across disciplines.
65
There is only a small literature on selection into teams in laboratory settings (Weber 2006, Charness and Yang
2008), although there is a far more extensive lab-based literature on team production, as reviewed in Charness and
Kuhn (2010).

78

for vote shares (Bull et al. 1987, Baker et al. 1988). While several studies have tested whether
the response to variation in tournament structure is consistent with theoretical predictions, field
evidence on the comparison of monetary prize tournaments against alternative monetary and
non-monetary incentive mechanisms is scarce.66
Third, whenever tournaments are in place, workers inevitably receive some information on their
relative performance. This information might have direct effects on productivity if individuals have
concerns for their relative position or status (Moldavanu et al. 2007, Besley and Ghatak 2008),
inequality aversion (Fehr and Schmidt 1999, Charness and Rabin 2002) or conformity (Bernheim
1994). The field experiment allows the authors to de-couple the effect of feedback from the effect
of monetary prize tournaments. As the provision of feedback is almost costless, measuring its
contribution to the overall tournament effect can lead to considerable cost savings if most of the
positive effect of tournaments on productivity is actually due to worker responses to feedback.67
In the experiment, at the beginning of the season, teams were paid piece rates based on their
aggregate productivity. Halfway through the season teams were additionally provided feedback by
posting daily histograms of each team’s productivity. This feedback makes precise the absolute
productivity of each team, and their ranking relative to all other teams. Halfway through the
remaining part of the season a monetary prize for the most productive team each week was
introduced, in addition to the provision of feedback, and conditional on teams being paid according
to piece rates.
When workers first arrive to the farm they are assigned to a team by the general manager for
their first week. Thereafter workers are free to choose their own team members at a team exchange
that takes place every week. A team is formed only if all its members agree. Hence in this setting
workers have two choice variables: how much effort to exert into picking, and team composition.
The field experiment is again closely tied to an underlying model. This makes precise two key
forces that drive team formation: workers’ ability and social connections. As individual earnings
are increasing in the ability of team members, workers have incentives to assortatively match by
ability. On the other hand, workers might prefer to form teams with friends because this might
limit free-riding within teams (Alchian and Demsetz 1972, Holmstrom 1982, Kandel and Lazear
1992), and because they enjoy non-pecuniary benefits from interacting with co-workers they are
socially connected to (Rosen 1986, Hamilton et al. 2003).68 To the extent that workers are not
66

The empirical literature on tournament theory comprises two distinct branches. The first tests whether a
particular compensation scheme has a tournament structure. Two specific predictions have been explored — (i) the
wage spread should be positively related to the number of workers at the lower job level; (ii) the wage structure
should be convex as in Rosen (1986). These tests typically use data from the market for CEOs (Gibbons and
Murphy 1990, Erikkson 1999, Bognanno 2001). The second branch of the literature tests whether individual
behavior changes with tournament features in a way consistent with theory, using data either from experimental
settings (Bull et al 1987, Nalbantian and Schotter 1997, Erikkson et al 2008, Freeman and Gelber 2008), personnel
data (Knoeber and Thurman 1994, Erikkson 1999, Bognanno 2001), or sports (Ehrenberg and Bognanno 1990).
There are few existing field studies — on either individuals or teams — exploring tournament incentives to other
incentive schemes such as piece rates or feedback.
67
Evidence from the laboratory has tended to focus on feedback to individuals (Freeman and Gelber 2008). One
exception is Sausgruber (2008) who provides experimental evidence on the effects on team performance when told
about the performance of one other team, holding team composition constant.
68
In line with this, Rotemberg (1994) develops a model showing how altruism between co-workers may endoge-

79

socially connected to colleagues of similar ability, a trade-off emerges. The theoretical framework
then makes precise how the introduction of feedback and prizes affect this trade-off.
The key empirical results from the field experiment are as follows. First, the introduction of
feedback and of monetary prizes leads to significant changes in team composition. Relative to the
piece rate regime, the share of team members connected by social ties is lower and team members’
ability levels are more similar under the feedback and tournament regimes.
Second, the feedback and tournament schemes have opposite effects on average productivity.
Relative to the piece rate regime, the introduction of feedback significantly reduces average team
productivity by 14%. The further introduction of a monetary prize tournament, conditional on
the provision of feedback, significantly increases productivity by 24%. As made precise in the
theoretical framework, the reduction in average productivity when feedback is provided is consistent with workers being better off sorting into teams on the basis of ability rather than friendship
as feedback increases the strength of incentives faced, and the firm being worse off because it
no longer harnesses the ability of socially connected workers to ameliorate free-riding within the
team. Hence the endogenous formation of teams under feedback reduces the firm’s productivity
overall. In contrast, the tournament incentives are sufficiently high-powered so the increase in
worker’s effort more than offsets any increase in free-riding within teams. Hence the firm’s overall
productivity rises.
Third, the dispersion of productivity increases under both regimes because both effects are
heterogeneous as indicated by the theoretical framework. Quantile regression results show that
the introduction of feedback reduces the productivity of teams at the bottom of the conditional
productivity distribution compared to piece rates, while it has no effect on teams above the 40th
percentile. In contrast, the introduction of prizes increases the productivity of teams at the top of
the conditional productivity distribution compared to piece rates, while it has no effect on teams
below the 30th percentile.
Fourth, focusing on the teams that remain intact after each change in incentives, the authors
evaluate the effect of feedback and prizes on effort, holding constant team composition. They
find that while the effect of feedback on team productivity is positive the magnitude appears
small. This emphasizes that the documented negative effect of feedback is primarily due to the
endogenous changes in team composition caused by the provision of feedback, rather than changes
in behavior of the same team. In contrast the additional introduction of monetary prizes increases
team productivity by 25% for teams that choose to remain intact. Hence the provision of monetary
prizes affects firm performance through both the endogenous changes in team composition and
changes in behavior within the same team.
Finally, the authors present qualitative evidence from a worker survey they conducted. As
highlighted at the start of this section, this type of primary data collection that is inherent in field
nously form in the workplace to facilitate cooperation among workers engaged in team production. Empirically,
Hamilton et al. (2003) provide non-experimental evidence from the introduction of team production in a garment
firm. They find the most able workers sorted first into teams despite a loss in earnings in many cases, suggesting
non-pecuniary benefits associated with teamwork.

80

experiments, allows the authors to shed light on other margins of behavior between workers that
might be affected by the monetary and non-monetary incentives provided, but that the firm does
not collect data on ex ante. This survey data reveals that relative to the piece rate regime, during
the tournament regime significantly fewer workers report pushing their team members to work
hard or giving team members instructions. This is consistent with workers being better matched
by ability and having fewer social connections with their team members under the tournament
regime, so that peer pressure within the team becomes less effective.
By exploring changes in behavior on a range of dimensions, this evidence from the field highlights new directions for research in understanding how agents react to monetary and non-monetary
incentives in workplaces characterized by team production where teams form endogenously.

4.3

The Employment Relationship

The neoclassical label market model emphasizes workers behave opportunistically. For example,
in the model sketched above from Lazear (2000), when workers compensation is not tied to their
performance, as under a fixed hourly wage scheme, all workers exert the minimum effort required
to achieve the minimum output requirement, q0 . There is thus no variation in workers in their
output or pay. We now explore the insights field experiments have provided on the existence and
nature of such opportunistic behavior in real world settings. We do so through examples related
to gift exchange in shirking.
4.3.1

Gift Exchange

The standard labor market model assumes in equilibrium firms pay market clearing wages and
workers provide minimum effort. This prediction does not receive uniform support empirically.
There are numerous cases where employers are observed paying above the market equilibrium wage
(Akerlof 1982), and where workers exert more than the minimum effort level, as we have already
discussed in relation to Lazear (2000) and in many other studies on employee performance under
fixed wages. This has led to the development of the gift-exchange model which is based on the
assumption of their being a positive association between wages and worker effort (Akerlof 1982,
Akerlof and Yellen 1988, 1990). In this class of model, employers offer higher than market clearing
wages, and workers are viewed to positively reciprocate by providing higher than the minimum
required effort.
Clearly such theories are hard to test using non-experimental data: there might be a host of
unobservable factors that create a correlation wages and worker effort. Hence, there has been a
large body of evidence established in laboratory settings on gift-exchange in firm settings, which
began with Fehr et al. (1993). In this original study, the constructed a labor market equilibrium
with excess labor supply so that the equilibrium wage was low. Employees also had no pecuniary
incentive to raise the quality of their work above the minimum required level, so the best response
of employers was to pay the low equilibrium wage. Contrary to the prediction, the majority of
employers attempted to induce employees to invest greater effort by offering them higher than
81

market-clearing wages. On average, this high wage was reciprocated by greater employee effort.
Overall, it was profitable for employers to offer high wage contracts.
Gneezy and List (2006) use a natural field experiment then look for evidence of gift-exchange
in similar real world environments in which equilibrium wages are low and workers earnings are
not tied to their performance. In moving from the lab to the field, one important comparative
static to evaluate is how behavior changes with the duration of the task. In other words, are
the types of positive reciprocity observed by workers in the lab, a long run phenomena. The
psychology literature provides two reasons why the duration of tasks might matter. First, there is
the distinction between hot and cold decision making (Loewenstein and Schkade 1999, Loewenstein
2005). Second, there can be adaption of behavior over time (Gilbert et al. 1998).
Two subject pools were utilized for the field experiments. In each a between subject design
was used. The first field experiment recruited undergraduate students to participate in an effort to
computerize the holdings of a small library at the university. The task was to enter data regarding
the books into a computer database. In the no-Gift treatment, individuals were offered a flat wage
of $12 per hour. In the Gift treatment, once the task was explained to participants, they were
surprisingly paid $20 per hour rather then $12 per hour as advertised. In total 19 workers were
hired for six hours each; 10 were randomly assigned to the no-Gift treatment. The second field
experiment was part of a door to door fundraising drive to support a university research center.
Fundraising solicitors were recruited. All solicitors were told they would be paid $10 per hour,
and those in the Gift treatment were surprisingly told they would actually receive $20 per hour.
In total 23 solicitors were employed over two days, with 10 being randomly assigned to the no-Gift
treatment.69
The main results are as follows. First, in line with earlier evidence from laboratory settings,
there are signs of significant gift exchange in the first few hours of the task, as measured both by
effort in the library task and money raised in the fundraising task. For example, in the library
task, effort is around 25% higher for those in the Gift treatment.
Second, there are significant falls in effort over time. After a few hours, there are no longer any
significant differences in effort between the no-Gift and Gift treatments in either task. Figure 10
illustrates clearly how any positive reciprocity by workers is a short run phenomena in these two
settings. Overall, the results suggest that with the same budget, the employer would have been
better off just paying the market clearing wage as in the no-Gift treatments.
[Figure 10: Gift Exchange in the Field]
While the results go against the standard gift-exchange explanation of the positive association
of wages and effort, they are in line with survey evidence on wage rigidity.70 For example Bewley
69

. In all such experiments, it is important to design the set-up to be able to distinguish gift-exchange from the
alternative explanation of why their should be a positive relationship between wages and effort — efficiency wages.
This hypothesis postulates employers pay above market-clearing wages to motivate workers to increase their effort
level so as to avoid being fired, which reduces employer monitoring (Katz 1986). Hence in both field exeriments
subjects were made aware that this was a one-time recruitment opportunity.
70
Clearly this debate on the existence of positive reciprocity in the field remains in need of further study. Charness
and Kuhn (2010) describe more of the related evidence from the laboratory and other field settings.

82

(1999) considers why wages are downwardly rigid during a recession. He reports that managers
are worried that wage cuts might result in decreases in morale that would subsequently result in
poor worker performance when the economy recovered, if not immediately. This highlights the
importance of fairness considerations in cases of negative reciprocity. With respect to positive
reciprocity, as in this field setting, Bewley’s evidence is less conclusive. He argues that morale
is less important when considering wage increases, but finds that one main consideration when
determining raises is the effect on employee turnover once the recession ends. Bewley’s work
suggests that there appears to be little connection between increasing pay and productivity, except
to the extent that higher wages make it possible to attract, and retain, higher quality workers.
This ties back to the earlier discussion of Lazear (2000) and the subsequent work on monetary
incentives in firms, where it is thought there are qualitatively large selection effects of incentives
driven by changes in workforce composition. Again, more evidence on these channels related to
employee turnover are required to test more precisely a fuller set of theoretical predictions.
4.3.2

Shirking

Field experiments had also provided insights on research questions related to employee shirking
behaviors. The standard economic framework emphasizes employees are rational shirkers: they will
slack when the marginal benefits of doing so outweigh the marginal costs. Firms respond to such
behaviors by choosing compensation and monitoring policies to reduce shirking. as emphasized
above, this view that workers will behave so opportunistically when the marginal returns on their
effort are low, is often contradicted by empirical evidence and predictions on behavior in such
settings from the psychological and sociological literatures (Pfeffer 1996, Kreps 1997, Baron and
Kreps 1999). While we have earlier studied the role of compensation schemes and wage setting
behavior to raise employee effort, we now focus on the effect employer monitoring has on worker
behavior.
If employees are rational cheats then, conditional on a given incentive pay arrangement, a
reduction in monitoring will lead to an increase in shirking. The most powerful sanction available
to employers is typically dismissal. Thus, an increase in shirking resulting from reduced monitoring
should be greatest among individuals for whom the ongoing employment relationship is least
valuable.
As with most of the research questions posed in this chapter, establishing credible empirical
evidence to support the theory is not straightforward. In this case there are two concerns that
have plagued the non-experimental literature. First, shirking behavior is by its nature hard to
detect. Moreover, the ability of the econometrician to detect shirkers might itself be endogenously
related to the employer’s monitoring practices. Second, there might be unobserved factors, such
as other hiring policies, that cause there to be a correlation between monitoring and shirking.
A carefully designed natural field experiment of Nagin et al. (2002) addresses both challenges.
The setting was a telephone solicitation company, with employees dispersed across 16 call centers.
At each call center, telephone solicitors were paid according to the same piece rate incentive

83

scheme, one in which salary increased with the number of successful solicitations. This piece rate,
together with imperfect information on the outcome of pledges, created incentives for employees
to falsely claim that they had solicited a donation.
To curb opportunistic behavior, the employer monitored for false donations by calling back a
fraction of those who had responded positively to a solicitation. Employees were informed when
hired that their activities would be checked by “callbacks” made by management. The results of
each week’s callbacks were communicated to both employees and their immediate supervisors, and
the bad calls were deducted from each individual’s weekly incentive pay. Stronger sanctions for
bad calls were not generally imposed on employees because the number of bad calls was understood
to be a noisy indicator of cheating. For example, donors might sometimes change their mind after
agreeing to pledge money.71
To see if the costs of implementing this monitoring system could be reduced, the firms company
conducted a controlled field experiment. This experiment was “double blind” in the sense that
neither the employees nor their immediate supervisors were aware of departures from “business
as usual.” In the experiment, the employer varied the fraction of bad calls that were reported
back to employees and supervisors at each call center. To more precisely estimate the true rate
of fictitious pledges, the firm simultaneously increasing the true callback rate from 10% to 25% of
pledges. By working closely with the firm, the researchers were able to collect primary survey data
on employee attitudes toward the job, their expected job tenure, and the perceived difficulty of
finding another, comparable job. These relate closely to the underlying theory of rational shirking
behavior. This information is used to test whether those for whom the job was most valuable were
also the employees least likely to engage in opportunistic behavior.
The main results are as follows. First, a significant fraction of employees behave according to
the predictions of the rational cheater model. In particular, employees respond to a reduction in
the perceived cost of opportunistic behavior by increasing the rate at which they shirk. Using the
survey data collected, the authors find the employees who responded to reductions in monitoring
tended to be those who perceived the employer as being unfair and uncaring. On the other hand,
there is no evidence that individuals with good outside options increased shirking by more than
other workers when the rate of monitoring declined. Second, a substantial proportion of employees
do not appear to respond at all to manipulations in the monitoring rate. As with responses to
monetary and non-monetary incentives documented above, there is considerable heterogeneity in
how workers respond to employer monitoring. This underlying heterogeneity highlights the need
to balance the need to reduce the shirking behavior of some workers inclined to rationally cheat,
against those that are unlikely to do so under normal circumstances.
71

Olken (2007 ) presents evidence from a natural field experiment in on the effects of top-down monitoring relative
to grassroots participation on reducing corruption on road projects organized by village committees in Indonesia.
Top-down monitoring via government audits is found to be the far more effective means of reducing corruption.

84

4.4

Moving Forward

Economists have only recently begun to exploit field experiments in firms. This nascent literature
has already highlighted the strengths of this methodology in being closely linked to testing alternative theories of individual behavior, of utilizing field experiments and structural modelling to
make inference on the optimal design of incentive schemes, and to collect primary data to check
for non-expected responses on other margins such as the quality of work, or to probe specific tests
of the theory. We conclude by highlighting a few key areas for future work to consider.
First, the set of field experiments discussed have focused primarily, although not exclusively,
on job tasks in which productivity is easy to observe, measure, compare across workers and time,
and the quality of work performed is relatively easily monitored by management and assignable to
individuals. Yet many jobs in the economy, or at higher tiers of firms’ hierarchies, do not share such
characteristics and more research is required in such settings where performance is evaluated more
subjectively, and might therefore be subject to influence activities (Milgrom 1988), or favoritism
(Prendergast and Topel 1996). As primary data collection is part of the field experimenter’s
arsenal, this approach might especially help to shed light on these types of evaluations and incentive
structures.
Second, most field experiments have been implemented to evaluate the effects of one time
changes in management practices. Standard theory suggests history does not matter and that
these effects should be equal and opposite to changing incentives the other way. This would be
relatively straightforward to test, conditional on being able to control for natural time effects on
behavior. A rejection of the standard model might then imply there can be persistent effects of
short run changes in management practice. Such effects might operate through habit formation or
reference point effects for example, that have been found using non-experimental data from real
world settings (Mas 2006).
Third, given the progression of field experiments exploring the effects of incentives on bottomtier workers, and then to managers in the middle tier of the firm hierarchy, it is natural to ask
whether field experiments might in the future extend to understanding executive pay. The last
two decades have seen a surge in the popularity of performance pay for individuals in executive
and managerial positions, from CEOs down to middle and lower management (Hall and Liebman
1998, Hall and Murphy 2003, Oyer and Schaefer 2004). However as yet there remains mostly an
unwillingness of organizations to experiment in relation to such high stakes positions.72
Broader methodological issues remain to be borne in mind with regards to field experiments
in firms. First, there are concerns over whether the set of firms and organizations that allow field
experiments to be conducted within them, are selected in some way. For example, those firms
that are most likely to gain from changes in management practices might be most amenable to
field experiments on these dimensions. Given the potential for such non-random selection, field
72

A similar set of issues arise for field experiments in public economics. In particular, understanding why individuals give to fundraisers or chartiable causes. Large scale field experiments have so far focused on how to induce
memebrs of the public or those with affinity to the fundraising organization to give. However a disproportionate
amount of funds raised come from a few very wealthy donors. No field experiments have been run on them.

85

experiments ought to be designed to precisely measure differential effects, and less weight given
to the levels effects.
Second, this body of field experiments offers an intriguing insight into whether firms choose
their management practices optimally. Certainly, Shearer’s (2004) study highlights why the firm
was using piece rates and not fixed wages. For the firm studied in Bandiera et al., in each case
the firm followed up on the results of the field experiment by maintaining the incentives that
were introduced. However we have to be careful that while field experiments have focused on the
effects of carefully engineered interventions on productivity, the firm chooses practices to maximize
discounted profits. Productivity increases need to translate in profit increases. An example of this
is in the study by Freeman and Klein (2005) on a US shoe manufacturer, who find that the move
from piece rates to hourly wages reduced productivity, but increased the quality of work to such
an extent that profits rose overall. Clearly, there remains scope for experimentation within firms
to help them learn the optimal behaviors, and for this to have a large impact economy-wide, and
perhaps go some way to explaining large productivity differences across otherwise observationally
similar firms.

5

Households

Much of an individuals life cycle is spent in some form of partnership or family union. Despite
widespread social changes in family structure in Western economies, families and multi-member
households remain a key building block of society. Understanding how households make decisions
has implications for many of the choices we have already touched upon, such as educational choices
for children, labor market participation and labor supply. Shedding light on the household decision
making processes also has profound implications for understanding whether and how policies such
as income transfers and the regulation of marriage and divorce marriage markets, shape these
outcomes.
The benchmark model of household behavior has been the unitary model, pioneered by Samuelson (1956) and Becker (1981). While this generates a rich set of predictions for price and income
effects on household behaviors, it remains silent on how conflicts between spouses are resolved.
Modelling household decision making as the outcome of a bargaining process provides a natural
way in which to introduce conflicts (Manser and Brown 1980, McElroy and Horney 1981, Chiappori 1988). Hence, where these approaches differ is in whether households maximize according to
a common or dictatorial set of preferences–the unitary approach–or whether they seek to maximize a weighted sum of household member preferences–the basis of the bargaining approach. On
the other hand, a key feature of both modelling frameworks is that households are assumed to
make efficient decisions.
Households might reasonably be expected to reach efficient outcomes because they have repeated and long term interactions, in strategic environments characterized by perfect information, and have the ability to communicate costlessly. Nevertheless, a more recent strand of the

86

literature has developed that takes seriously the idea that either household members behave noncooperatively within marriage (Ulph 1988, Chen and Woolley 2001), have private information or
an inability to communicate perfectly (Pahl 1983, Ligon 1998, Goldstein and Udry 1999, Boozer
and Goldstein 2003, Dubois and Ligon 2004), or cannot make binding agreements (Lundberg and
Pollak 2003, Basu 2006, Mazzocco 2004, 2007, Rasul 2008). In each case, household decisions can
then be inefficient.
There are two long-standing strands of the empirical literature on household decision making
that stem from these views of the world. First, there have been a number of attempts to uncover
whether households bargain efficiently, as is implied by both the unitary and collective choice
models. Many of these tests take the form of examining patterns of household demand and
consumption (Browning and Chiappori 1998) or testing for the equality of the marginal product
of labor of household members across economic activities (Udry 1996, Akresh 2005). A first
generation of field experiments on households has begun to shed light on this issue.73
Second, there us an older strand of the literature that uses non-experimental approaches to
test for the assumption on whether households pool income, consistent with the predictions of the
unitary framework, or whether the identity of the income earner matters for outcomes (Thomas
1990, 1994, Hoddinott and Haddad 1995, Duflo 2003, Duflo and Udry 2004, Rangel 2006). Rather
surprisingly given the roots of field experiments in the social experiments of the 1970s, relatively
fewer field experiments have been conducted to help test the specific predictions of either unitary
or collective bargaining frameworks.
A parallel stream of literature relates to the use of social experiments to evaluate conditional
cash transfer programs, that was touched upon earlier. Two notable studies that have used data
from the PROGRESA intervention in rural Mexico are Attanasio et al. (2006) and Todd and
Wolpin (2008). These both combine the experimental variation in PROGRESA transfers across
randomly assigned villages with structural estimation of household’s dynamic behavior to shed
light on outcomes under alternative policy designs.

5.1

Efficiency

Ashraf (2009) presents evidence from a framed field experiment to understand how information and
communication affect household financial decisions. The experiment was conducted with a sample
of current or former clients of a rural bank in the Philippines. The main decision each subject
had to make was over whether to spend or save income received during the experiment. More
precisely, subjects had to choose how to allocate 200 pesos received between: (i) direct deposits
73

Tests based on demand patterns exploit the fact that utility maximization by a single consumer subject to a
linear budget constraint implies Slutsky symmetry, namely the restriction of symmetry on the matrix of compensated price responses. This prediction is typically rejected in household data (Deaton 1990, Browning and Meghir
1991, Banks et al. 1997, Browning and Chiappori 1998). Browning and Chiappori (1998) derive the counterpart
to the Slutsky matrix for multi-member households solely under the assumption of efficient within-household decision making, consistent with Nash bargaining models. They show the assumption of efficiency generates testable
restrictions on household demand functions, and distinguishing the collective model from both the unitary and the
entirely unrestricted case.

87

into their own or a joint account; (ii) committed consumption using redeemable gift certificates.
Each subject was randomly assigned, with his or her spouse, to one of three treatments that varied
the privacy of information spouses had, and the ability of spouses to communicate with each other.
149 married couples are involved in the experiment.74
In the first treatment, subjects are separated from their spouses at the outset of the experiment.
This treatment is referred to as ‘private information without pre-play communication’. Under this
treatment spouses have no information on whether and how much income is received by the spouse,
what decisions they have made, or the outcomes obtained. In the second treatment spouses learn
each others’ payoffs and choice sets. In this treatment, referred to as ‘public information without
pre-play communication’, spouses make simultaneous decisions and so cannot communicate nor
observe each others decisions ex ante. In the final treatment the procedure is as in the previous
treatment except that spouses are able to communicate before making their decisions, and their
decisions are observable to each other. This is referred to as the ‘public treatment’.
Clearly, in the absence of a field experiment, trying to uncover and exploit plausibly exogenous
sources of variation in the information available to spouses or their ability to communicate is
difficult, and likely to be correlated to factors that affect outcomes directly. Hence this research
design allows economists to more carefully scrutinize causal changes in behavior along dimensions
that are theoretically important, yet empirically almost impossible to measure in the absence of
a field experiment. However, as with the other settings considered throughout, field experiments
conducted with households raise important issues that need to be taken into consideration when
interpreting results.
First, in common with laboratory experiments, behavior in framed field experiments might not
mimic behavior in the real world. Ashraf (2009) addresses this concern by running the experiment
in conjunction with a rural bank that all participants were familiar with, and by designing treatments that capture real world differences in communication and information across households in
this setting. Second, households are engaged in repeated interactions outside of the context of the
field experiment. Hence behavior within an experiment can be undone, or potentially reinforced,
by behavior outside of the experiment. To try and address this issue, Ashraf provides payoffs in
the form of person-specific gift certificates. Both methodological issues need to be considered in
all field experiments with households.
Ashraf’s (2009) results shed light on the interplay between information, communication and
gender in household decision making. Relative to field experiments in other settings, when the
experimenter is engaged in primary data collection with households it is of even greater importance
to understand societal norms of behavior within marriage. For example, in the Philippines, women
74

As in any framed field experiment or laboratory experiment, subjects need to be recruited. Framed field
experiments that aim to replicate natural settings — say by working in conjunction with local organizations —
might provide data from which to assess whether participants differ from those that choose not to participate.
As discussed earlier, the nature of self-selection into experiments is a phenomenon that is only beginning to be
understood (Lazear et al. 2009). Equally important, given the relatively small samples sizes inherent to many
framed field experiments, it is crucial to be clear on how large a sample would be required to detect statistically
different observable characteristics between participants and non-participants.

88

are typically in charge of the financial management of the household, making key decisions on
budgeting and allocation. Understanding the context in which the experiment takes place is
crucial for designing treatments that reflect real world trade-offs subjects face, and to closely align
experimental designs with a theoretical framework. Of course, the cost of this precision in any
given context is the limited ability, all else equal, to extrapolate findings to households operating
under very different norms.
The three main results are as follows. First, men are found to be more likely to deposit
money into their own account under the private treatments, and are more likely to commit it
to consumption under the public treatment. Second, the differences in behavior by gender are
subtle. A subset of women — those whose husbands normally control household savings decisions
— behave in the same way as men whose wives normally control household savings decisions.
Third, communication between spouses at the time of decision making induces the majority of
men to place the income into their spouses account rather than consume it or put it into their own
account. To understand these results, Ashraf discusses a framework of income monitoring within
the household where observability of income and communication at the time financial decision
making, significantly change the monitors ability to enforce contracts. The results can then be
understood as spouses responding strategically to changes in information and communication and
contract enforceability. They suggests a specific channel through which asymmetric information
can create inefficient outcomes in financial decision making, by providing incentives to hide one’s
additional income from one’s spouse.75

5.2

Moving Forward

Labor economists have sought to explain a far richer set of research questions than just those
related to behavior within households. Foremost among these other issues has been the research
into the causes and consequences of the formation and dissolution of households. Field experiments
have recently begun to help explore issues related to the formation of households or partnerships
in the first place. Two examples are Fisman et al. (2006) and Fisman et al. (2008) who conduct
a framed field experiment to measure differential preferences in dating across genders and races,
respectively. To do so, both studies analyze individual choices of subjects in an experimental speed
dating game.76
On differential preferences across genders, Fisman et al. (2006) find that women place greater
weight on the intelligence and the race of partner, while men respond more to physical attractiveness. Moreover, men do not value women’s intelligence or ambition when it exceeds their
own.
On racial preferences, Fisman et al. (2008) find that there is a strong asymmetry in racial
75

This strand of field experiments is growing For example, Robinson (2008) presents evidence from a framed field
experiment on 142 households in Kenya to test whether intra-household risk sharing arrangements are efficient,
and if not, whether limited commitment caused by contractual incompleteness partially explains behavior.
76
Stevenson and Wolfers (2007) provide a recent overview of the most pressing issues that are being addressed
in research in the economics of the family.

89

preferences across genders: women of all races exhibit strong same race preferences, while men —
of all races — do not. Second, subjects’ background influences their racial preferences: subjects that
come from locations that are measured to be more racially intolerant, using data from the General
Social Survey and World Values Surveys, reveal stronger preferences for same race preferences.
This is despite the subject pool being drawn from individuals that currently reside away from
home, and attend a top US university. Third, those exposed to other races in early life — as
measured by the fraction of individuals of a given race in the zip code where the subject grew
up–are less willing to date someone from this race, suggesting that familiarity might reduce racial
tolerance. Finally, physically more attractive individuals are less sensitive to the race of potential
partners in the experiment.
This experimental approach provides a nice complement to other non-experimental studies
applying structural methods to estimate similar preference parameters in the context of online
dating services (Hitsch et al. 2010). Given the growth in availability of online data in economic
research, perhaps in the near future we will witness research methods combining field experiments
with interventions akin to audit studies that were previously discussed in relation to the economics
of discrimination.
As yet though, on many aspects of the formation and dissolution of families, few research
designs have credibly exploited experimental sources of variation from which to identify causal
effects. The nature of questions involved might mean these sets of research questions remain
outside the domain of field experiments.

6

Concluding Remarks

Given that complexities of markets severely constrain the ability of traditional economic tools to
examine behavioral relationships, it is not surprising that economists have increasingly turned to
experimental methods. Within this recent trend is a relatively new approach–field experiments–
which have dramatically risen in popularity over the past several years. Since field experiments
will likely continue to grow in popularity as scholars continue to take advantage of the settings
where economic phenomena present themselves, we view this study as an opportunity to step back
and discuss a few of the areas within labor economics wherein field experiments have contributed
to our economic understanding. Our central task is to highlight what we view to be the central
advantages of the field experimental approach: (i) using economic theory to design the null and
alternative hypotheses; (ii) engineering exogenous variation in real world economic environments
to establish causal relations and learn the mechanisms behind them; and (iii) engaging in primary
data collection and often working closely with practitioners.
A second goal of this study is to draw attention to a methodological contribution of field
experiments: complementing other empirical approaches and allowing an exploration of the generalizability of behaviors across settings, such as lab and field behavior. When taking account
of the stock of evidence, it becomes clear how field experiments can play an important role in

90

the discovery process by allowing one to make stronger inference than can be achieved from lab
or uncontrolled data alone. In this way, the various empirical approaches should be thought of
as strong complements–much like theory and empirical modeling–and combining insights from
each of the methodologies will permit economists to develop a deeper understanding of our science.

References
[1]

 . , ..  , . .   , .. ,
 .   (2009) Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and Pilots,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15549.

[2]

 . (2002) “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market”, Journal of
Economic Literature 40: 7-72.

[3]

.. (1980) “The Theory of Social Custom, of Which Unemployment May be One
Consequence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 94: 749-75.

[4]

.. (1982) “Labor Contracts as a Partial Gift Exchange”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 97: 543-69.

[5]

..
 .. (1988) “Fairness and Unemployment”, American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 78: 44-9.

[6]

..
 .. (1990) “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 105: 255-83.

[7]

., ,
 .
 (2005) “Identity and the Economics of Organizations”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 19: 9-32.

[8]

 . (2005) Understanding Pareto Inefficient Intrahousehold Allocations, Institute for
the Study of Labor Discussion Paper 1858.

[9]

 

.

 .

 (2003) “Limited Commitment and Crowding Out of Private

Transfers: Evidence from a Randomised Experiment”, Economic Journal 113: C77-85.
[10]

 . .
 .   (1972) “Production, Information costs, and Economic Organizations”, American Economic Review 62: 777-95.

[11]

., . 
 . .
(2007) “Information Cascades: Evidence from a Field
Experiment with Financial Market Professionals”, Journal of Finance 62: 151-80.

[12]

  ..
 .  (1999) “Race and Gender in the Labor Market”, in Handbook of
Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Vol. 3C, Elsevier Science B.V. 3143-259.

91

[13]

  ..
 . (2001) “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVI: 293-312.

[14]

  . . (2008) “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
Projects”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103: 1481-95

[15]

 .
 .  (2004) “Public Goods Experiments Without Confidentiality: A
Glimpse Into Fund-Raising”, Journal of Public Economics 88: 1605-23.

[16]

 ..
 .. (1999) “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics”, Chapter 23 in Handbook of Labor Economics, 1999, Vol. 3, Part A, pp 1277-366, Elsevier.

[17]



..



.. (2001) “Instrumental Variables and the Search for Iden-

tification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15:69-85.
[18]



..

 .

 (2004) “Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence

from Boston’s Metco Program” American Economic Review 94:5, 1613-34.
[19]

 ..
 .  (1999) “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class
Size on Scholastic Achievement”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 533-75.

[20]

 ..  .  (2002) “New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil Learning”, Economic Journal 112: 735-65.

[21]

 ..
 .  (2009) “The Effects of High Stakes High School Achievement
Awards: Evidence from a Randomized Trial”, American Economic Review 99:4, 1384-414.

[22]

 .., .  , . , . 
 .  (2002) “Vouchers for Private Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment”, American
Economic Review 92: 1535-58.

[23]

 .., .  ,
 .  (2006) “Long-Term Educational Consequences of Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Colombia”,
American Economic Review 96: 847-62.

[24]

 .., . .  , .. , .  
 ..   (2010) “Who Benefits
from KIPP?”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15740.

[25]

 .
sity.

[26]

  
72: 333-47.

(2007) Information Feedback in a Dynamic Tournament, mimeo, Osaka Univer-

.., .



 .    (2005) “Gay Pay in the UK”, Economica

92

[27]

  . (2005) “Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How Do Admission and
Financial Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings?”, Econometrica 73: 1477-524.

[28]

. (1972) “The Theory of Discrimination”, in Discrimination in Labor Markets, O.
Ashenfelter and A. Rees, eds., Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[29]

  . (1990) “Nonparametric Estimates of the Labor-Supply Effects of Negative
Income Tax Programs”, Journal of Labor Economics 8: S396-415.

[30]

 . (2009) “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An Experimental
Study in the Philippines”, American Economic Review 99: 1245-77.

[31]

., . , .. 
, . 
 .  (2009) Risk Pooling,
Risk Preferences, and Social Networks, mimeo, Oxford University.

[32]

., . ,
 .
  (2006), Education Choices in Mexico: Using a
Structural Model and a Randomised Experiment to Evaluate Progresa, IFS Working Paper.

[33]

 ., . ,
 .   (2005) Rising Wage Inequality: The Role of Composition and Prices, mimeo, Harvard University.

[34]


.
 . (2009) The Importance of Relative Performance Feedback Information: Evidence from a Natural Experiment Using High School Students, mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

[35]  ., .
 ..  (1988) “Compensation and Incentives: Practice vs. Theory”, Journal of Finance 43: 593-616.
[36]  . , ., ..
nal of Economics 116: 161-88.

 .

 (2001) “Status in Markets”, Quarterly Jour-

[37]   ., .   ,
 .  (2005) “Social Preferences and the Response to
Incentives: Evidence From Personnel Data”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 917-62.
[38]   ., .   ,
 .  (2007) “Incentives for Managers and Inequality
Among Workers: Evidence from a Firm Level Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
122: 729-74.
[39]   ., .   ,
 .  (2009) Team Incentives: Evidence from a Field
Experiment, mimeo, University College London.
[40]   ., .   ,
 .
coming Review of Economic Studies.

 (2010) Social Incentives in the Workplace, forth-

[41]   ., .   
 .  (2009) Blissful Ignorance? Evidence From a Natural Experiment on The Effect of Individual Feedback on Performance, mimeo, LSE.
93

[42]   ., .   
 .  (2010) “Heterogeneous Class Size Effects: New
Evidence from a Panel of University Students”, forthcoming, Economic Journal.
[43]  . ., .  , . , . 
 .  (2001) Promoting
School Participation in Rural Rajasthan: Results from Some Prosepctve Trials, mimeo,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[44]  . ., ., .
 .  (2007) “Remedying Education: Evidence
from Two Randomized Experiments in India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 123564.
[45]   ., . 
 . (1997) “Quadratic Engel Curves and Consumer Demand”, Review of Economics and Statistics 79: 527-39.
[46]  

. (1938) The Functions of the Executive, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[47]   ..
 . . (1999) Strategic Human Resources: Frameworks for General
Managers, New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
[48]   ..
 . (1994) “The Social Psychology of Organizations and Inequality”,
Social Psychology Quarterly 57: 190-209.
[49]  .
 .   (2009) “Reciprocity in the Workplace”, Experimental Economics
12: 99-112.
[50]   - ., .  , . 
 .-  (2008) Conditional
Cash Transfers in Education: Design Features, Peer and Sibling Effects: Evidence from
a Randomized Experiment in Colombia, The World Bank: Impact Evaluation Series No. 20.
[51]  . (2006) “Gender and Say: A Model of Household Behavior with EndogenouslyDetermined Balance of Power”, Economic Journal 116: 558-80.
[52] .. (1957) The Economics of Discrimination, 2nd ed., Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
[53] .. (1981) A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[54] .
[55] 

(1990) Performance Appraisal, mimeo, Harvard Business School.
.., . 

 ..  (2004) “Evaluating Preschool Programs When

Length of Exposure to the Program Varies: A Nonparametric Approach”, Review of Economics and Statistics 86: 108-32.
[56]  .
Paper 7585.

 .  (2000) Self-Confidence and Social Interactions, NBER Working

94

[57]  .  .  (2003) “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation”, Review of Economic
Studies 70: 489-520.
[58] .
 . (2002) “Measuring the Effect of Sexual Orientation on Income: Evidence of Discrimination?” Contemporary Economic Policy 20: 394-414.
[59]   . (1994) “A Theory of Conformity”, Journal of Political Economy 102: 841-77.
[60] . (2009) Child Control in Education Decisions: An Evaluation of Targeted Incentives
to Learn in India, Mimeo. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[61]   .
 .  

(2004) “Are Emily and Greg More Employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination”, American Economic Review 94: 991-1013.
[62]   .
 .   (2003) “Managing With Style: The Effect of Managers on
Firm Policies”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1169-208.
[63]  . .
 .
 (2005) “Competition and Incentives with Motivated Agents”,
American Economic Review 95: 616-36.
[64]  . .
 .
 (2008) “Status Incentives”, forthcoming American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings.
[65] . . (1999) Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[66]   . (2002) Relative Performance Evaluation and Limited Liability, mimeo University of Essex.
[67] 
  .
 . (2010) Inferring Welfare Maximizing Treatment Assignment under Budget Constraints, NBER Working Paper 14447.
[68]  .
 .  (1996) “Experimental Evaluation of European Labour Market Policy”, International Handbook of Labour Market Policy and Evaluation, G.Scmid and
J.O’Reilly (eds.), Chapter 3, pp. 89-115.
[69]     .
 .   (2009) Tournaments Without Prizes: Evidence from
Personnel Records, mimeo LSE.
[70]  .
 .
  (2010) “Human Resource Management and Productivity”,
Handbook of Labor Economics, in: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor
Economics, edition x, volume x, chapter xx, pages xx-xx Elsevier.
[71]  .  .
- (2002) “Alternative Approaches to Evaluation in Empirical
Microeconomics”, Portuguese Economic Journal 1: 91-115.
95

[72]  . (2007) “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in
the American South”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 73-112.
[73]   .., . ,
 .-  
Journal of Human Resources 41: 692-721.
[74] 

(2006) “Anemia and School Participation”,

. . (2001) “Corporate Tournaments”, Journal of Labor Economics 19: 290-315.

[75]  . (1984) “Revealing Demand for an Actual Public Good”, Journal of Public Economics 24: 135-51.
[76] .
University.



..

 (2003) Poverty Measurement and Dynamics, mimeo Yale

[77]  .
 .  (1981) “Hawthorne, the Myth of the Docile Worker, and Class
Bias in Psychology”, American Psychologist 36: 867-78.
[78]  - ., ..  
 ..   (2007) “Theory and Experiments on
Spatial Competition”, Economic Inquiry 31: 139-65.
[79]   .
 - .  (1998) “Efficient Intra-household Allocations: A General
Characterisation and Empirical Tests”, Econometrica 66: 1241-78.
[80]   .
 .  (1991) “The Effects of Male and Female Labor Supply on
Commodity Demands”„ Econometrica 59: 925-51.
[81] ., .  
 . (1987) “Tournaments and Piece Rates: An Experimental Study”, Journal of Political Economy 95: 1-33.
[82]  . , ., .  ,
 .  (2005) Who Wins and Who Loses from
School Accountability? The Distribution of Educational Gain in English Secondary Schools,
CMPO Working Paper Series 05/128.
[83]  . (1987) “Task-Involving and Ego-Involving Properties of Evaluation: Effects of
Different Evaluation Conditions on Motivational Perceptions, Interest, and Performance”,
Journal of Educational Psychology 79: 474-82.
[84]   ., . .
 .  (2007) “Sorting and Incentive Effects of Pay for Performance: An Experimental Investigation”, Academy of Management Journal 50: 387-405.
[85]  ., . - 
 - . (2006) “Wage Bargaining With On-the-job
Search: A Structural Econometric Model”, Econometrica 74: 323-64.
[86]   .
 .. (1994) “Reinforcement, Reward, and Intrinsic Motivation: A
Meta-Analysis”, Review of Educational Research 64: 363-423.

96

[87]   . .
 ..
(2001) “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for
Black, Hispanic, and White Males”, Journal of Political Economy 109: 455-99.
[88]   . .
 .  (2004) “Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints Using Returns to Schooling”, Journal of Political Economy 112: 132-82.
[89]  . (1999) “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings”, Handbook of Labor Economics, in: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, edition 1,
volume 3, chapter 30, pages 1801-1863 Elsevier.
[90]  .

 .. (1992) “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A

Direct Assessment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 151-200.
[91]   .
 .  (2010), “Do Social Preferences Increase Productivity? Field
Experimental Evidence from Fisherman in Toyama Bay”, Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.
[92] 

.

 .

 (1999) “School Inputs and Educational Outcome in South Africa”,

Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 1047-84.
[93]   ..
 .
(2008) “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of
Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination”, Journal of Political Economy 116: 773-809.
[94]    .
 .  (2002) “Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 817-69.
[95]    .
 -.  (2008) Endogenous Group Formation and Public Goods Provision: Exclusion, Exit, Mergers, and Redemption, UC Santa Barbara Department of Economics Working Paper 13-08.
[96]    .
 . (2010) Pay Inequality, Pay Secrecy, and Effort: Theory and
Evidence, forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics.
[97]    .
 . (2010) Lab Labor: What Can Labor Economists Learn from the
Lab?, NBER Working Paper 15913.
[98]    .
 -.  (2009) “Cooperation and Competition in Intergenerational
Experiments in the Field and Laboratory”, American Economic Review 99: 956-78.
[99]  .
 . (2001) “A Cournot-Nash Model of Family Decision Making”,
Economic Journal 111: 722-48.
[100]  .- (1988) “Rational Household Labor Supply”, Econometrica 56: 63-90.
[101]  . .   (2003) “Testing Contract Theory: A Survey of Some Recent
Work”, in Advances in Economics and Econometrics Theory and Applications: Eighth World
Congress Volume 1, edited by M.Dewatripont, L.P.Hansen and S.J.Turnovsky, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
97

[102]  .
 .   (2009) “Herd Behavior in Financial Markets: An Experiment
with Financial Market Professionals”, Journal of the European Economic Association 7:
206-33.
[103]  . (2009) “The Performance and Competitive Effects of School Autonomy”, Journal
of Political Economy 117: 745-83.
[104]  .
 .. (1993) “Will Affirmative-Action Policies Eliminate Negative
Stereotypes?” American Economic Review 83: 1220-240.
[105] 
.. . 
. (1966) Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
[106]  ., .





 ..   (2006) “The Enrollment Effects of Merit-

Based Financial Aid: Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE Program”, Journal of Labor Economics 24: 761-86.
[107]  .., . . 

 ..

(2006) “The Effect of School Choice on Partici-

pants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries”, Econometrica 74: 1191-230.
[108]   .  ..
(2009) “The Economics of Psychology of Inequality and Human
Development”, Journal of the European Economic Association 7: 320-64.
[109] .., .. , .
 .. (1999) “Gaming Against Managers in Incentive
Systems: Experimental Results with Chinese Students and Chinese Managers”, American
Economic Review 89: 781-804.
[110] . (2001) “Early Childhood Education Programs”, Journal of Economic Perspectives
15: 213-38.
[111] .
 . 
(1995) “Does Head Start Make a Difference?”, American Economic Review 85: 341-64.
[112] .
 . 
(2000) “School Quality and the Longer Term Effects of Head
Start”, Journal of Human Resources 35: 755-74.
[113]   . . (1990) “Price Elasticities from Survey Data: Extensions and Indonesian Results”„ Journal of Econometrics 44: 281-309.
[114] .
 .. (2009) Are High Quality Schools Enough to Close the Achievement Gap? Evidence from Social Experiment in Harlem, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 15473.
[115]  ., . 
mimeo, Stanford University.

 ..

98

 (2009 Class-size and Class Heterogeneity,

[116] .., .

 . . (2001) “Extrinsic Rewards and Intrinsic Motivation
in Education: Reconsidered Once Again”, Review of Educational Research 71: 1-27.
[117]  .
 . (2004) Incentives and Workers’ Motivation in the Public Sector,
Tinbergen Institute Discussion Papers 04-060/1.
[118]   . , .
 .  (1999) “The Economics of Career Concerns, Part II:
Application to Missions and Accountability of Government Agencies.” Review of Economic
Studies 66: 199-217.
[119]  . , . 

 .  (2005) “Incentive-aligned Conjoint Analysis”, Journal

of Marketing Research 42: 67—83.
[120]   . (1980) “Ethics and Ethnography”, Sociological Review 28: 871-91.
[121]  . (2002) “Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An Interpretative Review”, Journal of Human Resources 37: 696-727.
[122]   . .
 .  (2006) “Performance Pay and Multi-dimensional Sorting: Productivity, Preferences and Gender”, Institute for the Study of Labor Discussion Paper No.
2001.
[123]  .  .   (1990) Implementing the National JPTA Study, Department
of Labor, Washington D.C.
[124]  .
 . (2004) Incentives and Nutrition for Rotten Kids: Intrahousehold
Food Allocation in the Phillipines, mimeo UC Berkeley.
[125] . (2003) “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and Intra-household
Allocation in SouthAfrica”, World Bank Economic Review 17: 1-25.
[126] .
 . (2004) Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Cote d’Ivoire: Social
Norms, Separate Accounts, and Consumption Choices, NBER Working Paper No. 10498.
[127] ., . , .

, .  

 .

 (2006) “Saving Incentives for Low-

and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R Block”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121: 1311-46.
[128] ., .
 .  (2009) Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives and the Impact of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 14475.
[129]  .. (1990) “Random Assignment: Practical Considerations from Field Experiments”, Evaluation and Program Planning 13: 125-32.
[130]   .. (1949) Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumer Behavior, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
99

[131] . (2008) Feedback and Motivation in Dynamic Tournaments, mimeo, MIT.
[132] .
 . (2007) Deception and Incentives: How Dishonesty Undermines Effort Provision, IZA Discussion Paper 3200.
[133]    .
 .
  (2008) “Pride and Prejudice: The Human Side of Incentive Theory”, American Economic Review 98: 990-1008.
[134]    .., . .  
 ..  (1997) The Sociology of Groups and the
Economics of Incentives: Theory and Evidence on Compensation Systems, National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 5953.
[135]  .,
. , .
,
.   
, . , . ,
.    .  (2007) “Strategies to Avoid the Loss of Developmental Potential in More Than 200 Million Children in the Developing World”, The Lancet 369: 229-42.
[136] .
 ..
 (1998) “Competition between Private and Public Schools,
Vouchers, and Peer-Group Effects”, American Economic Review 88: 33-62.
[137] ., ..

 .  (2006) “Admission, Tuition, and Financial Aid Policies
in the Market for Higher Education”, Econometrica 74: 885-928.
[138]  .
 .
 (1990) “The Incentive Effects of Tournaments Revisited:
Evidence from the European PGA Tour”, Industrial Labor Relations Review 43: 74—89.
[139]   . 1999 “Executive Compensation and Tournament Theory: Empirical Tests on
Danish Data”, Journal of Labor Economics 17: 262-80.
[140]   . , . 
 -.  (2008) Feedback and Incentives: Experimental
Evidence, IZA Discussion Paper 3440.
[141]   . , .  
 -.  (2008) “Self-selection and the Efficiency of
Tournaments”, Economic Inquiry 47: 530-48.
[142] .
 .  (1999) “Wage Rigidity in a Competitive Incomplete Contract Market”,
Journal of Political Economy 107: 106-34.
[143] .
 .   (2002) “Why Social Preferences Matter — The Impact of Non—
Selfish Motives on Competition, Cooperation and Incentives”, Economic Journal 112: C1C33.
[144] .
 . .   (1999) “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 817-68.
[145] ., . 
 . (1993) “Does Fairness Prevent Market Clearing?
An Experimental Investigation”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 437-59.
100

[146] ., . 
 .
(2004) “Loss Aversion and Labor Supply”, Journal of
the European Economic Association 2: 216-28.
[147]  . . (2007) “Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multidistrict
Economies”, American Economic Review 97: 789-817.
[148]  
., ..
 . (2003) Cultural Diversity, Status Concerns and
the Organization of Work, CEPR Discussion Paper No.3982.
[149] .
 .  (2002) Accountability , Ability and Disability: Gaming the System, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9307.
[150] ..
 ..  (2007) “Individual Teacher Incentives and Student Performance”, Journal of Public Economics 91: 901-14
[151] ..
 ..  (2006) “Do Accountability and Voucher Threats Improve Lowperforming Schools?”, Journal of Public Economics 90:1-2, 239-55.
[152]  .. (1926) “The Arrangement of Field Trials”, Journal of the Ministry of Agriculture
of Great Britain 33: 503-13.
[153] 
., .  , .  
 .    (2006) “Gender Differences in Mate
Selection: Evidence from a Speed Dating Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
121: 673-97.
[154] 
., .  
 .   (2008) “Racial Preferences in Dating: Evidence
from a Speed Dating Experiment”, Review of Economic Studies 75: 117-32.
[155]   . (2000) “Public Service Motivation as an Argument for Government Provision”,
Journal of Public Economics 78: 275-99.
[156]  .. (1985) Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest for Status,
New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
[157]  ..
 ..  (1978) “The Hawthorne Experiments: First Statistical Interpretation”, American Sociological Review 43: 623-43.
[158] 
.. (1987) “Labour Economics”, The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
first edition XXX
[159] 
..
 . .  (2005) “The Last American Shoe Manufacturers: Decreasing Productivity and Increasing Profits in the Shift from Piece Rates to Continuous
Flow Production”, Industrial Relations 44: 307-30.
[160] 
..
 . . (2008) Prize Structure and Information in Tournaments:
Experimental Evidence, mimeo Harvard University.
101

[161] 
.
 ..   (1948) “The Utility Analysis of Choice Involving Risk”, Journal of Political Economy 56: 279-304.
[162] .. (2010) Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination, Handbook of Labor Economics, in: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (ed.), Handbook
of Labor Economics, edition x, volume x, chapter xx, pages xx-xx Elsevier.
[163]  .. . (2004) “The Hawthorne Studies–A Fable for our Times?”, Quarterly Journal
of Medicine 97: 439-49.
[164]   ., . 

 . (2002) “Longer-Term Effects of Head Start”, Ameri-

can Economic Review 92: 999-1012.
[165] 

.. (1987) “Piece-Rate Incentive Schemes”, Journal of Labor Economics 5: 413-29.

[166]  ..
 ..  (1990) “Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief Executive Officers”, Industrial Labor Relations Review 43: 30-52.
[167]  . (1991) An Economic Approach to Process in Pay and Performance Appraisals,
mimeo, University of Chicago GSB.
[168]  .. , .. , ..  , .. 
 ..  (1998) “Immune Neglect: A Source of Durability Bias in Affective Forecasting”, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 75: 617-38.
[169]  . (1991) Manufacturing Knowledge: A History of the Hawthorne Experiments,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
[170]  ., . 
 .
(2007) The Risk of Asking: Measurement Effects from a
Baseline Survey in an Insurance Takeup Experiment, Working paper, World Bank.
[171] .
 .  (2006) “Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes in Developing Countries”, Chapter 16 in Handbook of the Economics of Education, 2006, 945-1017,
Elsevier.
[172] ., . ,
 . (2003) “Teacher Incentives”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9671.
[173] ., . , .  , .   (2004) “Retrospective vs. Prospective
Analyses of School Inputs: The Case of Flip Charts in Kenya”, Journal of Development
Economics 74: 251-68.
[174]  .
 . . (2006) “Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift
Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field Experiments”, Econometrica 74: 1365-384.
[175]  ., . .
 .. (2010) “Clean Evidence of Statistical Disrimination”,
working paper, University of Chicago.
102

[176]  .
 .   (2000) “Pay Enough or Don’t Pay At All”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 115: 791-810.
[177]  .  .  (2000) “Orchestrating Impartiality: the Impact of ‘Blind’ Auditions
on Female Musicians”, American Economic Review 99: 715-741.
[178]   . .  .. (1999) Gender and Land Resource Management in Southern
Ghana, mimeo Yale University.
[179] 
 - . , ., . 
 .  (1991) “Nutritional Supplementation, Psychosocial Stimulation, and Mental Development of Stunted Children: The
Jamaican Study”, The Lancet 338: 1-5.
[180] 
 - . , . , . , ., . 
 . 
(2007) “Developmental Potential in the First 5 Years for Children in Developing Countries,
The Lancet 369: 60-70.
[181]  ..
 ..  (1983) “A Comparison of Tournaments and Contracts”, Journal of Political Economy 91: 349—64.
[182]  . (1988) “Equity and Workplace Status: A Field Experiment”, Journal of
Applied Psychology 73: 606-13.
[183]  ., . 
 .

Journal of Economic Perspectives 13: 157-72.
[184]  .



(1999) “The Social Experiment Market”,

.  (2004) The Digest of Social Experiments, The Urban In-

stitute Press: Washington.
[185]  . , . , .  
 .   (1994) “Autonomy and Incentives in
Chinese State Enterprises”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 183-209.
[186]  .  .
(1998) “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 653-691.
[187]  ..
 ..  (2003) “The Trouble with Stock Options”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17: 49-70.
[188]    .., . .  
 . (2003) “Team Incentives and Worker Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation”,
Journal of Political Economy 111: 465—97.
[189]   .. (1986) “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public
Schools”, Journal of Economic 1Literature 24: 1141-77.
[190]   .. (2006) “School Resources”, Chapter 14 in Handbook of the Economics of
Education, 2006, 865-908, Elsevier.
103

[191]   .. (2007) “Some U.S. Evidence on How the Distribution of Educational Outcomes Can Be Changed”, Chapter 7 in Schools and the Equal Opportunity Problem, 2007,
159-190, MIT Press.
[192]   ..
 ..    (2004) “The Effect of School Accountability Systems
on The Level and Distribution of Student Achievement”, Journal of the European Economic
Association 2: 406-45.
[193]    .
1009-55.

 .

(2004) “Field Experiments”, Journal of Economic Literature 152:

[194]   .
 .
 (1987) “The Theory of Contracts”," In T. Bewley (ed.), Advances in Economic Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[195] 
  ..
 . .
 (2008) “Information, School Choice, and Academic
Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 123: 1373414.
[196]  
..
 . .  (1979) “Attrition Bias in Experimental and Panel Sata: The
Gary Income Maintenance Experiment”, Econometrica 47: 455-73.
[197] 
.. (1992) “Randomization and Social Policy Evaluation”, in C.F.Manski and
I.Garfinkel (Eds.), Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[198] 
..
 .
 (2005) The Productivity Argument for Investing in Young
Children. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Number 13016.
[199] 
...
 . 
(1993) “The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their Methods and Findings”, in Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in
America, M. Fix and R. Struyk, eds., Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
[200] 
..
 . .   (1995) “Assessing the Case for Social Experiments”, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 9: 85-110.
[201] 
.., ..  , . , . . 
 .   (2010) “The Rate of
Return to the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program”, Journal of Public Economics 94:
114-28.
[202]  ., .  
 .  (2010) “Matching and Sorting in Online Dating”,
American Economic Review 100: 130-63.
[203]   .
 .   (1995) “Does Female Income Share In‡uence Household Expenditures? Evidence from Côte d’Ivoire”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 57:
77-96.
104

[204] 

 . (1982) “Moral Hazard in Teams”, Bell Journal of Economics 13: 324-40.

[205] 
 .
 .  (1991) “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design”, Journal of Law, Economics and Organization
7: 24-52.
[206] 

. (1991) The Ethics of Social Research Longman: London.

[207] 
 .
 . . (2009) The Behavioralist Visits the Factory: Increasing Productivity Using Simple Framing Manipulations, NBER Working Paper 15623.
[208]  .. (1992) “Designing an Evaluation of JTPA”„ in C.F.Manski and I.Garfinkel (Eds.),
Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[209] .. (2000a) “The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New Evidence from
Natural Population Variation”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1239-86.
[210] .. (2000b) “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?”, American Economic Review 90: 1209-38.
[211] .. (2000c) “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7867.
[212] ..
 .   (2009) Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls and
How They Affect Their Students’ Achievement, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. w14852.
[213] ..
 .    (2006) Taking Race Out of the Equation: School Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects, Mimeo. Harvard University.
[214]  ..
 .  (2006) “The Effects of Generalized School Choice on Achievement and Stratification: Evidence from Chile’s Voucher Program”, Journal of Public Economics 90:8-9, 1477-503.
[215]   ., .

 

 .   (1997) “The Effects of Human Resource Man-

agement Practices on Productivity”, American Economic Review 86: 291-313.
[216]   .
 .   (2008) “Insider Econometrics: A Roadmap to Estimating
Models of Organizational Performance”, in Handbook of Organizational Economics, editors
R.Gibbons and J.Roberts, forthcoming.
[217]  .. (2002) Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: The Impact of High-Stakes Testing in the Chicago Public Schools, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
8968.
[218]  .. (2004) “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence
from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago”, American Economic Review 94: 233-58.
105

[219]  .. (2005) “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: The Impact of High-stakes
Testing in the Chicago Public Schools”, Journal of Public Economics 89: 761-96.
[220]   .  .  (1995) “The Productivity Effects of Employee Stock—Ownership Plans
and Bonuses: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data”, American Economic Review 85: 391—
414.
[221] .
 .  -  (1970) “Racial Discrimination and White-Collar
Workers in Britain”, Race 11: 397-417.
[222]  ., . . 
 . (1993) “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to
Skill”, Journal of Political Economy 101: 410-42.
[223]   

.

 .   (1979) “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decisions Under

Risk”, Econometrica 47: 313-27.
[224]  .
 .   (1992) “Peer Pressure and Partnerships”, Journal of Political
Economy 100: 801-13.
[225]   .
 .. (2006) “Public Versus Secret Reserve Prices in eBay Auctions:
Results from a Pokémon Field Experiment”, Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 6:
Article 7.
[226]  .. (1986) “Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation”, NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1: 235-76.
[227]  .., .. 
 ..
(2001) “Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early
Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 60754.
[228]  . . (2010) “A Structural Perspective on the Experimentalist School”, forthcoming
Journal of Economic Perspectives.
[229]  .
 .. (1997) “The Career Decisions of Young Men”, Journal of Political
Economy 105: 473-522
[230] . .
 . .   (1996) “Effects of Feedback Intervention on Performance: A
Historical Review, a Meta-analysis, and a Preliminary Feedback Intervention Theory”, Psychological Bulletin 199: 254-84.
[231]  .
 . 
(1994) “Testing the Theory of Tournaments: An Empirical
Analysis of Broiler Production”, Journal of Labor Economics 12: 155—79.
[232]  . .
 ..   (1984) “Scientific Challenges in the Application of Randomised Trials”, Journal of the American Medical Association 252: 2739-45.

106

[233]  . (2003) “Randomized Evaluations of Educational Programs in Developing Countries: Some Lessons”, American Economic Review 90: 102-6.
[234]  . (2006) “Expanding Educational Opportunity on a Budget: Lessons from Randomized Evaluations”, in Improving Education Through Assessment, Innovation, and Evaluation, American Academy of Arts and Sciences: Project on Universal Basic and Secondary
Education, Cambridge: MIT Press.
[235]  . ., .  , .
University.

  (2002) Unbalanced Decentralization, mimeo, Harvard

[236]  . , . , . 
and Statistics 91:3, 437-56.



(2009) “Incentives to Learn”, Review of Economics

[237]  .. (1997) “The Interaction Between Norms and Economic Incentives Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 87:
359-64.
[238] . . (1999) “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 497-532.
[239] . . (2003) “Economic Considerations and Class Size”, Economic Journal 113:
F34-63.
[240] . .
 . (2004) “Another Look at the New York City School Voucher
Experiment”, American Behavioral Scientist 47:5, 658-698.
[241] 
. (1978) “Endogenous Attribution and Intrinsic Motivation”, in D.Greene and
M.R.Lepper (eds.), The Hidden Costs of Reward, Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum Pub.
[242]  .. (1998) “Evidence on Discrimination in Mortgage Lending”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 12: 41-62.
[243]  . (2002) “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives on Pupil
Achievement”, Journal of Political Economy 110: 1286-317.
[244]  . (2009) “Performance Pay and Teacher’s Effort, Productivity, and Grading Ethics”,
American Economic Review 99: 1979-2011.
[245]  ., . 
,  .   (2008) Inside the Black Box of Ability Peer Effect:
Evidence from Variation of Low Achievers in the Classroom, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 14415.
[246]   .. (1995) Personnel Economics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
[247]   .. (1989) “Pay Equality and Industrial Politics”, Journal of Political Economy 87:
1261—84.
107

[248]   .. (2000) “Performance Pay and Productivity”, American Economic Review 90:
1346-61.
[249]   .. (2001) “Educational Production”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 777803.
[250]   .. (2005) “Output-Based Pay: Incentives or Sorting?” Research in Labor Economics — Accounting for Worker Well-Being, edited by S.W.Polachek, 23: 1-25.
[251]   ..  .  (1981) “Rank Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts”,
Journal of Political Economy 89: 841-64.
[252]   ..
 ..   (2007) “Personnel Economics: The Economist’s View of Human
Resources”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 21: 91-114.
[253]   .., .   
mimeo, Stanford University.

 . . (2009) Sorting and Social Preferences,

[254] .., .. ,
 . . 
(1995) “"Reward Innovations in Fortune
1000 Companies”, Compensation and Benefits Review 27: 76-80.
[255]  ..  .   (2002) The Evolution of Cooperation Through Imitation,
mimeo UCLA.
[256]  . .
 . .
(2007a) “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social
Preferences Reveal about the Real World?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 21: 153-74.
[257]  . .
 . . (2007b) “Viewpoint: On the Generalizability of Lab Behavior to
the Field”, Canadian Journal of Economics 40: 347-70.
[258]  . .
 . . (2008) “Field Experiments in Economics: The Past, the Present,
and the Future”, European Economic Review 53: 1-18.
[259] 

. .

 . .

(2009)

[260]  . ., . .
 . .  (2010) “The Effect of Financial Incentives on High
School Achievement: Evidence from Randomized Experiments”, Working Paper.
[261]  . (1998) “Risk-Sharing and Information in Village Economies”, Review of Economic
Studies 65: 847-64.
[262]  .. (2003a) “Using Random nth Price Auctions to Value Non-market Goods and Services”, Journal of Regulatory Economics 23: 193-205.
[263]  .. (2003b) “Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 41-71.

108

[264]  .. (2004a) “Young, Selfish and Male: Field Evidence of Social Preferences”, Economic
Journal 114: 121-49.
[265]  .. (2004b) “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence
from the Field”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 49-89.
[266]  .. (2004c) “Neoclassical Theory Versus Prospect Theory: Evidence from the Marketplace”, Econometrica 72: 615-25.
[267]  .. (2006) “Field Experiments: A Bridge Between Lab and Naturally Occurring Data”,
Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 6: Article 8.
[268]  ..
 .    (2010) “Exploring the Link between Market Power and the
Nature and Magnitude of Discrimination, working paper, University of Chicago.
[269]  ..
 .. (2005) “Conspiracies and Secret Price Discounts in the Marketplace: Evidence from Field Experiments”, Rand Journal of Economics 36: 700-17.
[270]  ..
 .. (2008) “Field Experiments”, The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, second edition, eds. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan.
[271]  .. , ..
 .  (2009) “Checkmate: Exploring Backward Induction
Among Chess Players”, forthcoming American Economic Review.
[272]  .. , . 
 .   (2010) So You Want to Run an Experiment, Now
What? Some Simple Rules of Thumb for Optimal Experimental Design, NBER Working
Paper No. 15701.
[273] . , . 
 .  (2002) The Incentive Effects of Interim Performance
Evaluations, CARESS Working Paper 02-09.
[274] 
 . (2005) “Hot-Cold Empathy Gaps and Medical Decision Making”, Health
Psychology 24: 49-56.
[275] 
 .
 .   (1999) “Wouldn’t it be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings”, in D.Kahneman, E.Diener and N.Schwartz (eds.), Well Being: The Foundations of
Hedonic Psychology, Russell Sage Foundation.
[276]   .., .. 
 . . (1987) “Behind the Mask: The Politics of
Performance Appraisal”, The Academy of Management Executive 1: 183-93.
[277]  -. (1999) “Using Field Experiments to Test Equivalence Between Auction
Formats: Magic on the Internet”, American Economic Review 89: 1063-80.
[278] ., .  (2007) “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidence
from a Regression Discontinuity Design”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 159-208.
109

[279]  .
 .  (2003) “Efficiency in Marriage”, Review of Economics of the
Household 1: 153-67.
[280]  ..
 . . (2003) “Value Elicitation in Laboratory and Retail Environments”,
Economics Letters 79: 27-34.
[281]

..
 . .   (1989) “Implicit Contracts, Incentive Compatibility,
and Involuntary Unemployment”, Econometrica 57: 447-80.

[282]

  . (1984) “Work Incentives, Hierarchy, and Internal Labor Markets”, Journal
of Political Economy 92: 486-507.

[283]

  .
 .
 (2004) “CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment”,
forthcoming Journal of Finance.

[284]

. (1999) “Existing Labor Market Data: Current and Potential Research Uses”,
in J.Haltiwanger, M.Manser, and R.Topel, eds., Labor Statistics Measurement Issues, The
University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

[285]

.
 . (1980) “Marriage and Household Decision-Making: A Bargaining
Analysis”, International Economic Review 21: 31-44.

[286]

.. (1995) Learning About Social Programs from Experiments with Random Assignment of Treatments, University of Wisconsin-Madison: Institute for Research on Poverty,
Discussion Paper 1061-95.

[287]

..
 .   (1992) Introduction, in C.F.Manski and I.Garfinkel (eds.),
Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs, Cambridge: Harvard University Press: Cambridge.

[288]

. (2006) “Pay, Reference Points, and Police Performance”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121: 783-821.

[289]
[290]

[291]

.

 . 

 (2009) Peers at Work, forthcoming, American Economic Review.

. , .  ,
 .-
(2003) The Quantum Opportunities
Program Demonstration: Implementation and Short-Term Impacts, Mathematica Policy
Research Report 8279—093.
. (1933) The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization, New York: Macmillan.

[292]

. (2004) “Saving, Risk Sharing, and Preferences for Risk”, American Economic
Review 94: 1169-182.

[293]

. (2007) “Household Intertemporal Behaviour: A Collective Characterization
and a Test of Commitment”, Review of Economic Studies 74: 857-95.
110

[294]

.
 .  (1981) “Nash-bargained Decisions: Towards a Generalization
of the Theory of Demand”, International Economic Review 22: 333-49.

[295]

.., . 
 ..  (1965) “Split Roles in Performance Appraisal”, Harvard Business Review 21-9.

[296]

.. (1995) “Natural and Quasi-natural Experiments in Economics”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13: 151-61.

[297]

.
 .  (2004) “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health
in the Presence of Treatment Externalities”, Econometrica 72: 159-217.

[298]

 .. (1988) “Employment Contracts, Influence Activities, and Efficient Organization Design”, Journal of Political Economy 96: 42—60.

[299]

 ..
 . (1990) “The Efficiency of Equity in Organizational Decision
Processes”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80: 154-9.

[300]

 .. (1981) The Negative Income Tax: Would it Discourage Work? Monthly Labor
Review.

[301]

 .. (1999) “Econometric Methods for Labor Market Analysis”, Chapter 24 in Handbook of Labor Economics, 1999, XXX, Elsevier.

[302]

 ., .  ,
omy 115: 338-63.

[303]

 . (2004) “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from PlantLevel Production Functions”, American Economic Review 94: 656-90.

[304]

   .
 .    
(2007) Teacher Incentives in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from India. Mimeo Harvard University.

[305]

 ., .. , .
 ,  ..  (2002) “Monitoring, Motivation, and
Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior in a Field Experiment”, American Economic Review 92: 850-73.

[306]


 ..
 .   (1997) “Productivity under Group Incentives: an Experimental Study”, American Economic Review 87: 314-41.

[307]

..
 ..   (1983) “Prizes and Incentives: Toward a General Theory
of Compensation and Competition”, Bell Journal of Economics 14: 21—43.

[308]

 . (2000) “Mobility, Targeting and Private School Vouchers”, American Economic
Review 90:1, 130-46.

 .  (2007) “Contests for Status”, Journal of Political Econ-

111

[309]

.
 .   (2007) “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do
Men Compete Too Much?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 1067-1101.

[310]  .. (2007) “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in. Indonesia”, Journal of Political Economy 115: 200-49.
[311]  . . (1962) “On the Social Psychological Experiment: With Particular Reference to
Demand Characteristics and their Implications”, American Psychologist 17: 776-83.
[312]  ...
 ..
(1968) “Incentive and Disincentive Experimentation for
Income Maintenance Policy Purposes”, American Economic Review 58: 754-73.
[313] .
 .   (2004) “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All Employees? An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories”, Journal of Financial Economics
76: 99-133.
[314] .

 .   (2010) Personnel Economics: Hiring and Incentives, Handbook

of Labor Economics, in: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics,
edition x, volume x, chapter xx, pages xx-xx Elsevier.
[315]   ..
 .   (1999) “The Response of Worker Effort to Piece Rates: Evidence from the British Columbia Tree-Planting Industry”, Journal of Human Resources
643-67.
[316]   ..
 .   (2000) “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages, and Incentive Effects:
Statistical Evidence from Payroll Records”, International Economic Review 41: 59-92.
[317]  .. (1983) “The Allocation of Money and the Structuring of InequalityWithin Marriage”, The Sociological Review 31: 237-62.
[318]    ., ., .
 .  (2003) “School Vouchers: Results
from Randomized Experiments”, In The Economics of School Choice, 107-144, University
of Chicago Press.
[319] . (1996) Competitive Advantage Through People: Unleashing The Power of The
Work Force, Harvard Business Press, Cambridge, Mass.
[320]  . (1972) “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism”, American Economic Review, LXII: 659-61.
[321] . . (1920) The Economics of Welfare.
[322] .
 . (2003) “Schooling, Family Background, and Adoption: Is It
Nature or Is It Nurture”, Journal of Political Economy 111: 611-41.
[323]  ..
 . .  (1997) “Resources and Relationships: Social Networks and
Mobility in the Workplace”, American Sociological Review 62: 673-93.
112

[324]  
. (1999) “The Provision of Incentives in Firms”, Journal of Economic Literature 37: 7-63.
[325]  
. (2001) Selection and Oversight in the Public Sector with the Los Angeles
Police Department as an Example, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 8664.
[326]  
.
 ..  (1996) “Favoritism in Organizations”, Journal of Political
Economy 104: 958-78.
[327]  . , .  , . ,
 .   (1990) Evaluation of the Food
Stamp Employment and Training Program: Final Report, Bethesda, Md.: Abt Associates:
Bethesda, MD.
[328]  .

(1985) The Politics and Ethics of Fieldwork. Sage: London.

[329]   .
 .  (1993) “AMO-kurs: Hvem søker, hvem får plass - og hvem får
jobbetterpå?” Søkelys på arbeidsmarkedet.
[330]   .
 ..   (1999) “First Impressions Matter: A Model of Confirmatory
Bias”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 37-82.
[331]  . . (2006) “Alimony Rights and Intrahousehold Allocation of Resources: Evidence
from Brazil”, Economic Journal 116: 627-58.
[332]  . (2008) “Household Bargaining Over Fertility: Theory and Evidence from Malaysia”,
Journal of Development Economics 86: 215-41.
[333]  . (2005) School Accountability and the Distribution of Student Achievement, mimeo
Columbia University.
[334] .
 .  (2004) “The Impact of Social Approval and Framing on Cooperation
in Public Good Situations”, Journal of Public Economics 88: 1625-44.
[335]  ..
 . (2002) “Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market Place”,
Economic Journal 112: F480-F518.
[336]  ..
 . (2006) “An Experimental Investigation of Sexual Discrimination
in Hiring in the English Labor Market”, B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 6:
Advances Article 1.
[337] . (1982) “The Hawthorne Effect: Persistence of a Flawed Theory”, Psychology Today
16: 71-4.
[338]  . ., . .  ,
 .. 
Achievement”, Econometrica 73: 417-59.
113

(2005) “Teachers, Schools, and Academic

[339]   . (2008) Limited Insurance Within the Household: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Western Kenya, mimeom, UC Santa Cruz.
[340] . (2009) “Field Experiments in Class Size from the Early Twentieth Century”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23: 211-30.
[341]   ..
 . 
Harvard University Press.

(1939) Management and the Worker, Cambridge:

[342]   . (1982) “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings”, Bell Journal of
Economics 13: 311-23.
[343]   . (1986) “The Theory of Equalizing Differences”, in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986.
[344]     .
 . (1983) “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects”, Biometrika 70: 41-55.
[345]   . .
 .. (2000) “Natural ‘Natural Experiments’ in Economics”,
Journal of Economic Literature 38: 827-74.
[346]  .. (1970) An Experimental Study of the Negative Income Tax, Child Welfare, December.
[347]   .. (1994) “Human Relations in the Workplace”, Journal of Political Economy
102: 684—717.
[348]  . (1998) “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
Milwaukee Parental Choice Program”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 133:2, 553-602.
[349] . (1952) “Quota Restriction and Goldbricking in a Machine Shop”, American Journal
of Sociology 57: 427—42.
[350]  . , .  
 .  (2004) Willingness-to-pay for Food Safety: An
Experimental Investigation of Quality Certification on Bidding Behavior”, European Review
of Agricultural Economics 31: 409-25.
[351]  .. (1990) “Comment: Neyman (1923) and Causal Inference in Experiments and
Observational Studies”, Statistical Science 5: 472-80.
[352]

  .. (1956) “Social Indifference Curves”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 70:
1-22.

[353]

  .
 .   (1988) “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making”, Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 1: 7-59.

114

[354]

 . (2008) A Note on Peer Effects Between Teams, forthcoming, Experimental
Economics.

[355]  . . (2004) “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa
Poverty Program”, Journal of Development Economics 74: 199-250.
[356]   . (2002) Blood, Bribes, and the Crowding-out of Altruism by Financial Incentives, mimeo, Toulouse University.
[357]  . (1999) Development as Freedom. New York: Knopf.
[358]  .
 . 
sity of Michigan.



(1999) Preference Evolution and Reciprocity, mimeo Univer-

[359]  .
 ..   (1984) “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device”, American Economic Review 74: 433-44.
[360]  .. (2004) “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives: Evidence From a Field
Experiment”, Review of Economic Studies 71: 513—34.
[361] ..
 . 
 (1971) “Comparison of Bayesian and Regression Approaches to the Study of Information Processing in Judgment”, Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance 6: 649-744.
[362]

.. (1927) “Research on Industrial Illumination”, The Tech Engineering News November 257-282.

[363] .
 .    (1983) “A Multi-Stage Model of Bargaining”, Review of Economic Studies 50: 411-26.
[364]   . . (2005) "Anonymity in Giving in a Natural Context — A Field Experiment
in 30 Churches”, Journal of Public Economics 89: 2301-23.
[365]   - 
. (1923a) “On the Application of Probability Theory to Agricultural Experiments. Essay on Principles”, Section 9, Statistical Science 5: 465-72. Translated and
edited bv D.M. Dabrowska and T.P. Speed from the Polish original, which appeared in
Roczniki Nauk Rolniczyc, Tom X (1923): 1-51 (Annals ofAgricultura1 Sciences).
[366]   - 
. (1923b) “Contributions of the Theory of Small Samples Drawn from a
Finite Population”, Biometrika 17: 472-79 (The note on this republication reads, “These
results with others were originally published in La Revue Mensuelle de Statistique, publ,
parl’office Central de Statistique de la Rtpublique Polonaise, tom. vi. pp. 1-29, 1923”).
[367]

. (2003) “College Education and the Mid-century GI Bills”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118: 671-708.

115

[368]

. (1986) “Forestalling the Demise of Empirical Economics: The Role of Microdata in Labor Economics Research”, Chapter 7 in Handbook of Labor Economics
(O.Ashenfelter and R.Layard, editors), XXX Elsevier.

[369]

  .
 . (2007) “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving
Forces”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 21: 27-52.

[370]

 .. (1975) “Incentives, Risk, and Information: Notes Towards a Theory of Hierarchy”, Bell Journal of Economics 6: 552-79.

[371]

 . (1990) “Fisher’s Contributions to Agricultural Statistics”, Biometrics 46: 937-45.

[372]

.
 . .N   B   E   R   (2008) “Labour
Economics (New Perspectives)”, The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, second edition,
eds. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan.

[373]

 . (1980) “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice”, Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 1: 39-60.

[374]


.. (1990) “The Impact of Race on Managers’ Experiences of Developmental Relationships”, Journal of Organizational Behavior 11: 479-92.

[375]


.. (1994) “Like Father, Like Son or Like Mother, Like Daughter: Parental Education and Child Health”, Journal of Human Resources 29: 950-89.

[376]

 .. (1913) Educational Psychology, Oxford: Columbia University.

[377]

.  .. (2006) “Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in Mexico: Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling
and Fertility”, American Economic Review 96: 1384-1417.

[378]

. .
 . . (1989) “Beyond Simple Demographic Effects: The Importance of
Relational Demography in Superior-Subordinate Dyads”, Academy of Management Journal
32: 402-23.

[379] . (1994) “Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical Investigation
in Northern Nigeria”, Review of Economic Studies 61: 495-526.
[380] .. (1988) A General Non-cooperative Nash Model of Household Consumption Behaviour, University of Bristol Working Paper 88/205
[381]   ., . 
 . . (2007) “Incentive Effects and Overcrowding in
Tournaments: An Experimental Analysis”, Experimental Economics 10: 345-68.
[382]  
 . (2004) “Rational Overoptimism (and Other Biases)”, American Economic
Review 94: 1141-51.
116

[383]  . (1934) The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions, New
York: Modern Library.
[384] 
.
 .  (1996) “Informed Consent in Human Experimentation Before
the Nuremberg Code”, British Medical Journal 313:1445-9.
[385]  .  .N   B   E   R   (2005) “A Surprising Effect of Feedback on Learning”, Learning and Instruction 15: 589-602.
[386] .. (2006) “Managing Growth to Achieve Efficient Coordination in Large Groups”,
American Economic Review 96: 114-26.
[387]    . (2003) “Sexual Orientation Discrimination in Hiring”, Labour Economics 10: 629-42.
[388]   . .
 ..   (1997) “Relational Demography in SupervisorSubordinate Dyads: Impact on Subordinate Job Satisfaction, Burnout, and Perceived Procedural Justice”, Journal of Organizational Behavior 18: 351-62.
[389] 
..
 . .’ (1998) “Demography and Diversity in Organizations: A
Review of 40 Years of Research”, Research in Organizational Behavior 20: 77—140.
[390] white and lakey
[391]  . , ..  ,
 . (2007) “The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production of Knowledge”, Science 316: 1036-9.
[392]  . (1998) “Evidence on Discrimination in Consumer Markets”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives XII: 23-40.
[393] 

.. (2003) “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence From a Natural
Experiment”, Review of Economics and Statistics 85: 9-23.

117

Table 1: A Typology of Field Experiments
Non Experimental Natural Experiments

Natural Field
Experiments

Framed Field Experiment

Artefactual Field
Experiment

Laboratory

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

In the Field

X

X

X

X

Real Incentives

X

X

X

X

Real Task or Information

X

X

X

X

Aware of experiment
Appropriate people

X

X

Researcher Intervenes
Exogenous change

X

X

Table 2: Published Research in Labor Economics by Decade
Year of Publication: 1990-99

Year of Publication: 2000-09

Theory

Empirics

Total

Theory

Empirics

Total

Demand for education/formation of human capital:

7

29

36

10

46

56

The demand and supply of labour:

10

58

68

20

53

73

Organisation of labour markets

28

59

87

20

48

68

Firm behaviour/personnel economics

26

23

49

33

28

61

Household economics

8

20

28

12

27

39

Aging and Retirement

0

6

6

0

6

6

Crime

2

2

4

1

11

12

Total

81

197

278

96

219

315

Subfield

Notes: The table is based on all published papers in the leading general interest journals of the American Economic Review, Econometrica, the Journal of Political Economy, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, and the Review of Economic
Studies. The numbers do not include papers and proceedings volumes. We use the Journal of Economic Literature classifications to place journal articles into one subfields within labor economics.

Table 3: Published Papers 2000-9 by Subfield and Empirical Method
Theoretical

Non
Experimental

Natural
Experiments

Natural Field
Experiments

Framed Field
Experiment

Artefactual Field
Experiment

Laboratory

Demand for education/formation of human capital:
Early childhood interventions on human capital accumulation

2

3

3

1

0

0

0

(RCT) conditional cash transfer programs

1

2

1

1

1

0

0

Educational production function

3

6

9

0

3

0

0

Educational Spillovers

1

3

2

0

0

0

0

Returns to education

3

8

3

0

0

0

0

The demand and supply of labour:
Wage and tax sensitivities

6

7

1

1

0

0

0

Determinants of wages/discrimination

12

28

4

1

0

0

4

Segmented labour markets

0

1

2

0

0

0

0

Demand for labour / skills

2

3

0

0

0

0

1

Organisation of Labour Markets
Unions, minimum wages and other labour market institutions

1

7

3

0

0

0

1

Labour market programs

0

1

3

3

0

0

0

Public sector labour markets

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Occupational choice/ intergenerational mobility/ labour market segmentation

7

9

0

0

0

0

2

Immigration

0

6

2

0

0

0

0

Unemployment

12

13

3

0

0

0

0

Employee and executive incentives

16

4

4

5

0

0

2

The emp
employment
loyment relationship / gift exc
exchange
hange

1

0

0

2

0

1

0

Peer effects

1

2

2

0

0

0

0

Workplace organisation

15

4

0

2

0

0

0

Firm Behavior/ Personnel Economics

Household Economics
Family size

1

3

2

0

0

0

0

Marital bargaining

2

0

0

0

1

0

0

The marriage market

6

4

3

1

0

0

0

Child Labour

2

2

0

0

0

0

0

Household Labour Supply

0

2

1

0

0

0

0

Female Participation

1

3

5

0

0

0

0

Retirement
Decision to retirement

0

2

1

1

0

1

0

Health and retirement

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

Crime
Crime

1

5

6

0

0

0

0

Total:

96

129

60

18

5

2

10

Notes: The table is based on all published papers in the leading general interest journals of the American Economic Review, Econometrica, the Journal of Political Economy, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, and the Review of
Economic Studies. The numbers do not include papers and proceedings volumes. We use the Journal of Economic Literature classifications to place journal articles into one subfields within labor economics.

Table 4: Testing Theory by Empirical Method, Published Papers 2000-9
Research Method

Theoretical

Non Experimental

Natural
Experiments

Natural Field
Experiments

Framed Field
Experiment

Artefactual Field
Experiment

Laboratory

Method
Pure Theory

Theory

96

0

0

0

0

0

0

Theory and
Evidence

Test one theory

0

61

5

4

0

0

1

Test between theories

0

10

6

5

1

1

5

Pure Evidenc
e
Evidence

Pure Emprics

0

58

49

9

4

1

4

96

129

60

18

5

2

10

Notes: The table is based on all published papers in the leading general interest journals of the American Economic Review, Econometrica, the Journal of Political Economy, the Quarterly Journal of
Economics, and the Review of Economic Studies. The numbers do not include papers and proceedings volumes. We use the Journal of Economic Literature classifications to place journal articles into one
subfields within labor economics.

Figure 1: Simple Illustration of the Selection Problem

g
g
Figure
2: A Field Experiment Bridge

Figure 3: Median weekly earnings of male workers. Year 2000 dollars. Source: Bureau
of Labor Statistics

Figure 4: Median weekly earnings of female workers. Year 2000 dollars. Source: Bureau of Labor
Statistics.

Figure 5: Male unemployment rates (annual averages) for men over 20. Source: Bureau of Labor
Statistics.

Figure 6: Female unemployment rates (annual averages) for women over 20. Source: Bureau of
Labor Statistics.

Figure 7: Labor force participation rates, 20 years and older. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Figure 8: Complementary Experiment I Summary

Figure 1: Complementary Experiment I Summary
700
600

Dollars

500
400
300
200
100
0
Non-Disabled

Disabled

Replicate Exp. 1 Replicate Exp. 1

Non-Disabled

Disabled

"More Quotes"

"More Quotes"

Treatment Type

Figure 9: Compensation Before and After At Safelite

bq‐K

q0

q*

Figure 10: Gift Exchange and the Duration of Tasks

q

