                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE COLLATERAL CHANNEL:
           HOW REAL ESTATE SHOCKS AFFECT CORPORATE INVESTMENT

                                           Thomas Chaney
                                             David Sraer
                                           David Thesmar

                                        Working Paper 16060
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16060


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




We are grateful to Institut Europlace de Finance for financial support. For their helpful comments,
we would like to thank Nicolas Coeurdacier, Stefano DellaVigna, Denis Gromb, Luigi Guiso, Thierry
Magnac, Ulrike Malmendier, Atif Mian, Adam Szeidl and Jean Tirole. We are especially indebted
to Chris Mayer, for providing us with the Global Real Analytics data. We are also grateful to seminar
participants at INSEE in Paris, USC, UC San Diego Rady School of Management, NYU Stern, MIT
Sloan, the University of Amsterdam, London Business School, Oxford’s Sa d School of Business,
the University of Chicago, the European University Institute in Florence, Bocconi University, Toulouse
University, the Kellog School of Management, Princeton University, the Haas School of Business
at Berkeley, and the University of Naples. We are solely responsible for all remaining errors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Thomas Chaney, David Sraer, and David Thesmar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate Shocks Affect Corporate Investment
Thomas Chaney, David Sraer, and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 16060
June 2010
JEL No. E44,G3

                                              ABSTRACT

What is the impact of real estate prices on corporate investment? In the presence of financing frictions,
firms use pledgeable assets as collateral to finance new projects. Through this collateral channel, shocks
to the value of real estate can have a large impact on aggregate investment. Over the 1993-2007 period,
the representative U.S. corporation invests 6 cents out of each additional dollar of collateral. To compute
this sensitivity, we use local variations in real estate prices as shocks to the collateral value of firms
that own real estate. We address the endogeneity of local real estate prices using the interaction of
interest rates and local constraints on land supply as an instrument. We address the endogeneity of
the decision to own land (1) by controlling for observable determinants of ownership and (2) by looking
at the investment behavior of firms before and after they acquire land. The sensitivity of investment
to collateral value is stronger the more likely a firm is to be credit constrained.


Thomas Chaney                                        David Thesmar
Department of Economics                              HEC Paris
University of Chicago                                1 rue de la libération
1126 East 59th Street                                78351 Jouy-en-Josas cedex
Chicago, IL 60637                                    France
and NBER                                             thesmar@hec.fr
tchaney@uchicago.edu

David Sraer
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance and International Econ
26 Prospect Avenue, Princeton, NJ 08540
dsraer@princeton.edu
1     Introduction
In the presence of contract incompleteness, Barro (1976), Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) and Hart
and Moore (1994) point out that collateral pledging enhances a firm’s debt capacity. Providing
outside investors with the option to liquidate pledged assets ex post acts as a strong disciplining
device on borrowers. This, in turn, eases financing ex ante. Asset liquidation values thus play a
key role in the determination of a firm’s debt capacity. This simple observation has important
macroeconomic consequences: as noted by Bernanke and Gertler (1989), business downturns
will deteriorate assets values, thus reducing debt capacity and depressing investment, which
will amplify the downturn. This “collateral channel” is often the main suspect for the severity
of the Great Depression (Bernanke (1983)) or for the extraordinary expansion of the Japanese
economy at the end of the 80s (Cutts (1990)). In the current context of abruptly declining real
estate prices in the U.S., an assessment of the relevance of this “collateral channel” is called for.
This paper attempts to empirically uncover the microeconomic foundation for this mechanism.

    We show that over the 1993-2007 period, a one dollar increase in collateral value leads the
representative U.S. public corporation to raise its investment by 6 cents. This sensitivity can
be quantitatively important in the aggregate. This is because real estate represents a sizable
fraction of the tangible assets that firms hold on their balance sheet. As we show in this paper,
in 1993, among public firms in the US, 58% reported at least some real estate ownership. Among
these land-holding firms, the market value of real estate accounted for 19% of the firm’s total
market value. To get at this 6 cents sensitivity, we use variations in local real estate prices,
either at the state or the city level, as shocks to the collateral value of land holding firms. We
measure how a firm’s investment responds to each additional dollar of real estate that the firm
actually owns, and not how investment responds to real estate shocks overall. This empirical
strategy uses two sources of identification. The first comes from the comparison, within a local
area, of the sensitivity of investment to real estate prices accross firms with and without real
estate. The second comes from the comparison of investment by land holding firms across areas
with different variations in real estate prices. The methodology is similar to Case et al. (2001)
in their study of home wealth effects on household consumption.
    Two sources of endogeneity might affect our estimation: (1) real estate prices may be cor-
related with the investment opportunities of land holding firms and (2) the decision to own or
lease real estate may be correlated with the firm’s investment opportunities. As in Himmelberg
et al. (2005) or Mian and Sufi (2009), we address the first source of endogeneity by instrument-
ing local real estate prices using the interaction of long-term interest rate with local housing
supply elasticity. We do not have a proper set of instruments to deal with the second source of
endogeneity. We make two attempts at gauging the severity of the bias it may cause. We first
control for the observable determinants in the ownership decision, which leaves the estimation
unchanged. Second, we estimate the sensitivity of investment to real estate prices for firms that
acquire real estate before and after they do so. Before acquiring real estate, future purchasers
are statistically indistinguishable from firms that never own real estate. The sensitivity of their
investment to real estate prices becomes large, positive and significant only after they acquire
real estate.
    Our paper is related to existing work on collateral and investment. Jie Gan (2006) in an
important contribution, showed, using a difference-in-difference like approach, that land holding

                                                 2
Japanese firms were more affected by the bust of the real estate bubble in the beginning of
the 90s than firms with no real estate. We view our contribution as complementary. First,
one might worry that, because the Japanese economy is bank-oriented, the role of collateral
might be much larger than in a more market-based economy like the U.S. Second, her paper
exploits extreme market conditions, and in particular a period where banks in Japan were
distressed. This might affect the degree of financing frictions that firms face, and hence lead
to an upward-bias of the effect. While we provide specific evidence on the recent real estate
bubble, we also use a large U.S. sample over a long period, covering mostly “normal” market
conditions. Third, the identification assumption in Gan (2006) is that land holding firms were
not differentially affected by the bust of the bubble when compared to non-land holding firms.
This is a strong assumption considering that land-holding firms are larger firms that might have
been more exposed, for instance, to exchange rates swings contemporaneous to the bubble. Our
identifying assumption requires only that land holding and non land holding firms have the same
reaction to variations in local real estate prices, a much weaker assumption.1 Another important
contribution is Peek and Rosengreen (1997), who look at the supply side of credit. Based also
on the Japanese real estate bubble, they show that banks owning depreciated real estate assets
cut their credit supply, leading to a decrease in their clients’ investment.2
    Secondly, our paper is also closely related to recent works that try to highlight the role of
collateral in financial contracts. Benmelech, et al. (2005) document that more liquid (or more
“redeployable”) pledgeable assets are financed with loans of longer maturities and durations.
Benmelech and Bergman (2008) documents how U.S. airline companies are able to take advan-
tage of lower collateral value to renegotiate ex post their lease obligation downward. Finally,
Benmelech and Bergman (forthcoming) construct industry-specific measures of redeployability
and show that more redeployable collateral leads to lower credit spreads, higher credit rat-
ings, and higher loan-to-value ratios. While we do not go into such details in the examination
of financial contracts, our paper contributes to this literature by empirically emphasizing the
importance of collateral for financing and investment decisions.3

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the construction of
the data and summary statistics. Section 3 describes our main empirical results on investment
and capital structure decisions. Section 4 concludes.


2       Data
We use accounting data on US listed firms, merged with real estate prices at the state and
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level.
    1
     Another contribution looking at collateral shocks triggered by the Japanese crisis can be found in Goyal and
Yamada (2001).
   2
     Gan (2007) also uses the Japanese crisis as a shock to banks health and identifies the importance of bank
health on their clients’ investment.
   3
     For other contributions emphasizing the role of collateral in boosting pledgeable income, see, among others,
Eisfeldt and Rampini (forthcoming) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2008)




                                                       3
2.1     Accounting Data
We start from the sample of active COMPUSTAT firms in 1993 with non-missing total assets
(COMPUSTAT item #6). This provides us with a sample of 9,211 firms and a total of 83,719
firm-year observations over the period 1993 - 2007. We keep firms whose headquarters are located
in the United States and exclude from the sample firms operating in the finance, insurance,
real estate, construction and mining industries, as well as firms involved in a major takeover
operation. We keep firms that appear at least three consecutive years in the sample. This
leaves us with a sample of 5,121 firms and 51,467 firm year observations. We defer the reader to
Appendix A for details on the construction of accounting ratios used in the regression analysis.

2.1.1    Real Estate Assets
We collect data on the value of real estate assets of each firm. After measuring the initial market
value of real estate assets of each firm, we will identify variations in their value coming from
variations in real estate prices across space and over time.

    First, we measure the market value of real estate assets. Following Nelson et al. (1999),
three major categories of property, plant and equipments are included in the definition of real
estate assets: Buildings, Land and Improvement and Construction in Progress. Unfortunately,
these assets are not marked-to-market, but valued at historical cost. To recover their market
value, we calculate the average age of those assets, and use historical prices to compute their
current market value. The procedure is as follows. The ratio of the accumulated depreciation
of buildings (COMPUSTAT item #253) to the historic cost of buildings (COMPUSTAT item
#263)4 measures the proportion of the original value of a building claimed as depreciation.
Based on a depreciable life of 40 years,5 we compute the average age of buildings for each firm.
Using state-level residential real estate inflation after 1975, and CPI inflation before 1975, we
compute the market value of real estate assets for each year in the sample period (1993-2007).
    The accumulated depreciation on buildings is no longer available in COMPUSTAT after
1993.6 This is why we restrict our sample to firms active in 1993. There are 2,750 firms in 1993
in our sample for which we are able to construct a measure of the market value of real estate
assets and 28,014 corresponding firm-year observations. Table 1 reveals two striking facts. In
1993, 58% of all US public firms reported some real estate ownership. Moreover, for the median
firm in the entire sample, the market value of real estate represents 30% of the book value of
Property, Plants and Equipment (and 5% of the firm’s total market value). For the median land
holding firm in COMPUSTAT, the market value of real estate represents 98% of the book value
of Property, Plant and Equipment and 19% of the firm’s total market value. Real estate is thus
a sizable fraction of the tangible assets that corporations hold on their balance sheet.
   4
     Unlike buildings, land and improvements, are not depreciated.
   5
     As in Nelson et al. (1999), this assumption can be tested by estimating annual depreciation amounts (as
the change in total depreciation). Building cost, when divided by annual depreciation, provides an estimate of
depreciable life. Although inconsistent, the average life estimated by this approach ranges from 38 to 45 years.
This confirms our assumption of a 40-year-life.
   6
     In 1994, ten of the fifteen schedules required for Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval system
(EDGAR) filings were eliminated. In particular, the accumulated depreciation on Buildings is no longer reported.




                                                       4
    Second, to measure accurately how the value of real estate assets evolves, we need to know
the location of these assets. COMPUSTAT does not provide us with the geographic location
of each specific piece of real estate owned by a firm. However, the data reports headquarter
location (variables STATE and COUNTY). We use the headquarter location as a proxy for the
location of real estate. There are two assumptions underlying this choice. First, headquarters
and production facilities tend to be clustered in the same state and MSA. Second, headquarters
represent an important fraction of corporation real estate assets. We discuss the relevance of
this choice in section 2.3.

2.1.2    Ex-Ante Measure of Credit Constraint
The standard empirical approach in the investment literature uses ex ante measures of financial
constraint to sort between “Constrained” and “Unconstrained” firms. Estimations are performed
separately for each set of firms. We follow Almeida et al. (2004) in this approach and define
three measures of credit constraint using the following schemes:

    • Payout ratio: In every year over the 1993 - 2007 period, we rank firms based on their payout
      ratio and assign to the financially constrained (unconstrained) group those firms in the
      bottom (top) three deciles of the annual payout distribution. We compute the payout ratio
      as the ratio of total distributions (dividends plus stock repurchases) to operating income.

    • Firm Size: In every year over the 1993 - 2007 period, we rank firms based on their total
      assets and assign to the financially constrained (unconstrained) group those firms in the
      bottom (top) three deciles of the annual asset size distribution.

    • Bond Rating: In every year over the 1993 - 2007 period, we retrieve from COMPUS-
      TAT data on bond ratings assigned by Standard & Poor’s and categorize those firms
      with debt outstanding but without a bond rating as financially constrained. Financially
      unconstrained firms are those whose bonds are rated.

2.2     Real Estate Data
2.2.1    Real Estate Prices
We use data on residential and commercial real estate prices, both at the state and at the MSA
level.
    Residential real estate prices come from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.78
The O.F.H.E.O. provides a Home Price Index (HPI), which is a broad measure of the movement
of single-family home prices in the US.9 Because of the breadth of the sample, it provides more
   7
     http://www.ofheo.gov/index.asp
   8
     The O.F.H.E.O. is an independent entity within the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
whose primary mission is “ensuring the capital adequacy and financial safety and soundness of two government-
sponsored enterprises (GSEs) - the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac)”.
   9
     The HPI is computed using a hedonic regression and each release of the HPI offers a different value of the
index for a given state year. The results presented in the paper are not, however, significantly different if, for
instance, we use the 2006 release instead of the 2007 release.


                                                        5
information than is available in other house price indices. In particular, the HPI is available at
the state level since 1975. It is also available for most Metropolitan Statistical Areas, with a
starting date between 1977 and 1987 depending on the MSA considered. We match the state
level HPI with our accounting data using the state identifier from COMPUSTAT. To match
the MSA level HPI, we aggregate FIPS codes from COMPUSTAT into MSA identifiers using a
correspondence table available from the OFHEO website.
    Commercial real estate prices come from Global Real Analytics. This dataset provides a
price index for Offices and Industrial Commercial Real Estate.10 This index is only available for
a subset of 64 MSAs in the U.S. with a starting date between 1985 and 2003.
    Table 1 provides details on these indices (that have been normalized to 1 in 2006). The
correlation between the residential and commercial indices at the state level is .57, and .42 at
the MSA level. The correlation between the MSA-level and state-level residential indices is .86.

2.2.2    Measuring Land Supply
Controlling for the potential endogeneity of local real estate prices in an investment regression is
an important step in our analysis. Following Himmelberg et al. (2005), we instrument local real
estate prices using the interaction of long-term interest rates and local housing supply elasticity.
Local housing supply elasticities are provided by Saiz (2009) and are available for 95 MSAs.
These elasticities capture the amount of developable land in each metro area and are estimated
by processing satellite-generated data on elevation and presence of water bodies. As a measure
of long-term interest rates, we use the “contract rate on 30 year, fixed rate conventional home
mortgage commitments” from the Federal Reserve website, between 1993 and 2007.

2.3     Measurement Issues
The empirical methodology we use in this paper relies on several approximations that introduce
measurement errors in the regression analysis. In this Section, we present evidence in support
of these approximations.
    The first approximation we make relates to the location of firms’ real estate assets. We
assume that firms own most of their real estate assets in the state (or MSA) where their head-
quarters are located. We do so because there is no systematic source of information on corpo-
rations “true” location(s). To check the validity of this approximation, we hand collected the
10K forms filed with the Security and Exchange Commission for a randomly selected sample
of 375 corporations with non-missing real estate data in COMPUSTAT. These documents were
retrieved from the SEC’s EDGAR website. Among these 375 firms, 179 firms report real estate
ownership both in COMPUSTAT and in their 10K file. 80% of these 179 firms (i.e. 139 firms)
report in their 10K file a major property in the state where their headquarter is located. This
gives credence to our assumption that most firms reporting real estate assets in COMPUSTAT
have a sizable fraction of these assets located in their headquarter’s state.

    Looking directly into the 10K files also allows us to address a second concern, which relates
to the quality of the real estate information in COMPUSTAT. Among the 132 firms with no
  10
    We use the Offices index in our analysis but the main results are left unchanged if we use the Industrial
index instead.


                                                     6
ownership reported on COMPUSTAT, 24 (i.e. 18%) declare at least some property in their 10K
file. Symmetrically, among the 243 firms that report real estate assets on their balance sheet,
64 (i.e. 23%) declare no property on their 10K files.

    Finally, using the OFHEO residential real estate prices as a proxy for commercial real estate
prices could be a source of noise in our regression. As noted earlier, the correlation between
the two indices ranges from .42 (at the MSA level) to .57 (at the State Level). Moreover, the
commercial index is available only at the MSA level, and for a subset of cities. Therefore, there
is a trade-off: this index corresponds more accurately to the true nature of firms real estate
assets but it relies on the stronger assumption that these assets are mostly located in the city
where headquarters are located. We present evidence using both types of prices (residential and
commercial) and show that our results do not depend on the price index used.


3     Real Estate Prices and Firm Behavior
In this Section we analyze the impact of real estate shocks on corporate investment. Our goal is
to provide an estimate of the financial multiplier (i.e. by how much an increase in assets’ value
increases investment) at the firm-level.

3.1     Empirical Strategy
We run different specifications of a standard investment equation for firm i, at date t, with
headquarters located in state or MSA s. We start with the following specification:
                                                        Pts     Pts
                 IN Vits = αi + δt + β.RE V aluei ×      s
                                                            + γ  s
                                                                    + controlsit + it ,               (1)
                                                        P93     P93
where IN V is the ratio of investment to lagged PPE,          RE V aluei is the ratio of the market value
                                                        Pts
of real estate assets in 1993 to lagged PPE and P s measures the growth in real estate prices in
                                                         93
state s from 1993 to year t. As is typically done in the reduced-form investment literature, we
control for the ratio of cash flows to PPE, the one year lagged market to book value of assets
and the lagged leverage. We also include a firm fixed effect αi , as well as year fixed effects δt ,
designed to capture aggregate        specific investment shocks, i.e. fluctuations in the global economy.
                          Pts
Finally, the variable P s controls for the overall impact of the real estate cycle on investment,
                           93
irrespective of whether a firm owns real estate or not. Shocks εit are clustered at the state × year
level. This correlation     structure is conservative given that the explanatory variable of interest
                  Pts
RE V aluei × P s is defined at the firm level (see Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan [2004]).
                   93
    As noted in Section 2.1.1, the market value of the real estate holdings of a firm can only be
estimated before 1993, which is the last year for which accumulated depreciations on Buildings
are available. RE V alue      i is thus defined as the initial market value of a firm’s real estate assets,
                      Pts
and RE V aluei × P s capture fluctuations in the market values of these particular assets. In
                       93
particular, RE V aluei is not time-varying, and its level is not identified separately from the firm
fixed effect αi .
    Let us also highlight that the coefficient β measures how a firm’s investment responds to
each additional $1 of real estate the firm actually owns, and not how investment responds to

                                                    7
real estate shocks overall. This specification allows us to abstract from state-specific shocks that
would affect both firms with and without real estate assets.

Endogeneity Issues
There are two potential sources of endogeneity in the estimation of equation 1: (1) real estate
prices could be correlated with investment opportunities and (2) the ownership decision could
be related with investment opportunities.
    There are two immediate reasons why real estate prices could be correlated with investment
opportunities. The first one is a simple reverse causality argument: large firms might have a non
negligible impact through labor demand on the local activity, so that an increase in investment
for such large, land holding firms, could trigger a real estate price appreciation. This would lead
us to over-estimate β. Second, it could be that our measure of real estate prices proxies for local
demand shocks, and that land holding firms are more sensitive to local demand.
    To address this source of endogeneity, we instrument MSA level real estate prices. As already
mentioned in Section 2.2.2, and following Himmelber et al. (2005) and Mian and Sufi (2009), we
do so by interacting local housing elasticities with aggregate shifts in the interest rate. When
interest rates decrease, the demand for real estate increases. If the local supply of land is
very elastic, the increased demand will translate mostly into more construction (more quantity)
rather than higher land prices. If the supply of land is very inelastic on the other hand, the
increased demand will translate mostly into higher prices rather than more construction. We
expect that in MSA’s where land supply is more constrained, a drop in interest rate should have
a larger impact on real estate prices. As our first stage regression, we thus estimate, for MSA
m, at date t, the following equation predicting real estate prices Ptm :
                                Ptm
                                  m
                                    = αm + δt + γ.Elasticity m × IRt + um
                                                                        t ,                                     (2)
                                P93
where Elasticity m measures constraints on land supply at the MSA leve, IRt is the nationwide
real interest rate at which banks refinance their home loans. αm is an MSA fixed effect, and δt
captures macroeconomic fluctuations in real estate prices, from which we want to abstract.

    The second source of endogeneity in the estimation of equation 1 comes from the ownership
decision: if firms that are more likely to own real estate are also more sensitive to local demand
shocks, we would over-estimate β. As a first step in addressing this    issue, we control for initial
                                                                    Pts
characteristics of firm i, Xi , interacted with real estate prices P s . The Xi are controls that
                                                                     93
we believe might play an important role in the ownership decision and include 5 quintiles of
Age, Assets, Return on Assets and Leverage as well as 2-digit industry dummies and State
dummies. We show in Table 2 that these characteristics are good predictors of the decision to
buy real estate assets and, to a lesser extent, on the amount of real estate purchased. Table 2
is a simple cross-sectional OLS regression of RE OW N ER, a dummy equal to 1 when the firm
owns real estate, and RE value, the market value of the firm’s real estate assets, on the initial
characteristics mentioned above. Older, larger and more profitable firms, i.e. mature firms, are
more likely to be owners in our dataset. 11
 11
      Note that, from an intuitive perspective, these firms seem to be more likely to be insulated from local demand


                                                          8
    Controlling for the observed determinants of real estate ownership, we end up estimating the
following reduced form investment equation:
                                            Pts   Pts    X
        IN Vits   = αi + δt + β.RE V aluei × s + γ s + κ   Xki × Pts + controlsit + it                       (3)
                                            P93   P93    k


    However, some determinants of the land holding decisions might not be observable, which
makes our approach in equation (3) insufficient. Unfortunately, it is difficult to find firm-level
instruments that predict real estate ownership. Yet, we can still attempt to empirically measure
how different land holding firms are compared to non-land holding firms. To do so, we look
in Section 3.5 at the sensitivity of investment to real estate prices for firms that are about to
purchase a property, but before the purchase. If the unobserved characteristics that co-determine
investment and ownership is time invariant, then it should be the case that firms that are about
to purchase real estate assets are already more sensitive to the real estate cycle. Section 3.5
detail the implementation of this test in greater details. We insist however that while suggestive,
this approach is by no mean definitive, as the unobserved heterogeneity could well vary with
time.

3.2     Main Results
Table 3 reports estimates of various specifications of equation (1) and (3). Column (1) starts
with the simplest estimation of equation (1) without any additional controls. Land holding firms
increase their investment more than non land holding firms when real estate prices increase. The
baseline coefficient is .08, so that each additional $1 of real estate collateral increases investment
by 8 cents. The coefficient is significant at the 1% confidence level. The effect is economically
large: a one s.d. increase in RE V alue explains 28% of investment’s s.d.
    In Column (2), we add the initial controls interacted with real estate prices that account for
the observed heterogeneity in ownership decisions and its potential impact on the sensitivity of
investment to real estate prices. The coefficient is now .07, still significant at the 1% confidence
level, somewhat smaller but not statistically different from .08 found in column (1).
    Column (3) adds state variables traditionally used in investment equations, i.e. Cash and
Market to Book. The reduced form sensitivity remains positive but is now smaller, equal to
.055.1213 In other words, a one s.d. increase in collateral value explains a 20% s.d. increase
in investment once the effect of the Market to Book and the other controls are accounted
for. Note that, as is traditional in the investment literature, both Cash and Market to Book
shocks. This suggests that the hypothesis according to which land holding firms are inherently more likely to be
affected by local demand shocks is not the most likely a priori.
   12
      In particular, in unreported regressions, we see that most of the drop in the sensitivity comes from adding
the control for the Market-to-Book ratio and not from adding Cash.
   13
      As we explain in our working paper (Chaney et al. (2009)), the drop in β once the Market-to-Book ratio is
controlled for can easily be interpreted in the light of a simple model of investment with collateral constraints.
Intuitively, to leave the Market-to-Book ratio unchanged after a positive shock to the value of the firm’s real
estate assets, there need to be a negative shock to unobserved productivity. This negative shock to productivity
generates a negative shock to investment. As a consequence, the response of investment to the initial shock in
real estate prices will be smaller than it would have been had the Market-to-Book ratio not been controlled for.


                                                        9
have a significant, positive impact on investment. However, we also notice that the additional
explanatory power brought about by these controls remains limited, increasing the R2 of the
regression from .35 up to .4.
    Column (4) tests whether the relation between collateral value and investment found in
column (3) depends on the shape of the empirical distribution of collateral values. To do so, we
interact the RE OW N ER dummy (equal to 1 when a firm initially owns some real estate assets)
with the real estate price index. The estimated coefficient is positive and strongly significant,
indicating that our results are not driven by firms with large real estate holdings. Somewhat
mechanically, the binary model has a lower predictive power on investment: A one s.d. increase
in real estate prices explains a 9% s.d. increase in investment for land holding firms.
    Column (5) replicates the estimation performed in Column (3) using MSA-level residential
price index instead of the State-level index. Using MSA level prices has both advantages and
drawbacks. It offers a more precise source of variation in real estate prices. It also makes our
identifying assumption that investment opportunities are uncorrelated with variations in local
prices much milder. However, there are potentially larger measurement errors, as we now rely on
the assumption that all the real estate assets that a firm owns are located in the headquarters’
city. The results in Column (4) show that the coefficient remains stable, at .055.

    Column (6) uses commercial real estate prices instead of residential prices. The lower number
of MSAs with available commercial real estate prices reduces slightly the number of observations
(18,062 observations compared to 22,771 in the specification using MSA residential prices).
However, the sensitivity is equal to 0.063 and significant at the 1% level, and is slightly higher
than that computed using residential prices: a $1 increase in the value of commercial real estate
assets leads to an average increase of 6.3 cents in investment.
    Column (7) implements the IV strategy where real estate prices are instrumented using the
interaction of interest rates and local constraint on land supply (see Section 3.1). Let us first
briefly comment the first stage regressions, which are direct estimations of equation 2. These
estimations are presented in Table 4. The first two columns predict MSA residential prices,
while the two last columns predict MSA office prices. In column (1) and (3), we directly use
the measure of local housing supply elasticity provided in Saiz (2009). In column (2) and (4),
we group MSAs by quartile of local housing supply elasticity.
    Low values of local housing supply elasticity corresponds to MSAs with very constrained
land supply. We expect the effect of declining interest rates on prices to be stronger in MSAs
with less elastic supply. As expected, the γ coefficient in equation 2 is positive and significant at
the 1% confidence level. For instance, using the results in Column (4), a 100 basis points interest
rate decline increases the office price index by 6 percentage points more in “constrained” cities
(75th percentile of the elasticity distribution) than in “unconstrained” cities (25th percentile).
These effects are economically large, and significant. All F-tests for nullity of the instrument
are above 10 which leads us to conclude that these instruments are not weak. Moving to the
                                                            m
second stage equation, we simply use predicted prices Pc   t from the estimation of equation 2 and
use them as an explanatory variable in equation 3. Column (7) in Table 3 reports the result of
the estimation when the instrument used in the first stage is the local housing supply elasticity
(i.e. Column (3) of Table 4). The coefficient estimated from this IV regression is very close to
the one obtained from the OLS regression, equal to .065 and remains significant at the 1% level.

                                                 10
    A potential issue with pooled regressions as the ones presented in Table 3 is that they might
conceal a fair amount of heterogeneity in the elasticity across time. The sensitivity of investment
may be different in a growing environment than in a recession for instance. We cannot report
yearly estimates, but we reproduce the estimation of equation 3 on two different sample periods:
before 1999 (Columns (1), (3) and (5) in Table 5) and after 2000 (Columns (2), (4) and (6) in
Table 5). The coefficients before 1999 are only marginally higher than those after 2000. The
significance of the coefficient of interest does not seem to come from some particular years in
our sample.

3.3     Heterogeneous Responses: Ex Ante Credit Constraints
As pointed out in a different context by Kaplan and Zingales (1997), it is unclear a priori
that the sensitivity of investment to collateral value should be increasing with the extent of
credit constraints.14 This remains ultimately an empirical question which we answer using three
different ex ante measures of credit constraints based on: (1) dividend payments (2) firm size
and (3) credit rating. Those measures are defined in Section 2.1.2. We estimate equation 3
separately for “constrained” and “unconstrained” firms.
    As reported on Table 6, there is a strong cross-sectional heterogeneity in the response of
investment to balance sheet shocks. The sensitivity of investment to collateral value is on average
twice as large in the group of “constrained” firms relative to the group of “unconstrained” firms.
For instance, the coefficient β for firms in the 3 bottom deciles of the size distribution is .09
compared to .045 for the firms in the 3 top deciles. The difference between these two coefficients
is significant at the 5% level for all three measures of credit constraints.

3.4     Collateral and Debt
In this Section, we try to explore the channel through which firms are able to convert capital
gains on real estate assets into further investment. In unreported regressions, we investigate
whether firms, when confronted with an increase in the value of their real estate assets, are
more likely to sell them and cash out the capital gains. We do not find it to be the case. This
implies that outside financing has to increase to explain the observed increase in investment.
Standard theories of investment with collateral constraints (as, e.g. in Hart and Moore (1994))
would predict that collateral value leads to more or larger issues of new debt, secured on the
appreciated value of land holdings.
    Table 7 reports results of the effect of an increase in land value on debt issues, using COM-
PUSTAT data. To simplify interpretations and minimize endogeneity issues, we remove the
Cash and Market/Book controls from equation (3), and replace investment on the right hand
side with debt issues and debt repayments:
                                                                          Pts
                          DebtIssuessit = αi + δts + β.RE V aluei ×         s
                                                                              + εsit                      (4)
                                                                          P0
  14
    For instance, firms with strong agency problems may simply have a lower ability to convert collateral into
cash, because of these very agency issues.




                                                     11
    To obtain estimates comparable to investment results, our debt issues variables are normal-
ized by lagged tangible fixed assets (PPE). Thus, the results obtained when estimating equation
4 should be compared with the coefficient β derived in Column (2) of Table 3, i.e. .06.
    The results are presented in Table 7. Columns (1) and (2) look at the inflows and outflows
of debt. We find that land holding firms make larger debt issuances and repayments when the
value of their real estate increases. A $1 increase in collateral value increases debt issues by
13 cents and debt repayments by 7 cents. The difference, i.e. the net debt issues, corresponds
to an increase in the inflows of debt of 4 cents, in a range similar to the observed increase in
investment. The fact that both repayment and issues increase when collateral value increase
suggests that firms take advantage of the appreciated value of their collateral to renegotiate
former debt contracts, reimbursing former loans and issuing new, cheaper ones. If this were the
case, the marginal interest rates of companies with increasing collateral value should decrease.
Unfortunately, COMPUSTAT only reports a noisy measure of average interest rates, preventing
us from testing this natural interpretation of the results. Doing so would require the use of an
alternative source of data. A potential worry with results in Column (1) to (3) is that flows data
(i.e. issuances and repayments) are of a lower quality than stock data (i.e. the level of long-term
debt). Column (4) confirms the robustness of these results by looking at yearly variations in
the stock of long-term debt. The reported coefficient is similar to that in Column (3).
    On the short-term liability side, lines of credits might be easier to obtain when secured on
valuable collateral (e.g. Sufi, 2009). However, we observe only a small, positive and slightly
significant net increase in short term debts, with a coefficient of .5 cents per dollar. Borrowers
are more likely to use longer-term liabilities to finance their additional investment.

3.5    Are Real Estate Purchasers different from Non-Purchasers?
The decision by firms to own real estate assets on their balance sheet is not random. This can
introduce a bias in the various regressions we have presented so far. For instance, if firms with
more cyclical strategies were to own their real estate properties – for a reason we do not model
here – the estimated β would be upward-biased.
    In this section, we show that our results are robust to assuming a time-invariant unobserved
heterogeneity across firms that would affect both the real estate ownership and the sensitivity
of investment to real estate prices. Our test consists in estimating the sensitivity of investment
to real estate prices for firms that purchase a property both before and after this acquisition.
We find that, before the acquisition, future owners are statistically indistinguishable from firms
that never own real estate. Yet, these firms behave like other real-estate holding firms after they
acquire their properties.

    To implement this idea we do not rely on the market value of the real estate assets, but only
on whether firms own real estate or not. This allows us to work with a larger sample, as we do
not require information on buildings depreciations.
    We start with a sample of all COMPUSTAT firms that are not in the Finance, Insurance,
Real Estate, Construction or Mining Industries, that are not involved in major takeovers, and
that have at least three consecutive years of appearance in the data. The sample period is 1984
to 2007, 1984 being the year when information on real estate assets appears in COMPUSTAT.
We define a firm as a purchaser if it has initially no positive real estate assets on its balance

                                                12
sheet and positive real estate assets after some date.15 We exclude from our sample firms that
move several time between 0 and positive real estate assets, i.e. multiple acquirers. We also
require that the firm has at least three years of available data before and after the purchase of
the real estate asset. We end up with a sample of 876 purchasers and 11,083 purchaser-year
observations, with purchasing date ranging from 1986 to 2005. The number of purchaser-year
observations before the purchase is 4,733. The group of non-purchaser is defined as those firms
that always report no real estate assets throughout their history in COMPUSTAT. This leaves
us with a sample of 2,742 firms and 15,842 firm year observations for non-purchaser.

    We first estimate equation (1) separately for non purchasers and for purchasers before the
purchase of land. The results are presented in Table 8, Column (1) and (2). If anything,
purchasers have, prior to acquiring real estate, a lower sensitivity of investment to real estate
prices than non-purchasers. More importantly, the difference between the two is not statistically
different from 0. Future owners are statistically indistiguishable from non-owners before they
acquire land. The data rejects the existence of a time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity that
would simultaneously affect real estate ownership and investment sensitivity to the local real
estate cycle. However, we emphasize again that this does not imply that the decision to own
land is exogenous: firms could decide to buy real estate anticipating that their investment
opportunities will be more correlated with the local real estate cycle, creating a bias in the
estimation.

    The sample of purchasers also allows to confirm the finding in Section 3.2 by investigating
the within dimension of the data. In order to do so, we also estimate equation (1) for purchasers
after they acqure real estate assets. The results are presented in Column (3) of Table 8. The
sensitivity of investment to real estate prices is .47 for purchasers once they become land holders,
and it is significant at the 1% level. Relative to Column (2), we see that purchasing real estate
is associated with a .54 increase in the sensitivity of investment to real estate prices. This
difference is significant at the 3% level. This difference between owners and non owners is larger
but not statistically different from the comparable coefficient in Column (4) of Table 3.16

    Column (4), (5) and (6) of Table 8 run the same regressions as in Column (1), (2) and (3)
using variations in long-term debt as a dependent variable. The sensitivity of debt issues to
local real estate prices for land-holding firms is not significantly different from that of future
owners before they purchase their real estate assets (Column (4) and (5)). Debt issues become
significantly more sensitive to local real estate prices after firms acquire land (Column (6)).
Overall, the analysis in this section confirms that our main results on investment and debt
issuance do not seem to be caused by a time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity that would
simultaneously affect real estate ownership and investment or debt sensitivity to the local real
estate.
  15
     Before 1995, many firms have missing real estate data in COMPUSTAT. To maximize the number of pur-
chasers, we define as a purchaser a firm that has initially missing real estate observations, then 0 real estate
assets and then positive real estate assets for the remaining years.
  16
     As the estimation of equation 1 corresponds to a specification with a RE OW N ER dummy variable, the
natural benchmark is that of Column (4) in Table 3




                                                      13
3.6     A Closer Look at the Real Estate Bubble
In this Section, we investigate the impact of the recent surge of real estate prices between 2002
and 2006 on corporate investment. This allows us to (1) further test the robustness of our
results (2) reduce the extent of measurement errors and (3) provide a simple illustration of the
methodology used in this paper. This Section follows closely the methodology outlined in Mian
and Sufi (2009) and is similar in spirit to that in Gan (2006).17
    We divide the sample between MSAs with high and low local housing supply elasticity
(fourth vs. first quartile), and between firms owning vs. renting real estate. In order to reduce
the extent of measurement errors (see Section 2.3), we hand collect information on headquarter
ownership for firms that report at least some ownership in COMPUSTAT in 2001.18 We thus take
seriously the claim made in Section 2.3 that headquarters represent a significant fraction of the
non-specific real estate assets held by corporation and restrict the identification on headquarters
ownership. We then simply compare the evolution of investment of headquarters’ owners vs.
renters in cities with high vs. low elasticities.
    Figure 1 shows the evolution of office prices from 2001 to 2006 depending on the MSA
local housing supply elasticity. It confirms that, while the bubble had a more dramatic impact
on residential prices, it did also affect commercial prices. Low elasticity MSAs experienced
a much larger increase in office prices (30% increase in 2 years) than high elasticity MSAs.
Figure 2 implements our methodology looking at growth in assets. In low elasticity MSAs,
firms owning their headquarters experienced a 70% growth in assets (blue line, left panel), while
the aggregate assets of firms renting their headquarters saw only a 15% increase (red line, left
panel). By contrast, in high elasticities MSAs, there is no significant difference in the evolution
of assets of firms owning their headquarters (blue line, right panel) relative to firms renting
them (red line, right panel). It clearly shows a significant net effect of local real estate prices
on corporate investment. Figure 3 leads to similar conclusions on long-term debt: firms owning
their headquarters in low elasticity MSAs took advantage of the real estate price bubble to
increase their stock of debt relative to firms in similar MSAs but renting headquarters and
relative to MSAs where the bubble did not have a large impact on office prices.

   Table 9 confirms these graphical evidence using firm-level regressions. We adopt a standard
long-run difference-in-difference strategy and estimate the following equation:

    ∆(Assets)01−06
              i,m           ∆(Of f ice P rice)01−06
                                              m                         ∆(Of f ice P rice)01−06
                                                                                          m
                   = αm + β                         × Headquartersi + γ                         + im          (5)
      Assets01
             im               Of f ice P rice01
                                              m                           Of f ice P rice01
                                                                                          m


        ∆(Assets)01−06                                                                   01−06
where Assets01i,m
                   is firm i asset growth from 2001 to 2006, ∆(Of  f ice P rice)m
                                                                 Of f ice P rices01
                                                                                    is MSA m office
              im                                                                 m
price growth from 2001 to 2006 and Headquartersi is a dummy equal to 1 if firm i owns its
headquarters in 2001.
    Column (5) in Table 9 directly estimates equation 5 while Column (1) uses variation in long-
term debt normalized by initial assets as a dependent variable. Column (2) and (6) augment the
  17
     Again, it is worth emphasizing that Gan restricts her analysis to the time-series dimension, i.e. she does not
exploit the cross-sectional variations in real estate prices.
  18
     Such data collection is possible for 2001 (and not in 1993) as 10K files for this year are available online
through the SEC website.

                                                        14
previous regressions by controlling for initial firm size. This is natural as there is a fair amount
of heterogeneity between firms owning their headquarters and firms renting them. Column (3)
and (7) replace office price growth by local housing supply elasticity: this corresponds to the
reduced form of an instrumental variable regression where growth in price from 2001 to 2006
is instrumented by local housing supply elasticity. Finally, column (4) and (8) use quartiles
of local housing supply elasticity instead of the elasticity itself. Overall, results in Table 9 are
coherent with Figures 2 and 3. Firms owning their headquarters experienced a significantly
larger growth in assets and long-term debt relative to renters, especially so in MSAs where office
prices increased a lot, i.e. in MSAs with lower housing supply elasticity. This effect is monotonic
in the local housing supply elasticity. It is also economically important: taking the estimate of
column (6), an increase in real estate prices of 25% (which corresponds to the difference between
high and low elasticity MSAs, see figure 1) leads to an increase in firms’ assets by 0.79x0.25=20%
over the 2001-2006 period.


4    Conclusion
When the value of a firm’s real estate appreciates by $1, its investment increases by approxi-
mately 6 cents. This investment is financed through additional debt issues. The impact of real
estate shocks on investment is stronger when estimated on a group of firms which are more
likely to be credit constrained. As we showed in this paper, real estate represents a significant
fraction of the assets held on the balance sheet of corporations. As a consequence, one could
expect the impact of real estate shocks on aggregate investment to be non-trivial. However, this
is not necessarily the case in a world where responses to balance sheet shocks are heterogenous.
In particular, small firms respond more than large firms, which attenuates the agregate impact
of credit constraints. Understanding how one can go from the micro estimates we offer in this
paper to the macro impact of real estate shocks on investment, and therefore on GDP, remains
unclear. We hope to tackle this question in future research.


References
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004. “The Cash Flow Sensitivity
of Cash,” Journal of Finance, American Finance Association, 59(4):1777-1804.
  Barro, Robert J, 1976. “The Loan Market, Collateral, and Rates of Interest,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, Ohio State University Press, 8(4):439-56.
   Benmelech, Efraim, Mark J. Garmaise and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2005. “Do Liquidation
Values Affect Financial Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning
Regulation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):1121-1154.
   Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai Bergman, forthcoming. “Collateral Pricing”, Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics.
   Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai Bergman, 2008. “Liquidation Values and the Credibility of Fi-
nancial Contract Renegotiation: Evidence from U.S. Airlines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,


                                                15
123(4): 1635-1677.
   Bernanke, Benjamin and Mark Gertler, 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business
Fluctuations” American Economic Review, 79(1):14-34.
   Bernanke, Ben S, (1983). “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propagation of
the Great Depression,” American Economic Review, 73(3):257-76.
   Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004. “How Much Should We
Trust Difference in Difference Estimators ?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119:249-275
   Case, Karl, Quigley, John and Robert Shiller , 2001. “Comparing Wealth Effects: The
Stockmarket Versus the Housing Market,” NBER Working Paper N.8606.
   Cutts, Robert, L., (1990). “Power from the Ground Up: Japan’s Land Bubble”, Harvard
Business Review, 68:164-72.
   Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Adriano Rampini, forthcoming. “Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and
Debt Capacity,” Review of Financial Studies.
    Gan, Jie, 2006. “Collateral, Debt Capacity, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment”, Journal of Financial Economics, 85:709-734.
    Gan, Jie, 2007. “The Real Effects of Asset Market Bubbles: Loan- and Firm-Level Evidence
of a Lending Channel”, Review of Financial Studies, 20:1941-1973.
   Goyal, Vidhan and Takeshi Yamada, 2001. “Asset Price Shocks, Financial Constraints and
Investment: Evidence From Japan,”Journal of Business, 77(1):175-200
  Hart, Oliver and John Moore, 1994. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of
Human Capital,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4):841-79.

    Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai, 2005. “Assessing High House
Prices: Bubbles, Fundamentals and Misperceptions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4):67-
92.
   Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales, 1997. “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities provide
Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112: 169-
215.
   Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2009. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
U.S. Household Leverage Crisis”, Working Paper.
   Nelson, Theron R., Thomas Potter and Harold H. Wilde, 1999. “Real Estate Asset on
Corporate Balance Sheets,” Journal of Corporate Real Estate, 2(1):29-40.
   Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren, 2000. ”Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank
Crisis on Real Activity in the United States,” American Economic Review, 90(1):30-45, March.
    Rampini, Adriano, and S. Viswanathan, “Collateral, Financial Intermediation, and the Dis-
tribution of Debt Capacity,” Working paper, Duke University.


                                             16
    Rauh, Joshua D., 2006. “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding
of Corporate Pension Plans,” Journal of Finance, 61(1):33-71.
    Saiz, Albert, 2009. “On Local Housing Supply Elasticity”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
   Sufi, Amir, 2009. “Bank Lines of Credit in Corporate Finance: An Empirical Analysis”, The
Review of Financial Studies, 22(3):1057-1088.
    Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss, 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information,” American Economic Review, 71(3):393-410.
   Townsend, Robert M. , 1979. “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
State Verification”, Journal of Economic Theory 20:265-293.




                                             17
A       Construction of Accounting Ratios
Aside from data on real estate, we calculate other accounting variables following the standards of the corporate
finance literature. We compute investment rate as the ratio of capital expenditures (COMPUSTAT item #128)
to past year’s Property Plant & Equipment (item #8).19 We compute the Market-to-Book ratio as follows: we
take the total market value of equity as the number of common stocks (item #25) times end-of-year close price
of common shares (item #24). To this, we add the book value of debt and quasi equity, computed as book value
of assets (item #6) minus common equity (item #60) minus deferred taxes (item #74). We then normalize the
resulting firm’s “market” value using book value of assets (item #6). We also use the ratio of cash flows (item
#18 plus item #14) to past year’s PPE (item #8). Leverage is computed as the ratio of short-term and long
term liabilities (item #34+item #9) normalized by total assets (item #6).
    We use COMPUSTAT to measure debt issuance. We measure long term debt issues as long term debt issuance
(item #111) normalized by lagged PPE (item #8). We also compute long term debt repayment (item #114)
divided by lagged PPE. Finally, only the net change in current debt (item #301) is available in COMPUSTAT,
and we also normalize it by lagged PPE. Net change in long term debt is defined as long term issuance minus
long term repayments normalized by PPE. Because data on issuances and repayments are sometimes missing,
we also compute net change in long term debt as the yearly difference in long term debt normalized by lagged
PPE.
    In most of the regression analysis, we use initial characteristics of firms to control for the potential hetero-
geneity among our 2,750 firms. These controls, measured in 1993, are based on Return on Assets (operating
income before depreciation (item #13) minus depreciation (item #14) divided by total assets (item #6)), Assets
(item #6), Age measured as number of years since IPO, Leverage, 2-digit SIC codes and state of location.
    Finally, to ensure that our results are statistically robust, all variables defined as ratios are windsorized at
the 5th percentile.20 Table 1 provides summary statistics on most accounting variables used in the paper. We
simply remark that the debt-related variables (Debt Repayment, Debt Issues, Net Debt Issues and Changes in
Current Debt) have a high means (.75 for debt issues, for instance) but fairly low medians (e.g., .01 for debt
issues).




  19
     This normalization by PPE is standard in the investment literature (see, e.g., Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
or Almeida et al. (2007)). It provides typically a median investment ratio of .21. An alternative specification is
to normalize all variables by lagged asset value (item #6), as in Rauh (2006) for instance, which deliver notably
lower ratios. Our results are robust to this alternative normalization choice.
  20
     Windsorizing at the first percentile or trimming the variables at the 5th/1st percentile does not qualitatively
change our results.


                                                        18
B      Figures and Tables




                                .3
                                .2
                      (mean) offprice
                            .1  0
                                -.1




                                           2001                2002                 2003            2004                                   2005                  2006
                                                                                     Data Year - Fiscal

                                                                           low elasticity                                   high elasticity




    Figure 1: Relative Evolution of Office Prices (High vs. Low Elasticity MSA) (2001-2006)
                                .8




                                                                                                        .8
                                                                                                        .7
                                .6




                                                                                                        .6    .5
                        Aggregate Assets




                                                                                                Aggregate Assets
                                                                                                       .4
                               .4




                                                                                                 .3     .2
                                .2




                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                        0
                                0




                                           2001   2002     2003     2004     2005       2006                       2001   2002     2003     2004     2005        2006
                                                          Data Year - Fiscal                                                      Data Year - Fiscal

                                                         Low Elasticity MSAs                                                     High Elasticity MSAs
                                                          owner                renter                                              owner                renter




                     Figure 2: Evolution of Aggregate Assets (2001-2006)




                                                                                           19
        .5




                                                                              .5
        .4




                                                                              .4
             .3




                                                                                   .3
Aggregate Debt




                                                                       Aggregate Debt
   .2




                                                                        .2
        .1




                                                                              .1
        0




                                                                              0




                  2001   2002     2003     2004     2005       2006                     2001   2002     2003     2004     2005       2006
                                 Data Year - Fiscal                                                    Data Year - Fiscal

                                Low Elasticity MSAs                                                   High Elasticity MSA
                                 owner                renter                                           owner                renter




Figure 3: Evolution of Aggregate Debt (2001-2006)




                                                                  20
                                                                        Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                                                      Mean     Median    Std. Dev.    25th percentile   75th percentile   Observations
                Firm Level Data
                                                   Investment                           .35      .21         .37            .11               .41            27,672
                                                   Cash                                -.11      .26         2.3           -.11               .59            27,877
                                                   Market/Book                         2.23     1.54        1.93           1.1               2.5             25,592
                                                   Leverage                             .44      .20        9.36            .03               .37            27,931
                                                   Debt Issues                         .54       .01        1.23             0                .38            26,772
                                                   Debt Repayment                      .39      .08          .76            .01               .33            27,291
                                                   Net Debt Issues                     .09        0          .56           -.08               .06            26,192
                                                   Changes in Current Debt             .01        0         .14              0                 0             28,014
                                                   RE Value                             .85     .28         1.36             0               1.12            28,014
                Initial Firm Level Data (1993)
                                                   RE OWNER                            .58       1           .49             0                 1              2,750
                                                   ROA                                 -.01     .07          .26           -.03               .12             2,742
                                                   Age                                12.26      8          10.6             3                19              2,750
                                                   Leverage                            .29      .19         1.13           .04                .36             2,746
                                                   Log(Asset)                          4.1      3.97        2.2            2.6                5.5             2,750
                MSA Level Data




21
                                                   Residential Prices Growth Rate       .05     .04         .05            .03                .06             5,679
                                                   Residential Prices Index             .71     .70          .2            .57               .88              5,695
                                                   Office Prices Growth Rate            .04      .03        .08            -.01              .07               880
                                                   Office Prices Index                  .79       .8        .18            .67               .91               890
                                                   Local Housing Supply Elasticity     1.57     1.34        .86            .96               2.02             1,455
                State Level Data
                                                   Residential Prices Growth Rate      .06       .05        .04             .03               .07             765
                                                   Residential Prices Index            .70       .66        .20             .54               .86             765


     Notes: This table provides summary statistics at the firm level (panel 1 and 2), at the MSA level (panel 3) and at the state level (panel 3). Investment is defined as capital
     expenditure (item #128) normalized by the lagged book value of properties, pland and equipment (PPE: item #8). Cash is defined as Income before extraordinary items +
     depreciation and amortization (item #14 + item # 18) normalized by lagged PPE (item # 8). Market/Book is defined as the market value of assets (item #6 +(item #60 ×
     item #24) -item #60 -item #74) normalized by their book value (item #6). Leverage is defined as the sum of short-term and long-term debt (item #34+ item #9) normalized
     by the book value of assets (item #6). Debt Issues is defined as item #111 normalized by lagged PPE (item #8). Debt Repayment is defined as item #114 normalized by
     PPE (item #8). Net Debt Issues is defined as Debt Issuance minus Debt Repayment. Changes in current debt is defined as item #301 normalized by lagged PPE (item #8).
     RE Value is the ratio of the market value of real estate assets normalized by lagged PPE (see Section 2 for details on the construction of this variable). ROA is defined as
     operating income before depreciation minus depreciation and amortization normalized by total assets ((item #13-item #14)/item #6). Age is the number of years since IPO.
     RE OWNER is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm reports any real estate holding in 1993. Residential Prices Growth Rate (MSA Level – resp. State Level) is the growth
     rate of the MSA (resp. State) OFHEO real estate price index ; Residential Price Index (MSA Level – resp. State Level) is the OFHEO real estate price index, normalized to
     1 in 2006. Office Prices Index is an index of MSA level office prices normalized to 1 in 2006. Office Prices Growth Rate is the growth rate of the Office Prices Index. Local
     Housing Supply Elasticity come from Saez (2009).
                         Table 2: Determinants of Real Estate Ownership


                                                  RE OWNER     RE Value (State)
                                                       (1)            (2)
                       2nd Quintile of Asset         .16***          .071
                                                     (.021)        (.066)
                       3rd Quintile of Asset         .31***         .13**
                                                     (.022)        (.069)
                       4th Quintile of Asset         .48***        .27***
                                                     (.024)        (.074)
                       5th Quintile of Asset         .48***          .035
                                                     (.028)        (.086)
                       2nd Quintile of Leverage      .14***         .2***
                                                      (.02)        (.062)
                       3rd Quintile of Leverage      .18***        .19***
                                                     (.021)        (.066)
                       4th Quintile of Leverage      .17***         .17**
                                                     (.022)        (.068)
                       5th Quintile of Leverage      .23***        .28***
                                                     (.022)        (.069)
                       2nd Quintile of ROA          .099***        .33***
                                                     (.022)        (.069)
                       3rd Quintile of ROA           .12***        .25***
                                                     (.023)        (.072)
                       4th Quintile of ROA           .12***         .17**
                                                     (.023)        (.071)
                       5th Quintile of ROA           .13***        .23***
                                                     (.022)        (.069)
                       2nd Quintile of Age            .028         -.0091
                                                     (.021)        (.066)
                       3rd Quintile of Age          .094***          .11*
                                                      (.02)        (.063)
                       4th Quintile of Age           .21***        .47***
                                                     (.021)        (.066)
                       5th Quintile of Age           .23***        .89***
                                                     (.023)        (.072)

                       Industry Fixed Effect         Yes             Yes

                       State Fixed Effect            Yes             Yes

                       Observations                 2,738           2,738
                       Adj. R2                       .58             .27


Notes: This table shows the determinant of Real Estate Ownership in 1993. The dependent variable
is RE OWNER (Column (1)), a dummy indicating whether the firm reports any real estate asset on
its balance sheet in 1993 and RE Value (Column (2)), the market value of real estate assets in 1993.
Control variables include 5 quintiles of Asset, Age, Leverage, ROA, as well as Industry and State Fixed
Effects. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.


                                                   22
                                                         Table 3: Real Estate Prices and Investment Behavior
                                                                                                             Capital Expenditure
                                                                                     (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                                                   (OLS)      (OLS)       (OLS)     (OLS)     (OLS)        (OLS)       (IV)
                                   RE Value (State)                               .077***    .067***     .055***
                                                                                   (.005)    (.0052)     (.0048)
                                   RE OWNER × State Residential Prices                                              .17***
                                                                                                                     (.07)
                                   RE Value (MSA)                                                                            .055***
                                                                                                                             (.0052)
                                   RE Value (MSA Office Prices)                                                                           .063***     .065***
                                                                                                                                          (.0066)     (.0072)

                                   State Residential Prices                         -.1*       -.9**       -.51       -.43
                                                                                   (.061)      (.37)      (.34)      (.33)
                                   MSA Residential Prices                                                                       -.68**
                                                                                                                                 (.33)
                                   MSA Office Prices                                                                                         .67       .094

                                                                                                                                            (.67)      (.59)

                                   Cash                                                                  .016***    .016***    .016***    .015***     .015***




23
                                                                                                         (.0028)    (.0028)    (.0028)    (.0029)     (.0029)
                                   Market/Book                                                           .062***    .063***    .062***    .065***     .064***
                                                                                                         (.0034)    (.0033)    (.0035)    (.0039)      (.004)

                                   Initial Controls × State Residential Prices       No         Yes        Yes        Yes        No         No          No
                                   Initial Controls × MSA Residential Prices         No         No         No         No         Yes        No          No
                                   Initial Controls × MSA Office Prices              No         No         No         No         No         Yes         Yes

                                   Year Fixed Effects                               Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

                                   Firm Fixed Effects                               Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes


                                   Observations                                    27,672     27,438     24,480      24,480     22,771     18,062     17,844
                                   Adj. R2                                           .35        .37        .4          .4         .4         .41        .41



     Notes: This table reports the empirical link between the value of real estate assets and investment. The dependent variable is capital expenditure (item # 128 normalized
     by lagged item #8). Column (1), (2), (3) and (4) use the state-level residential price index. Column (4) uses MSA-level residential prices, while Column (5),(6) and (7) use
     MSA-level office prices. Except for column (1), all regressions control for firm-level initial characteristics (5 quintiles of Age, Asset, Leverage and ROA as well as initial 2-digit
     industry and state of location) interacted with Real Estate Prices. All regressions, except Column (1) and (2) control for Cash, previous year Market/Book. Column (5) presents
     IV estimates where MSA office prices are instrumented using the interaction of real mortgage rate interacted with the local elasticity of land supply taken from Saez (2009)
     (See Table 4 for the first stage regressions). All specifications use year and firm fixed effect and cluster observations at the state-year level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically
     different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.
Table 4: First-Stage Regression: the Impact of Local Housing Supply Elasticity on Housing
Prices


                                                         MSA Residential Prices     MSA Office Prices
                                                           (1)        (2)             (3)      (4)
  Local Housing Supply Elasticity×Mortgage Rate          .028***                    .036***
                                                         (.0044)                    (.0072)

  First Quartile of Elasticity×Mortgage Rate                          -.064***                -.066***
                                                                       (.0071)                  (.013)
  Second Quartile of Elasticity×Mortgage Rate                         -.046***                 -.033**
                                                                       (.0077)                  (.016)
  Third Quartile of Elasticity×Mortgage Rate                           -.014**                  -.0097
                                                                       (.0067)                  (.023)

  Year Dummies                                            Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes

  MSA Fixed Effect                                        Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes

  Observations                                            1,358        1,358          804        804
  Adj R2                                                   .94          .94           .84        .84


Notes: This table investigates how local housing supply elasticity, as defined by Saez (2009), affects
real estate prices. The dependent variable is the real estate price index, defined at the MSA level –
Column (1) and (2) – and the MSA office price index – Column (3) and (4). Column (1) and (3) use
directly the local housing supply elasticity, while Column (2) and (4) use quartiles of the elasticity. All
regressions control for year as well as MSA fixed effects and cluster observations at the MSA level. ∗ ,
∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.




                                                    24
                               Table 5: Real Estate Prices and Investment Behavior: Robustness – Different Sub-periods

                                                                                                       Capital Expenditure
                                                                           State-level Prices            MSA-level Prices                Office Prices
                                                                       Before 1999 After 2000        Before 1999 After 2000        Before 1999   After 2000
                                   RE Value                             .084***         .066***
                                                                         (.011)         (.0094)
                                   RE Value (MSA)                                                      .086***        .065***
                                                                                                        (.012)        (.0099)
                                   RE Value (MSA Office Prices)                                                                      .083***        .085***
                                                                                                                                      (.013)         (.013)

                                   State Residential Prices              -2.9***         -1.2*
                                                                          (.94)          (.66)
                                   MSA Residential Prices                                              -3.4***         -1.2**
                                                                                                        (1.1)           (.63)
                                   MSA Office Prices                                                                                   -.76            .26
                                                                                         (.96)           (.83)

                                   Cash                                  .017***        .015***        .016***        .015***        .016***         .013**




25
                                                                         (.0042)        (.0049)        (.0041)         (.005)        (.0044)        (.0056)
                                   Market/Book                           .069***        .049***        .069***         .05***        .072***        .051***
                                                                         (.0043)         (.005)        (.0043)        (.0051)        (.0048)        (.0061)

                                   Initial Controls × RE Prices            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

                                   Year Fixed Effects                      Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

                                   Firm Fixed Effects                      Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes


                                   Observations                          15,049          9,431          14,130         8,641          11,597          6,465
                                   Adj. R2                                 .48            .45             .48           .45             .48            .46



     Notes: This table tests the robustness of the link between the value of real estate assets and investment by reporting regression results for two sub-periods: 1993-1999 (Column
     (1), Column (3), Column (5)) and 2000-2007 (Column (2), Column (4), Column (6)). The dependent variable is capital expenditure (item # 128 normalized by lagged item
     #8). Column (1) and (2) defines the value of real estate assets using state-level residential prices. Column (3) and (4) use MSA-level residential prices, while Column (5) and
     (6) use MSA-level office prices. All specifications use year and firm fixed effect and cluster observations at the state-year level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically different from
     zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.
                         Table 6: Real Estate Prices and Investment Behavior: “Constrained” vs. “Unconstrained” Firms

                                                                                                       Capital Expenditure
                                                                        Payout Policy                          Firm Size                             Bond Ratings
                                                               Constrained Unconstrained             Constrained Unconstrained              Constrained Unconstrained
         RE Value (MSA Office Prices)                            .086***         .047***               .09***          .045***                .078***         .032***
                                                                  (.012)           (.011)               (.016)         (.0092)                 (.011)         (.0084)
         MSA Office Prices                                          -.47             .17                  -6.9            -.59                   .55            -2.3
                                                                   (2.5)           (1.15)                (9.6)           (1.1)                  (.83)            (2)
         Cash                                                     .01***          .04***                .0051          .063***                .014***         .043***
                                                                 (.0037)           (.008)              (.0042)          (.012)                (.0045)          (.017)
         Market/Book                                             .061***         .057***               .05***          .052***                .069***         .061***
                                                                 (.0049)           (.007)              (.0049)          (.007)                (.0054)          (.011)


         Initial Controls × State Residential Prices                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes




26
         Year Fixed Effects                                         Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes

         Firm Fixed Effects                                         Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes

         Test “Const.=Unconst.”                                              .02**                                  .05**                                .01***

         Observations                                              9,003              6,153              5,931               4,561             10,573              3,283
         Adj. R2                                                    .43                 .6                .33                 .71               .44                 .67


     Notes: This table differentiates the results of table 3 according to ex-ante measure of credit constraints. The dependent variable is capital expenditure (item # 128 normalized
     by lagged item #8). RE Value (MSA Office Prices) is the market value of real estate assets computed using MSA-level office prices normalized by lagged PPE. All regressions
     control for firm-level initial characteristics (5 quintiles of Age, Asset, Leverage and ROA as well as initial 2-digit industry and state of location) interacted with Real Estate
     Prices, as well as for Cash, previous year Market/Book and previous year Leverage. Constraint category assignments use ex ante criteria based on firm dividend payout (Column
     (1) and (2)), size (Column (3) and (4)) and bond ratings (Column (5) and (6)). Test “Const.=Unconst.” is a t-test of equality of the RE Value coefficients between the
     constrained and the unconstrained firms. All specifications use year and firm fixed effect and cluster observations at the state-year level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically
     different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.
                                                               Table 7: Real Estate Prices and Debt Issues

                                                                      Debt Issues      Debt Repayment          Net Debt Issues          Changes in            Changes in
                                                                                                                                      Long-Term Debt         Current Debt
                                                                           (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)
               RE Value (MSA Office Prices)                              .13***              .071***                .037***               .044***               .0045*
                                                                         (.022)               (.012)                  (.01)                (.008)              (.0025)
               MSA Office Prices                                           -.38                 -.99                   1**                   .62                 .55**
                                                                          (1.9)                (1.8)                  (.47)                 (.79)                (.26)


               Initial Controls × State Residential Prices                 Yes                 Yes                     Yes                    Yes                  Yes

               Year Fixed Effects                                          Yes                 Yes                     Yes                    Yes                  Yes

               Firm Fixed Effects                                          Yes                 Yes                     Yes                    Yes                  Yes

               Observations                                              19,674               20,010                 19,251                 20,464                20,531
               Adj. R2                                                    .39                  .44                    .22                    .11                   .14




27
     Notes: This table reports the relationship between collateral value and capital structure. The dependent variable is Debt Issues (Column (1)), Debt Repayment (Column (2)),
     Net Debt Issues (Column (3)), Changes in Long-Term Debt (Column(4)) and Changes in Current Debt (Column (5)). RE Value (MSA Office Prices) is the market value of real
     estate assets computed using MSA-level office prices normalized by lagged PPE. All regressions control for firm-level initial characteristics (5 quintiles of Age, Asset, Leverage
     and ROA as well as initial 2-digit industry and state of location) interacted with Real Estate Prices. All specifications use year and firm fixed effect and cluster observations at
     the state-year level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.
                    Table 8: Real Estate Prices and Investment: The Case of Purchasers


                                                       Capital Expenditure                                  Changes in Long-Term Debt
                                                  Non       Purchaser Purchaser                            Non      Purchaser Purchaser
                                               Purchaser Before the After the                          Purchaser Before the After the
                                                            Purchase    Purchase                                     Purchase   Purchase
                                                   (1)           (2)        (3)                             (4)          (5)        (6)
 MSA Office Prices                                .068          -.07      .47***                            .07          -.27      .29*
                                                 (.067)        (.18)       (.15)                          (.053)        (.19)     (.15)
 Cash                                           .017***       .03***      .04***                        -.006***       -.0071     .0059
                                                (.0027)      (.0082)       (.01)                         (.0021)      (.0064)     (.01)
 Market/Book                                    .035***      .036***     .029***                       -.0072***       -.0067     -.013
                                                (.0036)      (.0085)     (.0094)                         (.0026)      (.0067)    (.0092)

 Test“Purch.=Non Purch.”                                   .076                                                   .14
 Test “Purch. before=Purch. after”                                                .03**                                         .02**

 Observations                                     17,480             2,289                 2,611         17,648         2,307           2,616
 Adj. R2                                           .35                 .4                   .39           .15            .18             .17


Notes: This table looks at the investment behavior of real estate purchasers compared to non-land holding Corporations. Capital
Expenditure, normalized by lagged PPE, is the dependent variable in Column (1) to (3); Changes in Long-Term Debt, normalized
by lagged PPE, is the dependent variable in Column (4) to (6). Column (1) and (3) looks at the sensitivity of investment and
debt issues to MSA Office Prices for firms that never own real estate assets in our sample. Column (2) and (4) looks at the same
sensitivities for firms that will acquire real estate but before they acquire it. Column (3) and (6) estimates the same sensitivities
for real estate purchasers but after they have purchased their real estate assets. Test “Purch.=Non Purch.” presents the p-value
from a t-test of equality of the MSA Office Prices coefficients between the non-purchasers and the purchasers before the purchase.
Test “Purch. before=Purch. after ” presents the p-value from a t-test of equality of the MSA Office Prices coefficients between the
purchasers before and after the purchase. All specifications control for Cash and previous year Market to Book, use year and firm
fixed effect and cluster observations at the state-year level.   ∗ , ∗∗ ,   and   ∗∗∗   means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1%
level of significance.




                                                                     28
                                        Table 9: Headquarter Ownership and the Impact of the Real Estate Bubble

                                                                                       Changes in Long Term Debt                     Changes in Total Assets
                                                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
                        Headquarter Owner × ∆(office prices)2001−2006           .18***    .21***                             .44*      .79***
                                                                                (.069)    (.071)                             (.23)       (.2)
                        ∆(office prices)2001−2006                                .028      .0059                             .098       -.23*
                                                                                (.054)    (.051)                             (.15)      (.12)
                        Headquarter Owner × Elasticity                                               -.057*                                      -.21**
                                                                                                     (.029)                                      (.086)
                        Elasticity                                                                    .028                                        .088
                                                                                                     (.021)                                      (.059)
                        Headquarter Owner × First Quartile of Elasticity                                       .12**                                         .3**
                                                                                                               (.053)                                        (.14)
                        Headquarter Owner × Second Quartile of Elasticity                                       .095                                          .29
                                                                                                               (.068)                                        (.19)
                        Headquarter Owner × Third Quartile of Elasticity                                         .06                                          .11
                                                                                                               (.075)                                        (.26)
                        First Quartile of Elasticity                                                            -.027                                        -.091
                                                                                                               (.042)                                        (.11)
                        Second Quartile of Elasticity                                                           -.009                                         .09
                                                                                                               (.046)                                        (.12)
                        Third Quartile of Elasticity                                                            .047                                        .0091
                                                                                                               (.054)                                        (.17)




29
                        Log(Asset2 001)                                                   -.015***    -.017***   -.017***              -.22***   -.22***   -.22***
                                                                                           (.0048)     (.0048)    (.0048)               (.017)    (.016)    (.016)
                        Observations                                             2,130      2,130       2,255      2,255     2,149      2,149     2,274     2,274


     Notes: This table explores the impact of the real estate bubble from 2001 to 2006, depending on headquarter ownership. Column (1) to (4) use change in long term debt
     normalized by initial assets as a dependent variable. Column (5) to (8) use changes in assets normalized by initial assets as a dependent variable. Elasticity refers to local
     housing supply elasticity provided in Saez (2009). Observations are clustered at the MSA Level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of
     significance.
