                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     OIL, AUTOMOBILES, AND THE U.S. ECONOMY:
                     HOW MUCH HAVE THINGS REALLY CHANGED?

                                         Valerie A. Ramey
                                          Daniel J. Vine

                                       Working Paper 16067
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16067


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2010




The views expressed here are those of the authors and not those of the Board of Governors, or the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Sam Ackerman provided
excellent research assistance. We are grateful for comments from Daron Acemoglu, Jordi Galí, George
Hall, James Hamilton, Chris Kurz, Ariel Pakes, and Garey Ramey, and we thank William Lee for sending
us his papers. We also thank participants at the 2008 International Society for Inventory Research
session, the NBER Twenty-fifth Annual Conference on Macroeconomics, and seminar participants
at Statistics Canada and UC San Diego. Valerie Ramey gratefully acknowledges financial support
from National Science Foundation grant SES-0617219 through the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Valerie A. Ramey and Daniel J. Vine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Oil, Automobiles, and the U.S. Economy: How Much have Things Really Changed?
Valerie A. Ramey and Daniel J. Vine
NBER Working Paper No. 16067
June 2010, Revised July 2010
JEL No. E2,Q43

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies the impact of oil shocks on the U.S. economy—and on the motor vehicle industry
in particular—and re-examines whether the relationship has changed over time. We find remarkable
stability in the response of aggregate real variables to oil shocks once we account for the extra costs
imposed on the economy in the 1970s by price controls and a complex system of entitlements that
led to some rationing and shortages. To investigate further why the response of real variables to oil
shocks has not declined over time, we focus on the motor vehicle industry, which is considered the
most important channel through which oil shocks affect the economy. We find that, contrary to common
perceptions, the share of motor vehicles in total U.S. goods production has shown little decline over
time. Moreover, within the motor vehicle industry, the effects of oil shocks on the mix of vehicleVROG
and on capacity utilization appear to have been proportional in recent decades to the effects observed
in the 1970s.


Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
VRAMEY@UCSD.EDU

Daniel J. Vine
)HGHUDO5HVHUYH%RDUG
20th Street and Constitution Ave. NW
Mail Stop 82
Washington, DC 20551
daniel.j.vine@frb.gov
Introduction

         Between 2002 and mid-2008, the average real price of gasoline in the United

States increased more than two fold after having risen only modestly in the preceding 15

years. Not surprisingly, this run-up led to renewed interest in the effects of oil shocks on

the U.S. aggregate economy. Hamilton’s (1983) seminal paper documented the negative

effects of oil shocks on the aggregate economy, and numerous papers since that time

have extended or questioned the strength of these effects. 1 Most recently, several authors

have argued that the effects of oil price shocks on U.S. aggregate activity have declined

since the mid 1980s (e.g. Herrera and Pesavento (2009), Blanchard and Galí (2010),

Blanchard and Riggi (2009), Edelstein and Kilian (2009)). These papers have variously

attributed the decline to improved monetary policy, a smaller share of oil in production,

or more flexible labor markets. Empirical work has also shown that a more-muted

response in the consumption of motor vehicles to energy price shocks has played a large

role in obtaining these results (Edelstein and Kilian (2009)).

         This paper re-examines the extent to which the impact of oil shocks on the

aggregate economy—and on the motor vehicle industry in particular—has changed over

time. We first discuss the array of energy cost measures that authors in the literature

have used to define oil price shocks, and then we survey the theoretical contributions

from a number of DSGE macro models that include various roles for oil in the economy.

Using these models, there are a number of structural parameters that reasonably could



    1
        See, for example, Mork (1989), Hooker (1996), Hamilton (1996), Barsky and Kilian (2002), and
Hamilton (2003).



                                                      2
have changed over time and reduced the potency with which oil price fluctuations

depress aggregate output.

       However, all of these macro models assume that the price of oil reflects the true

cost of energy for firms and consumers. While much of the recent empirical work uses

published measures of oil and/or gasoline prices as an indicator of the strength of the oil

price shocks, we find that these measures neglect the impact of the shortages that

occurred in the critical 1973-74 and 1979 oil shock episodes due to price controls.

       Using two oil shock measures that include the effects of both price and non-price

rationing, we re-examine the evidence from vector autoregressions that oil disturbances

have had less impact on the real economy in the past twenty years than in the preceding

decades.   The results show that the responses of motor vehicle consumption and

aggregate output to shortage adjusted oil price shocks appear just as great during the past

two and a half decades as they were in the 1970s and early 1980s. On the other hand,

even the new measures imply that the impact on nominal variables has become

noticeably muted.

       Why has there been so little change over time in the response of motor vehicle

consumption to oil price changes? We find that, despite the many innovations in the way

the U.S. economy produces and uses motor vehicles that have occurred over the past 40

years, the primary channels through which oil prices directly affect motor vehicles have

not changed much over time. Namely, we present evidence that the recent increases in

gasoline prices have caused just as much anxiety in consumers now as was observed 30

years ago, and the shifts in demand across vehicle size classes have also been as equally




                                                3
disruptive to motor vehicle capacity utilization since 2000 as they were in the 1970s and

early 1980s.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II reviews the data available on various

measures of oil prices and discusses how modern DSGE models accommodate the role of

oil in the economy. It also presents evidence that the presence of energy price controls

and gasoline shortages in the 1970s may cause problems in empirical work because

published prices in that era do not reflect the true cost of energy. Using measures that

include the cost of shortages, we find no evidence of weaker effects of oil shocks on the

real economy. Because we find that the motor vehicle industry plays a central role in the

propagation of the oil shocks, the remainder of the paper studies this industry in detail.

Section III examines the role of the motor vehicle industry in the overall economy.

Section IV discusses how gas prices affect vehicle demand and Section V shows the ways

in which these shocks affect production. Section VI concludes.


I.   Oil shocks and the U.S. economy

       We begin by reviewing the behavior of several key measures of oil prices over the

past few decades.     After describing how macro DSGE models have been used to

understand the role of energy costs in the economy, we present evidence that price

controls may have led to a wedge between the published price of oil and the true cost of

oil during the large oil price shocks in the 1970s. Using vector autoregressions that are

similar to those estimated by Blanchard and Galí (2010) and Edelstein and Kilian (2009),

we then show how mismeasurement of the true cost of oil in the 1970s may have caused

the appearance of structural instability in the impulse response functions of real output to




                                                 4
oil price shocks. Using cost measures that account for shortages, we find that the impulse

response functions have not changed much over time.


     A. Overview of oil prices

            Figure 1 displays three oil price measures: the producer price index for crude

petroleum (PPI-oil), the refiner acquisition cost of imported oil (RAQ), and the consumer

price index for gasoline (CPI-gas). Hamilton (2003, 2009b) typically uses the PPI-oil

measure and Mork (1989) and Barsky and Kilian (2002) use versions of the RAQ

measure. 2 Unfortunately, the RAQ measure starts only in 1974. 3 We include the CPI-

gas measure because several authors have shown that gasoline is a large share of U.S.

petroleum consumption, and gasoline prices are also the most relevant energy price

measure for the automobile sector. 4

           Oil and gas prices—displayed in log current dollars in the upper panel of Figure 1

(thick solid line) and in log real index points in the lower panel—have risen notably at

several points in history. Four episodes stand out in particular: First, the real price of

gasoline rose 27 percent between October 1973 and May 1974, the result of an even

larger rise in the price of crude oil after the Yom Kippur War. After falling back a bit

over the next four years, the price of crude oil began to rise again at the end of 1978. By

the spring of 1980, the Iranian Revolution and the Iran-Iraq war led to losses in crude oil




     2
         Blanchard and Galí (2008) use the price of West Texas intermediate oil, available from FRED. This
series shares the same problems with the PPI measure that we will discuss below.
     3
         Barksy and Kilian (2002) extend it back to 1971, but we are worried about this extension, for
reasons given below.
     4
         Also, Kilian (2009) highlights the importance of studying gas prices separately from crude oil prices.



                                                            5
production that pushed up the price of imported oil 71 percent and the price of gasoline

46 percent. Between 1982 and 1985, the nominal price of gasoline grew only modestly

until Saudi Arabia abandoned production quotas and the price of crude oil plunged.

       Real gasoline prices continued to trend lower after 1985, and, by the end of the

1990s, real gasoline prices had receded to record low levels. This pattern changed

abruptly at the beginning of 1999, when OPEC member countries phased in several cuts

to production quotas. The real price of gasoline surged 43 percent by the summer of

2001 before the weakening world economy put downward pressure on crude oil prices.

The relief was short lived, however. Gas prices began to rise again in early 2002, when

political turmoil in Venezuela shut down much of the country’s crude oil production; real

crude prices climbed 588 percent and gasoline prices climbed 127 percent by summer

2008, and then collapsed when the financial crisis spread from the housing sector to the

rest of the economy and interrupted aggregate demand.


    B. Oil shocks in macro DSGE models

       Economists take a keen interest in oil prices because these episodes of steep

increases in prices were often followed by recessions. The literature has introduced into

macro models four principle channels through which oil or energy shocks can lead to

recessions: (i) Energy serves as an important input to production; (ii) energy is an

important consumption good; (iii) changes in energy prices lead to costly shifts in

demand across sectors; and (iv) the policy response to oil price shocks includes monetary

tightening, a move that depresses output. Often layered on top of these channels are

forces that multiply and propagate the effects of oil price shocks on aggregate output,

such as real wage rigidities (e.g. Bruno and Sachs (1982), Blanchard and Galí (2010),


                                               6
Blanchard and Riggi (2009)), imperfect competition (Rotemberg and Woodford (1996)),

variable utilization rates (Finn (2000)), vintage capital effects (Atkeson and Kehoe

(1999), Wei (2009)), and multiplier effects created by externalities across firms (Aguiar-

Conraria and Wen (2007)). We will briefly discuss each of these channels and point out

which parameters in these DSGE models are suspected to have changed over time.



       Energy as an input to production

       Berndt and Wood (1975), Bruno and Sachs (1982), and Pindyck and Rotemberg

(1983) were among the first to study energy price shocks in a framework that

accommodated energy as an input to production. The strength of this channel is limited,

however, by the small share of energy in total production costs, even in the 1970s. Finn

(1991, 2000) modifies the standard model to reflect the notion that the energy

requirements of installed capital are often fixed, and thus energy must be used in fixed

proportions to capital utilization. This feature makes output more sensitive to increases

in energy prices.

       In many of the models mentioned above, a decrease in the amount of oil required

to produce a unit of output would reduce the effect of oil shocks on the aggregate

economy. This result suggests that increases over time in the fuel efficiency of many

types of production technology may have weakened the relationship between of oil price

and real output. In addition, structural parameters not directly related to the use of energy

can also affect the transmission of energy price shocks in DSGE models. For example,

Blanchard and Galí (2010) show that a decline in the rigidity of wages in these types of

models reduces the effects of oil price shocks on output.



                                                 7
       Energy as consumption good

       In addition to the consequences of reduced output in general equilibrium,

increases in oil prices also have direct effects on demand. First, oil shocks can lead to

declines in demand for goods for which consumption is complementary with purchases of

oil. Hamilton (1988) and Wei (2009) use models of demand for motor vehicles to show

this effect. Second, oil shocks introduce uncertainty into the outlook for future energy

prices, and increases in uncertainty can dampen demand for goods if purchases are costly

to reverse (Bernanke (1983)). Third, for energy consuming capital goods, increases in

the price of energy change the desired characteristics of the capital in use. Because the

energy efficiency of the existing stock of consumer durables available in the short run is

largely fixed, demand for new goods can shift between products in an exaggerated

fashion and reflects the widening differential in the relative cost of ownership between

different types of goods. For motor vehicles, smaller and more fuel-efficient models

naturally become more desirable.

       In these types of models, one parameter that has likely changed over time is the

energy efficiency of consumer durable goods, including motor vehicles and other

appliances. When energy efficiency rises or the share of these types of goods in total

consumption falls, then we would expect the impact of oil shocks on output to diminish

over time.



       Sectoral shifts and costly factor mobility




                                                    8
          Several papers have investigated sectoral shifts as a way in which oil price shocks

affect the aggregate output. Davis (1987) and Hamilton (1988) both suggest that oil price

shocks have a bigger effect on output if the shocks induce sectoral shifts and factor

adjustment is costly. Bresnahan and Ramey (1993) argue that oil shocks can lead to

disruptive sectoral shifts even within narrowly defined industries. They present empirical

evidence that shifts in demand between size classes of automobiles disrupted output in

the U.S. automobile industry during the 1970s.

          In the context of the multi-sector models, it is not clear that the structure of the

economy has changed in a way that would weaken the transmission of oil price shocks

through the sectoral shifts channel. We find evidence in the motor vehicle industry that

this channel remains quite potent.



          Monetary Policy Reaction Functions

          Bernanke, Gertler and Watson (1997) argue that the endogenous response of

monetary policy to an increase in oil prices is an important part of the outsized declines

observed in output, a result they showed by using a structural vector autoregression and

counterfactual experiments with different monetary policy rules. 5 Using a calibrated

DGE model, Leduc and Sill (2004) found that 40 percent of the decline in output that

follows a positive shock to oil prices reflects the systematic component of monetary

policy.



     5
         Hamilton and Herrera (2004) questioned details of their specification. Bernanke, Gertler and
Watson (2004) responded and re-estimating their model in a way that attempts to deal with this critique and
find results only slightly less strong than in their original paper.



                                                             9
          To look for changes in policy parameters over time and assess whether these

changes may have reduced the impact of oil shocks on output, a number of papers have

either simulated monetary DGE models or estimated monetary structural vector auto

regressions. Herrera and Pesavento (2009), Blanchard and Galí (2010), and Blanchard

and Riggi (2009) all find evidence that oil price shocks have had less impact in recent

decades, in part, because of the changes in monetary policy.

          To summarize, the theoretical literature has suggested a variety of ways in which

oil shocks affect the economy. Some of these effects should be expected to be weaker

now, while other effects can easily be as strong.


    C. The importance of non-price rationing in the 1970s

          In the models described above, it is assumed that the price of oil reflects the true

acquisition cost of energy for firms and households. While the literature on the effects of

oil shocks has debated the merits of various measures of oil prices and whether the

effects are nonlinear, 6 much of it has missed a potentially important change in the degree

to which oil prices reflect oil disruptions.            In particular, other than Mork (1989),

macroeconomists have not paid much attention to the embargoes, price controls, and

shortages that marked the oil price disturbances in the 1970s. Helbling and Turley (1975)

document that price controls were first imposed on the U.S. domestic oil industry in

August 1971 as part of the general imposition of price controls. The controls on other

sectors of the economy were phased out, but the controls were made more stringent on

the domestic oil industry in response to the OPEC embargo of October 1973. These



    6
        For example, see the debate between Kilian and Vigfusson (2009) and Hamilton (2009b).



                                                       10
complex controls, which imposed a price ceiling on “old” oil that was lower than the one

imposed on “new” oil, led to significant disruptions in the production of domestic oil and

held the average domestic price of crude oil below the world price. Most of the effects of

these controls were felt in the markets for gasoline and diesel fuel. According to some

estimates, 20 percent of the gasoline stations ran out of gas during the height of the crisis

(Frum (2000)).

       Pisarski and de Terra (1975) detail the policy responses to the embargo in various

European countries. While most European countries did not impose the types of price

controls imposed in the United States, they responded with other sorts of controls, such as

bans on Sunday driving (Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Switzerland) and limits on gas

purchases (Great Britain, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland). Almost all countries

imposed lower speed limits.

       Multiple oil and gas price controls also helped produce shortages after the Iranian

Revolution of 1979. In April 1979, President Carter announced gradual decontrol of oil

prices, but proposed a windfall profits tax. In January 1981, President Reagan signed an

order leading to the complete deregulation of oil and gas prices.

       To quantify the additional cost imposed on consumers by non-price rationing in

the 1970s, Frech and Lee (1987) use data on urban and rural traffic patterns in California

and estimates of the price elasticity of demand for gasoline from Lee (1980). They

estimate that the time cost of the queues added between 13 to 84 percent to the price of a

gallon of gasoline between December 1973 and March 1974; the additional time cost

implicitly paid by consumers between May 1979 and July 1979 varied from 6 to 33

percent. Thus, the price index for gasoline shown in Figure 1 potentially understates the



                                                 11
true cost of gasoline quite severely in periods affected by the two oils shocks of the

1970s.

             The producer price index for crude petroleum suffers from the same problem

because of the price controls on domestic crude oil. The refiners’ acquisition cost of

imported oil used by Barsky and Kilian (2002) comes closer to measuring the world price

of oil. However, this measure still does not capture all of the additional costs imposed on

the U.S. economy by distortions caused by price controls and the entitlement system.

The reason is that price controls cause inefficiencies and deadweight loss that are larger

than the gap between actual prices and market clearing prices. 7

             In order to capture the true cost of gasoline during these episodes, we propose two

new variables: The first variable augments published gas prices with estimates of the

additional time cost during the periods of gasoline lines. In particular, we use the average

of the rural and urban estimates from Table 1 in Frech and Lee (1987), which compares

the time costs per gallon to the published price per gallon of gasoline for the months of

December 1973 through March 1974 and May 1979 through July 1979.                                   All told,

rationing is estimated to have added between 8 percent (in July 1979) to 67 percent (in

March 1974) to the shadow price of a gallon of gasoline. 8 Using these estimates, we



        7
            For example, Frech and Lee describe inefficiencies in the allocation of gasoline across urban and
rural markets. Similarly, Davis and Killian (2009) show that the total inefficiency costs of price controls on
residential natural gas in the U.S. was three times larger than was the estimate of the simple deadweight
loss.
        8
            Frech and Lee’s estimates are based on data from only California, so the question arises as to how
California’s shortages compared to the rest of the nation. According to the Feb. 8, 1974 Wall Street
Journal, there was no rationing in “New England north of Boston, much of the Midwest, Denver, Nevada,
and Southern California. In Northern California, the word was okay on weekdays and in daylight, but



                                                            12
construct a shortage adjusted index for the real price of gasoline, which is shown as the

dashed line in figure 2.

          Because the rationing-by-queue cost estimates likely capture the effect of

shortages imperfectly, we also consider a second measure—the special question posed by

Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan in the Survey of Consumer Attitudes.

Respondents to the monthly survey are asked several questions related to car buying

conditions. The survey tracks the portion of respondents who cite the price of gasoline or

possible fuel shortages as a reason that car buying conditions are poor. 9 This measure is

shown in Figure 3. The portion of consumers that expressed anxiety over fuel prices

ramped up sharply at the time of the oil price shocks in the 1970s and early 1980s.

Although the rise in real gas prices was much greater in the 2000s than in the 1970s and

early 1980s, the consumer sentiment variable hit similar peaks in both periods.                          A

CNN/Opinion Research Poll conducted in June 2008 found that consumers were more

concerned about long gas lines than about high prices (CNNMoney.com, June 10, 2008).

This may explain why the run-up in gas prices in the 2000s, though bigger than the run-

ups in earlier episodes, did not cause a larger effect on consumer sentiment.




otherwise watch out. There were long lines in Washington, D.C., and the Philadelphia area…and in New
York and New Jersey, where things have been tough for quite a while now.”
     9
         Other reasons consumers can give for this being a bad time for buying a car are: (1) prices of cars
are too high; (2) interest rates are too high; (3) can’t afford to buy; (4) uncertain future; and (5) poor
selection or quality of cars.



                                                         13
      D. The responses of output, consumption, and prices to oil price shocks

            Using the published measures of energy prices and the two variables that account

for non-price rationing in the 1970s, we now revisit the evidence used to suggest that

aggregate activity has been responding less to energy price shocks in recent years than it

used to in the past. The energy price measures we consider are the following: (1) The

consumer price index for gasoline; (2) Hamilton’s (2003,2009b) “net oil price

increases” 10 ; (3) the CPI index for gasoline that has been augmented with the time cost of

rationing-by-queue; and (4) the measure of consumer attitudes toward gasoline prices and

fuel shortages. Our strategy is as follows: First we show that the impulse response

functions from vector autoregressions estimated by Blanchard and Galí (2010) and

Edelstein and Kilian (2009) do not change much if published gasoline prices are used in

place of the authors’ original oil price measures. Second, we show that the impulse

response functions based on gasoline price measures that account for the effects of

shortages present a different story.

            We begin by estimating a vector autoregression (VAR) that is similar to the one

used by Blanchard and Galí (2010).                      The VAR system we estimate is given in

equation (1).

(1)         Yt = A( L)Yt −1 + U t

In the VAR estimated by Blanchard and Galí with quarterly data, Yt includes the nominal

price of oil, the CPI, the GDP deflator, nominal nonfarm compensation, real GDP and




      10
           The Hamilton measure is defined as the log change in the price index for gasoline relative to its
previous three-year high if it is positive, or zero if it is negative



                                                              14
nonfarm business hours. In other specifications, they also included the federal funds rate.

In our version of their analysis, Yt is built from monthly observations of the following

variables (in order): (i) A selected version of one of the oil shock variables, (ii) the

consumer price index (CPI), (iii) nominal wages of private production workers, (iv)

industrial production, (v) civilian hours, and (vi) the federal funds rate. A(L) is a matrix

of polynomials in the lag operator L. U is a vector of disturbances. All variables except

the sentiment measure and the federal funds rate are in logs. The shock to oil prices is

identified using a standard Cholesky decomposition. We include a linear time trend and

six lags of the variables. The data are monthly and span 1967:1 to 2009:12.

       Blanchard and Galí (2010) compare samples that are split between 1983 and

1984, which is the typical split for studies of the Great Moderation. Edelstein and Kilian

(2009) study samples split between 1987 and 1988. We choose a split between 1985 and

1986, as this date is between the dates used by these authors, and it also coincides with

the rather dramatic change in the nature of the oil market that occurred in 1986.

       We summarize the results in table 1. As an alternative to showing dozens of

impulse response functions from various permutations of oil price measures and

estimation periods, table 1 shows the peak response of key macro variables to a shock in

each oil price indicator in each period.

       The oil measure used for each impulse is shown in the first line of each panel in

the table. The shock has been normalized so that the size of the increase at its peak is

equal to one in both periods. It is important to note, however, that the standard deviations

of the (non-normalized) shocks to nominal gas prices and to Hamilton’s net price gain

measure are more than twice as high in the second period as in the first period. In


                                                15
contrast, the standard deviation of the shocks to the shortage-adjusted gas price is roughly

constant across the periods, whereas the standard deviation of the shocks to the measure

of consumer sentiment toward gasoline is about 50 percent higher in the second period.

           The key comparison in Table 1 is the ratio in the last column. For a given shock

in the gas cost variable, it shows the ratio of the peak response of the other variables in

the second period to the peak response in the first period. The results for both the

standard nominal gas price measure and Hamilton’s nonlinear measure show that the

responses of both industrial production and hours are less than half as large in the second

period as in the first period. The response of inflation appears to have declined by an

even larger proportion than did the real variables. In contrast, when either the real index

of gas prices adjusted for the cost of shortages or the measure of consumer sentiment

about gas prices/shortages are used as the oil price indicator, the peak response of

industrial production becomes greater in the second period than in the first period. For

hours, the response remains slightly less in the second period than in the first period if we

use as the oil price indicator the shortage adjusted gas price index, but it becomes greater

if we use the measure of consumer sentiment. 11 However, the response of inflation is

still lower in the second period than in the first period even if the shortage adjusted gas

price index or the gasoline sentiment measure is used as the oil price indicator. 12




     11
          We do not show the response of nominal wages and the funds rate because their responses are not
significantly different from zero and the dynamic patterns swing from positive to negative in some cases.
     12
          The results are similar if we substitute the chained price deflator for personal consumption
expenditures for the consumer price index.



                                                        16
       To examine more formally the relationship between consumer sentiment toward

gasoline and the various gasoline price measures, we estimate a number of bivariate

vector auto regressions and compare the relationship in the early and late periods. We

find that shocks to the published CPI for gasoline appear to have an effect on sentiment in

the early period that is about twice as large as the effect in the late period. In contrast,

shocks to the shortage adjusted gasoline price index have about the same peak effect on

sentiment in each period. This evidence suggests that the presence of shortages in the

early period is the key difference between shocks to gasoline sentiment and shocks to the

published CPI for gasoline.

       Edelstein and Kilian (2009) find that much of the decline in aggregate activity (or

aggregate consumption, more specifically) that follows a jump in oil prices comes

through demand for motor vehicles. They also show that this channel has weakened over

time, thereby reducing the effect of oil shocks on aggregate activity. Because this result

is even more likely to have been affected by presence of market distortions in the 1970s,

we also re-estimate a VAR similar to the Edelstein and Kilian (2009) model, using our

shortage adjusted measures for the true cost of gasoline.

       We estimate a trivariate VAR, in which Yt is defined by (i) one of the oil cost

indicators, (ii) the log of real total consumption excluding motor vehicles, and (iii) the log

of real consumption of motor vehicles. In the first set of results, we use as an energy

price indicator the Edelstein and Kilian (2009) measure of the purchasing power lost to

increases in oil prices: This measure scales the changes in real energy prices by the share




                                                 17
of energy in consumption expenditures. 13 In the second set of results, we use as an oil

cost indicator the consumer sentiment toward gasoline. In each set of results we estimate

the VAR in two sample periods: 1967:1 – 1985:12 and 1986:1 – 2009:12. We normalize

each shock so that the peak responses of the shock variable are equal to one in each

sample period.

           Figure 4 shows the estimates, with filled dots indicating when the estimated

response is more than two standard deviations from zero and open circles indicating

when the response is more than one but less than two standard deviations from zero. The

panels to the left show responses that use the Edelstein and Kilian purchasing power

series as an oil cost indicator, and the responses to the shocks are largely consistent with

those originally reported by Edelstein and Kilian. Specifically, the response of total

consumption falls less sharply in the second sample period than in the first sample period,

though the responses are not statistically significant in either period. To the degree that

the response has changed, the bottom panel shows that most of the change comes from

the consumption of motor vehicles: The response in the consumption of motor vehicles is

much less in the second period (the dashed line) than the first period (the solid line).

           The column to the right in figure 4 shows the impulse responses obtained when

the consumer sentiment toward gasoline serves as the oil cost indicator.                            Several

comparisons here stand out.            First, the responses of consumption to these shocks have

not diminished between the early and late periods; this holds true for the consumption of



     13
          We also considered a measure that scaled prices by the average fuel efficiency of the motor vehicle
stock and the miles driven by households. The results were similar to those using the Edelstein and Kilian
measure.



                                                          18
motor vehicles and the consumption of all other goods and services. Moreover, the

responses in the second period appear to be more persistent than those in the first period.

Second, the responses based on these shocks are statistically significant, an indication

that real activity is more closely related to consumer perceptions of the price of gasoline

and its availability than it is to published fuel prices. And third, the decline in

consumption of motor vehicles after a gasoline price sentiment shock is many times

larger than the response of consumption excluding motor vehicles. 14

           For comparison, we also estimated the impulse response based on other measures

of energy prices. Using the Hamilton measure of net oil price increases, the responses

show a significant muting between the early and the late samples. If we use the shortage

adjusted measure of gasoline prices, we find results qualitatively similar to those obtained

using consumer sentiment toward gasoline as the oil cost indicator. The responses to oil

shocks are only slightly smaller in the second period than in the first periods; the peak

impact on total consumption is 0.9 in the second period relative to the first, and on motor

vehicle consumption is 0.8.

           To summarize, when oil price shocks are measured as the shocks to either the

published price index for gasoline, the Hamilton net increase in oil prices, or the

Edelstein and Kilian purchasing power measure, we confirm the results from the

literature that oil shocks have much less of an impact on the economy after 1985 than

they did up until 1985. In contrast, when we measure oil shocks as either the shocks to



     14
          The relative magnitudes of the estimated responses imply that about 30 percent of the decline in
total consumption that occurs 15 months after a gasoline price shock comes from the decline in motor
vehicle consumption.



                                                         19
the price of gasoline adjusted for the cost of shortages or as the shocks to consumer

sentiment toward gasoline, we find that the impact of these shocks on real activity has

either diminished only slightly or has become larger in the later period. Lastly, all

measures of energy price shocks produce results that suggest the motor vehicle industry

is a key part of the transmission mechanism between oil shocks and real activity. Thus,

the remainder of the paper presents evidence that, although the motor vehicle industry has

changed in many ways over the past 40 years, this sector continues to act as an important

propagation mechanism between oil price shocks and real activity.


   II. The contribution of the motor vehicle sector to the U.S. Economy

         The contraction in the size of the Detroit three automakers in recent decades often

leaves the impression that the contribution of the auto industry to the U.S. economy has

declined significantly. In this section we present some measures of the contribution of

the entire domestic motor vehicle industry (the portion operated by the Detroit firms as

well as the portion operated by other firms) to the U.S. economy and to the business

cycle.

         Figure 5 shows two measures of the contribution of motor vehicle output to U.S.

GDP: Panel A shows the quarterly values of a statistic commonly referred to as “gross

motor vehicle output,” and panel B shows annual estimates of the domestic value added

of motor vehicle and parts manufacturing, a narrower view of the industry’s contribution

to GDP. 15 The lower line in each of these graphs displays each measure of output as a



    15
         “Gross motor vehicle output” in the NIPAs is the retail value of motor vehicles sold to final
consumers (households, businesses, and governments) and the wholesale value of vehicles invested in



                                                      20
share of total GDP, and the upper lines plot these measures as a share of either goods

GDP (for gross motor vehicle output) or total value added from goods manufacturing (for

motor vehicle and parts manufacturing value added). Shares are calculated from nominal

expenditures data reported in the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs). The

dashed lines in the figure represent the 95 percent confidence interval for the sample

mean of each line in two sample periods: 1967 to 1985, and 1986 to 2007 (before the

financial crisis had affected vehicle sales).

         Two features of the graphs in figure 5 are worth noting: First, motor vehicle

output drops abruptly in recessions, and many of these recessions followed large

increases in gasoline prices. As shown in table 2, the motor vehicle sector alone accounts

for between 14 and 22 percent of the variance of the quarterly changes in real GDP,

depending on the time period. Even after the great moderation, these figures continue to

exceed the moderate size of the motor vehicle sector.

         The second feature of the graph that is worth noting is that the size of the motor

vehicle industry as a share of the U.S. economy does not show a downward trend that is

as striking as one might expect. As a share of total GDP (the top line in Panel A), motor

vehicles represented about 4 percent of the U.S. economy between 1967 and 1985, and

that figure declined to 3½ percent between 1986 and 2007. As a share of the goods

producing sectors of the U.S. economy, however, motor vehicle output actually increased



inventories. This series is adjusted for net exports of motor vehicles and has the advantage of capturing all
of the value added from the production process as well as from the distribution of motor vehicles to final
demand, including the wholesale and retail margins. This measure is not the same as “gross output of motor
vehicles and parts” in the U.S. industry accounts, which is the sum of all sales and receipts in the industry,
including sales of intermediate inputs to firms in other (or in the same) industries.



                                                           21
between the two periods, from about 10½ percent in the early sample, to about

11½ percent in the more recent sample. Manufacturing value added gives a similar

picture:      Motor vehicle and parts manufacturers accounted for 5.7 percent of U.S.

manufacturing value added in the 1970s and early 1980s, and this share slipped to

5.2 percent in the more recent period. However, as shown by the dashed lines, the

decline between the two periods is not very pronounced relative to its high volatility. 16

          All told, the motor vehicle sector has been a modest but relatively stable share of

the goods producing sector over the past 40 years, and the declines that have occurred in

its contribution to total GDP mostly reflect an increase in the size of the services sector.

Most importantly, the auto industry continues to induce swings in aggregate activity that

far exceed its modest size.


   III. Oil shocks and the demand for motor vehicles

          We now describe theories of how gasoline prices affect vehicle demand and then

present evidence in some detailed auto industry data that consumers adjust their vehicle

buying patterns in response to changes in gasoline prices. In addition, we show that this

behavior has not changed much over the past 40 years.

          A rather large literature has developed—much of it in the late 1970s—to analyze

how households respond to changes in gasoline prices by making adjustments to their


     16
          One additional measure of motor vehicle output that we examined (but do not report) is motor
vehicle and parts output. This wider view of the industry is intended to help control for the value of
imported intermediate inputs to motor vehicle production that have risen over time. (See Kurz, and
Lengermann (2008), and Klier and Rubenstein (2009).) Using this adjusted measure, motor vehicle output
was 12½ percent of goods GDP in both the early and late periods, and it declined from 4¾ percent of total
GDP in the early period, to 3¾ percent in the later period.



                                                          22
vehicle stock and to their driving behavior (e.g. Dahl (1979)). 17 More recently, Wei

(2009) casts the vehicle purchasing decision in a general equilibrium framework, in

which households invest in transportation capital with a particular level of fuel efficiency

and then combine it with gasoline to produce the good that ultimately enters their utility

functions—personal vehicle travel. Because consumers are forward looking, changes in

gasoline prices lead to dynamic effects on the vehicle stock and average fuel efficiency.

           Following a gasoline price shock, households respond in the short run mostly by

reducing travel, though estimates from the literature suggest the response in the short run

is quite low (e.g. Hughes, Knittel and Sperling (2006)). Over long horizons, households

adjust their vehicle technology and reduce further their consumption of gasoline. Using

her DSGE model calibrated to US fuel and vehicle consumption data, Wei (2009) finds

that vehicle purchases and total miles traveled decline after a permanent shock to

gasoline prices, though the equilibrium fuel efficiency of new vehicles increases.

           These theories suggest that permanent increases in gasoline prices lead

households to reduce vehicle travel in the short run and then to replace their vehicle stock

in the long run. In the very-long run, gasoline prices can also impact where households

choose to live and work.

           To see the effects of these decisions on vehicle travel over the past 40 years,

figure 6 plots total vehicle miles traveled per household in the United States between

1970 and 2009. Two features in the figure are noteworthy: First, households nowadays

consume a significantly larger amount of travel than they did in the early 1970s: The


     17
          The CBO study from January 2008, “Effect of Gasoline Prices on Driving Behavior and Vehicle
Markets,” surveys much of the literature from the 1970s.



                                                           23
average household drove approximately 1,500 miles per month in 1970, and that figure

has increased 50 percent, to almost 2,200 miles per month in the period 2000-2007.

Second, households do cut back on travel when gasoline prices increase, though part of

the decline in travel likely also reflects the deterioration in the broader economy that also

occurs at these times.

           While households now drive more each month than they did in the early 1970s,

they do so in vehicles that are, on average, more fuel efficient. Figure 7 shows data from

the U.S. Department of Transportation on the average fuel efficiency of the registered

stocks of cars and light trucks (which include SUVs and vans). As seen in the plot, the

average fuel economy for each type of vehicle has increased over the sample, though

much of the gains occurred in the 1980s, after the United States introduced Corporate

Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards that were met by reducing the average weight

of cars and introducing some technological improvements to engine design.

           One feature of figure 7 that receives lots of attention is the marked slowdown (or

near halt) in the rate of improvement for average fuel economy that occurred in the

1990s. This was an era of relatively cheap gasoline, and, likely as a result, demand

shifted away from cars and toward larger sports utility vehicles. 18 Studies that more

carefully take into account vehicle size and engine horsepower, such as Knittel (2009),

conclude that the technological frontier of fuel-economy/vehicle-weight/engine-power

possibilities continued to expand over this period, but these improvements are obscured

in aggregate data by the shift in sales across vehicle size classes.


     18
          The average fuel efficiency of vehicles flowing into the stock each year (i.e., new sales) actually
decreased during the 1990s, as the mix in sales shifted toward light trucks.



                                                          24
           Shifts in vehicle demand across vehicle size classes often occur when gasoline

prices move dramatically, a stylized fact that was discussed by Bresnahan and Ramey

(1993). To see evidence of this, figure 8 shows the domestic market shares of vehicles of

various sizes. 19 The panel to the left shows the key market shares in the 1970s and early

1980s. The domestic market share for standard-size cars fell noticeably in 1973 and did

not stabilize until almost two years later.20 When the second oil price shocks hit in 1979,

this market share fell even further. The market share of small cars moved in the opposite

direction on both occasions.

           The panel to the right shows market shares of key vehicle segments in the 2000s.

The patterns in market shares since 2000 have been similar to those observed in the

earlier episodes of sharp gas prices increases, though the scope of the variety of products

available has grown considerably since the 1970s. The market share of full size pickups,

utility vehicles and vans fell more than 15 percentage points between its peak in 2004 and

early 2009. Small cars and the new cross utility vehicle segment picked up most of this

market share. 21




     19
          This graph focuses on the market for domestically produced goods. An additional effect not shown
in the graph is the shift to imported cars when oil prices increase; this move occurred in both the in 1980s
and in the 2000s. The share of imported vehicles rose from about 15 percent in the mid 1970s to about
25 percent in the first half of the 1980s. The import share then fell back as foreign automakers began to
establish manufacturing operations in North America, and the import share fell below 10 percent by 1996,
The market share of imported vehicles turned up again in the late 1990s, and the share moved up from
17 percent in 2000, to 26 percent in 2009.
     20
          The domestic market share excludes vehicles imported from outside North America.
     21
          A cross-utility vehicle is a utility vehicle that is assembled on a car chassis. They are classified by
the industry as a light truck.



                                                            25
  IV. The response of motor vehicle production

          Shocks that affect motor vehicle sales often lead to changes in the rate of

production that are quite abrupt, and the high level of volatility in motor vehicle

production has been studied extensively in the literature on inventories and production

scheduling. It is well-understood how changes in aggregate vehicle demand can lead to

reductions in production. In this section, we show how changes in the composition of

demand, such as those induced by gas price increases, can lead to further declines in

output.

          We begin by presenting an inventory model in which segment shifts lead to

capacity mismatches and thereby reduce output.       We then study this channel using

detailed auto industry data by vehicle size class. We find that segment shifts are an

important channel through which oil shocks affect the U.S. motor vehicle industry and

that the importance of this channel has not declined much over time.


    A. Segment shifts and the constraints on capacity

          Bresnahan and Ramey (1993) speculated that a shift in demand from one vehicle

segment to another, with no decline in overall demand, can lead to a decrease in

production and capacity utilization. They also argued that the variance of days’ supply

(i.e. the inventory-sales ratio) across segments reflects mismatches between capacity and

demand for vehicles in some segments.

          In order to formalize this hypothesis, we consider a simple model of a profit-

maximizing monopolist that sells cars to two segments of demand. For each segment i,

the monopolist chooses the price, Pt, and schedules production using regular time hours,

RHt, and overtime hours, OHt. These choices determine expected sales, St, and expected


                                               26
end-of period inventories, It. The firm maximizes the expected present discounted value

of profits, given as equation (2).

                       ∞
(2)        Π 0 = E0 ∑ β t [ P1t S1t + P2t S 2t − Costt ]
                      t =0



 The costs of production and inventory holding are given by equation (3).

           Costt = γ ⋅ RH1t + γ ⋅ RH 2t + γ ⋅ ω ⋅ OH1t + γ ⋅ ω ⋅ OH 2t
(3)                           1                         1
                             + α1 ( I1t −1 − φ1S1t ) 2 + α 2 ( I 2t −1 − φ2 S 2t ) 2
                              2                         2

Inventory stocks evolve according to equation (4),

(4)        I it = I it −1 + RH it + OH it − S it , i = 1, 2

and the use of regular time hours is limited by the capacity constraints in equation (5).

(5)        RH it ≤ K , i = 1, 2

The parameters of the model satisfy the following restrictions: 0 < β < 1; γ > 0; ω > 1; αi,

φi > 0; K > 0.

       Relative to the familiar linear-quadratic production smoothing model, the

inventory holding costs in equation (3) are the same, but the marginal costs of production

are somewhat more complicated:                       Marginal costs in this model are flat when the

monopolist uses regular time hours but rise when the firm must increase its workweek of

capital and use overtime hours or a second shift.                               This assumption induces a key

asymmetry in marginal costs.

       Finally, the sales processes for segments 1 and 2 are described by equations (6)

and (7).

(6)        S1t = θ A − θ B P1t + utseg + utagg

(7)        S 2t = θ A − θ B P2t − utseg + utagg

                                                                   27
There are two types of demand shifts in these sales equations: The first, utseg , is a variable

that shifts demand away from one segment and toward the other, while the second, utagg ,

is a variable that shifts the demand curves for all types of vehicles in the same direction.

We assume that each of these shift variables follows an AR(1) process as shown in

equations (8) and (9).

(8)         utseg = ρ ⋅ utseg
                           −1 + ε t



(9)         utagg = ρ ⋅ utagg + ηt

The autocorrelation parameter ρ lies between 0 and 1, and the shocks ε and η are white

noise.

            An increase in gasoline prices affects vehicle sales through both utagg and utseg .

To study the effects of the second type of shock—the shift in sales between segments—

we simulate the model and evaluate the optimal paths of key choice variables. To

calibrate the simulation, β and φi are set to match the averages observed in the data for

interest rates and days’ supply for light vehicles. We choose values for K, θA, θB, and γ to       B




generate a price elasticity of demand of -1.5 at the steady-state level of output, a figure

that is in the range of empirical estimates for total vehicle demand. 22 Finally, we set αi

and ω so that the premium on overtime hours or second shift hours is ten percent.                      23
                                                                                                            The




      22
           Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) find much higher elasticities (in absolute value) for particular
models.
      23
           The statutory overtime premium is 50 percent, whereas shift premia are typically 5 to 10 percent.
Trejo (1991) has found that the implicit overtime premium is substantially lower than 50 percent. Thus,
our assumption of a 10 percent premium is within the relevant range.



                                                           28
simulation considers shocks that shift the intercept of the demand curve by 10 percent,

with ρ equal to 0.75. 24

           Because plants face the same cost function in each segment, the effects of an

aggregate shock on inventories and production are the same in each segment. And,

because the inventory-sales ratios change by equal amounts in each segment, the cross-

section variance of the days’ supply remains zero. This is not the case for shocks that

shift demand between segments, a scenario that is shown in figure 9. If demand for

segment 1 cars shifts up and demand for segment 2 cars shifts down by an equal amount,

total production falls because the rise in output in segment 1 does not fully offset the fall

in output in segment 2. The asymmetric response of production reflects the increase in

marginal costs that occurs at the capacity constraint. Mirroring this pattern, the price of

vehicles in segment 1 rises by an amount that is different from the decline in the price of

vehicles in segment 2.              All told, segment shifts reduce total production, sales, and

capacity utilization, and they drive up the variance of days’ supply across vehicle

segments.

           Some of these results depend critically on the increase in marginal cost that

occurs when production exceeds the level of capacity. 25 If costs were instead quadratic,

as is assumed in the standard production smoothing model, then marginal costs would be

linear, capacity utilization would have no effect on production costs, and segment shifts




     24
          The values of the parameters are as follows: β = 0.997, φi = 2.5 for i = 1, 2, K= 40, θA = 100, θB = 1,
γ = 19.85, αi = 0.1, and ω = 1.1.
     25
          Several authors in the capacity utilization literature define full capacity as the point beyond which
marginal production costs begin to rise too rapidly. See Klein (1960) and Corrado and Mattey (1996).



                                                            29
would not reduce total production.26 The variance of days’ supply would still increase in

the case of quadratic costs, but the asymmetric response of production to positive and

negative demand shocks requires the marginal cost function to exhibit some curvature.


     B. Evidence of capacity constraints and segment shifts in the auto industry

           To see the effects of segment shifts in the detailed auto industry data, figure 10

plots day’s supply for vehicles in selected size classes in the early and late periods. In the

earlier period, days’ supply of standard cars grew to uncomfortably high levels at the

time of both oil shocks, and days’ supply for small cars moved down. Similarly, in the

later period, days’ supply for full size trucks, vans and utilities climbed to critically high

levels between 2000 and 2008, while days’ supply for small cars and cross utility

vehicles moved down between 1998 and 2000 before edging back up in 2002. As the

shift in demand between segments accelerated again at the end of 2004, days’ supply for

small vehicles receded, and several of the models in these segments were reported to be

in short supply. 27 The onset of the financial crisis in the second half of 2008 appears to

have been a common shock that pushed up days’ supply for almost all vehicle segments.




     26
          See, for example, equation (7) of Ramey and Vine (2006).
     27
          The patterns in sales and days’ supply between 2000 and 2009 were influenced by occasional
inventory clearance events, often targeted toward full size trucks and SUVs.     The Detroit manufacturers
have typically dominated the full size truck market segments and therefore faced significant loss in market
share as sales of these vehicles sagged over this period. The large dip in days’ supply in late 2001 reflects
the advent of zero-interest financing, and the plunge in stocks in 2005 coincides with the extension of these
firms’ employee-discount programs to all customers.



                                                         30
            To measure these supply imbalances on a more general scale, we calculate the

variance of days’ supply across size categories, V DS , that was described earlier. The

formula is shown in equation (10).

                              11
                                    I ti
                                      A (
                     Vt DS = ∑            DSti − DStA ) ; i = 1, 2,...,11
                                                       2
(10)
                             i =1   It

I ti denotes inventories on hand in vehicle segment i at the end of period t, I tA is the

aggregate inventory stock, DSti is days’ supply for each segment, DStA denotes aggregate

days’ supply, and i ranges from 1 to 11, covering five car segments (subcompact,

compact, intermediate, full-size and luxury) and six truck segments (compact pickups,

full-size pickups, small vans, large vans, cross utility vehicles, and full-size utility

vehicles). An increase the variance of days’ supply across segments indicates that the

imbalance between the composition of capacity and the composition of demand has

become worse. 28

            The variance of days’ supply is plotted in Figure 11 from January 1972 to March

2009. Large spikes in the variance correspond quite closely with the increases in fuel

prices discussed earlier. Also, the severity of some of the supply-demand imbalances that

occurred after 2002 appear even greater than the magnitudes observed in the early 1980s.

To investigate the empirical relationship between these spikes in the variance of days’

supply, the cost of gasoline, and movements in capacity utilization, we estimate a VAR in



       28
            In the theoretical model presented above, the variance of days’ supply in steady state was zero,
because the parameters of the cost function were the same for each vehicle segment. In actual industry
data, vehicle types often show distinct long-run average inventory-sales ratios. This implies that the cross-
sectional variance can be positive in steady state.



                                                               31
which. Yt includes four variables: (i) consumer sentiment about gasoline prices or

shortages; (ii) aggregate days-supply for domestic vehicles; (iii) the variance of days

supply across segments (defined in equation (10)); and (iv) capacity utilization for light

motor vehicle assembly. 29 The VAR also includes six lags and a linear time trend.

            Oil shocks in the VAR play two roles: First, oil shocks reduce aggregate demand

and dampen sales for all types of vehicles. In the production model described earlier, this

role resembles the aggregate shock that drives up days’ supply for the entire industry and

reduces capacity utilization for all segments. Second, high gas prices lead to segment

shifts in demand away from large vehicles and toward small vehicles. This role leads to

mismatches in capacity and drives up the variance of days’ supply across vehicle

segments. Our production model also shows how shocks in this role can reduce capacity

utilization when capacity constraints push up marginal costs for the products in demand.

            Figure 12 shows the responses of the variables in Yt to a shock to the measure of

consumer sentiment toward gasoline (meaning a higher percentage of consumers were

worried about high gas prices), which is ordered first in the VAR. The VAR is estimated

over the full sample from January 1972 to March 2009. As seen in the figure, both the

level and variance of days-supply increase after a sentiment shock, indicating that shocks

to gasoline sentiment affect demand both as an aggregate shock and as segment shifting

shock. According to the last panel, capacity utilization also falls significantly.




     29
           The production theory presented above suggests that one should also include vehicle prices for each
segment, but unfortunately we lack data on segment specific vehicle prices over much of the necessary
history.



                                                           32
       Has the relationship between these variables changed over time? To answer this

question, we compare the impulse response functions from VARs estimated separately

for the 1972—1985 and 1986—2009 periods and plot the results in figure 13. The

shocks to consumer sentiment toward gasoline have been normalized to reach a peak of

1.0 in both periods. As seen in the figure, the peak responses of both the level and

variance of days’ supply are about 30 percent larger in the early period than in the later

period. The response of capacity utilization, however, is about the same in both periods.

       Finally, using the VAR estimates and a set of counter-factual experiments, we

parse the response of capacity utilization to oil shocks into portions that reflect the

aggregate demand channel and the segment shifts channel. In one experiment, we plot

the response of utilization to a gasoline sentiment shock after we have shut down the

segment shifts channel by replacing the estimated coefficients of the days’ supply

equation in the VAR with zeros. The difference between the baseline response and this

counter-factual response reveals the contribution of the aggregate demand channel to the

transmission of gasoline shocks to capacity utilization. In a second experiment, we shut

down the segment shifts channel by setting the coefficients of the variance of days’

supply equation to zero. The third experiment shuts down both channels.

       The panels in figure 14 show the results of the each experiment; the solid lines

represent the baseline response of capacity utilization to a gasoline sentiment shock, and

the dashed lines represent one of the counterfactual responses. In the first panel, the

counterfactual response is only half as large as the baseline response, a comparison that

suggests the contraction in demand for all vehicles plays an important role in transmitting

oil shocks to motor vehicle production. The counterfactual response in the second panel



                                                33
is also only about half as large when the segment shifts channel is shutdown, indicating

that this channel is also important. The counterfactual response in the third panel remains

very close to zero, suggesting that omitted channels are not too important.

       The counter-factual exercises indicate that the level and variance of days’ supply

channels are about equally important in transmitting oil shocks to motor vehicle output.

These results imply that oil shocks have both aggregate effects and segment shift effects.

Moreover, the relationship between these variables appears to have been stable over time.


   V. Conclusions

       This paper has studied the impact of oil shocks on the U.S. economy and its motor

vehicle industry and has examined whether these relationships have changed over time.

We have found that, once the costs of queuing are added to the prices paid for gasoline

during the gasoline shortages in the 1970s, real output in the United States has been as

sensitive to oil price shocks since the mid 1980s as it had been in the 1970s and early

1980s. The effect on inflation, however, has diminished over time.

       We have also found that the motor vehicle industry plays an important role in

propagating oil price shocks to the rest of the U.S. economy and that, despite the many

innovations in the ways motor vehicles are produced and consumed, the primary channels

through which oil prices directly affect demand for motor vehicles have not weakened

much over time. Specifically, the abrupt shifts in demand across vehicle size classes that

stem from oil shocks have been as disruptive to the supply-demand relationship in the

motor vehicle industry since the mid 1980s as they were in the 1970s and early 1980s.

       Our results may impact the debate over which changes in the U.S. economy have

led to the decline in GDP volatility since the mid 1980s, or the “Great Moderation.” If


                                                34
the relationship between oil shocks and real output had, in fact, become weaker since the

mid 1980s, then this stylized fact could have bolstered arguments that structural change

had reduced the sensitivity of output to these types of shocks. Our results, to the

contrary, suggest that this particular relationship has been stable over time.       The

diminished impact of oil shocks on inflation, however, may support the theory that

monetary policy has played a role in reducing volatility. Finally, our results point to

another change in government policy that may also have reduced the volatility of output

since the 1970s: A decline in the propensity to use price controls.




                                                35
                                        Work Cited

Aguiar-Conraria, Luis, and Yi Wen. 2007. Understanding the Large Negative Impact of

       Oil Shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39(4): 926-944.

Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1999. Models of Energy Use: Putty-Putty versus

       Putty-Clay. The American Economic Review 89(4): 1028-1043.

Barsky, Robert B. and Lutz Kilian. 2002. Do We Really Know That Oil Caused the Great

       Stagflation? A Monetary Alternative. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001 16:

       137-183.

Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment. Quarterly

       Journal of Economics. 98: 85-106.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Mark Watson. 1997. Systematic Monetary Policy

       and the Effects of Oil Price Shocks. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1:

       91-142.

Berndt, Ernst R., and David O. Wood. 1975. Technology, Prices, and the Derived

       Demand for Energy. Review of Economics and Statistics. 57: 259-68.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. Automobile Prices in Market

       Equilibrium. Econometrica 63: 841-890.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí. 2007. The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Price

       Shocks: Why are the 2000s so Different from the 1970s?             International

       Dimensions of Monetary Policy. ed. Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler. 373-421.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Marianna Riggi. 2009. Why are the 2000s so Different from the

       1970s? A Structural Interpretation of Changes in the Macroeconomic Effects of




                                             36
       Oil Prices. NBER working paper no. 15467. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of

       Economic Research.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Valerie A. Ramey. 1993. Segment Shifts and Capacity

       Utilization in the U.S. Automobile Industry. American Economic Review 83: 213-

       218.

-------------------------------------. 1994. Output Fluctuations at the Plant Level.   The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 109: 593-624.

Bruno, Michael and Jeffrey Sachs. 1982. Input Price Shocks and the Slowdown in

       Economic Growth: The Case of UK Manufacturing. Review of Economic Studies.

       49: 679-705.

Congressional Budget Office. 2008. Effects of Gasoline Prices on Driving Behavior and

       Vehicle Markets. A CBO study. Congressional Budget Office: Washington, DC.

Corrado, Carol and Joe Mattey. 1997. Capacity Utilization. Journal of Economic

       Perspectives. 1: 151 - 167.

Dahl, Carol A. 1979. Consumer Adjustment to a Gasoline Tax. Review of Economics and

       Statistics. 61(3): 427-432.

Davis, Steven. 1987. Fluctuations in the Pace of Labor Reallocation. Carnegie Rochester

       Conference Series on Public Policy. 27: 335-402.

Davis, Lucas W. and Lutz Kilian. 2009. The Allocative Cost of Price Ceilings in the U.S.

       Residential Market for Natural Gas. University of Michigan Working Paper: Ann

       Arbor, MI.




                                               37
Deacon, Robert T. and Jon Sonstelie. 1985. Rationing by Waiting and the Value of Time:

       Results from a Natural Experiment. Journal of Political Economy. 93(1): 627-

       647.

Edelstein, Paul and Lutz Kilian. 2009. How Sensitive are Consumer Expenditures to

       Retail Energy Prices? Journal of Monetary Economics 56: 766-779.

Finn, Mary G. 1991. Energy Price Shocks, Capacity Utilization and Business Cycle

       Fluctuations. Discussion Paper 50. Institute for Empirical Macroeconomics,

       Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Finn, Mary G. 2000. Perfect Competition and the Effects of Energy Price Increases on

       Economic Activity. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. 32: 400-416.

Frech III, H.E. and William C. Lee. 1987. The Welfare Cost of Rationing-by-Queue

       Across Markets: Theory and Estimates from the U.S. Gasoline Crises. Quarterly

       Journal of Economics. 102: 97-108.

Frum, David. 2000. How We Got Here: the 70s. Basic Books. New York, NY.

Graham, Daniel and Stephen Glaister. 2002. The Demand for Automobile Fuel: A Survey

       of Elasticities. Jounral of Transport Economics and Policy. 36: 1-26.

Hamilton, James D., 1983. Oil and the Macroeconomy since WWII. Journal of Political

       Economy 91: 228-248.

----------------. 1988. A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business Cycle.

       Journal of Political Economy. 96: 593-617.

----------------. 2003. What Is an Oil Shock? Journal of Econometrics. 113: 363-398.

----------------. 2009a. Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007-08. Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activity. 1: 215-261.



                                               38
----------------. 2009b. Yes, the Response of the U.S. Economy to Energy Prices is

       Nonlinear. UCSD working paper, University of California, San Diego: La Jolla,

       CA.

Hamilton, James D., and Ana Maria Herrera. 2004. Oil Shocks and Aggregate

       macroeconomic Behavior: The Role of Monetary Policy. Journal of Money,

       Credit and Banking. 36(2): 265-86.

Helbling, Hans H. and James E. Turley. 1975. Oil Price Controls: A Counterproductive

       Effort. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review. November: 2-6.

Herrera, Ana María and Elena Pesavento. 2009. Oil Price Shocks, Systematic Monetary

       Policy, and the ‘Great Moderation’. Macroeconomic Dynamics 13: 107-137.

Hooker, Mark A. 1996. What Happened to the Oil Price-Macroeconomy Relationship?

       Journal of Monetary Economics. 38(2): 195-213.

Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling. 2006. Evidence of a

       Shift in the Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand. Research Report

       UCD-ITS-RR-096-16. University of California, Davis: Institute of Transportation

       Studies: Davis, CA.

Kilian, Lutz. 2010. Explaining Fluctuations in Gasoline Prices: A Joint Model of the

       Global Crude Oil Market and the U.S. Retail Gasoline Market. The Energy

       Journal 31: 103-128.

Kilian, Lutz and Robert J. Vigfusson. 2009. Pitfalls in Estimating Asymmetric Effects of

       Energy Price Shocks. CEPR Discussion Paper no. DP7284. Center for Economic

       Policy Research: London.




                                              39
Klein, Lawrence R. 1960. Some Theoretical Issues in the Measurement of Capacity.

       Econometrica. 28:2: 272-286.

Klier, Thomas H., and James M. Rubenstein. 2009. Imports of Intermediate Parts in the

       Auto Industry—A Case Study. Paper prepared for the conference “Measurement

       Issues Arising from the Growth of Globalization.” Washington, DC.

Knittel, Christopher R. 2009. Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-offs and

       Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector. NBER working paper no.

       15162. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kurz, Christopher, and Paul Lengermann. 2008. Outsourcing and U.S. Economic

       Growth: The Role of Imported Intermediate Inputs. Paper prepared for the 2008

       World Congress on National Accounts and Economic Performance Measures for

       Nations. Arlington, VA.

Leduc, Sylvain, and Keith Sill. 2004. A Quantitative Analysis of Oil-Price Shocks,

       Systematic Monetary Policy, and Economic Downturns. Journal of Monetary

       Economics. 51: 781-808.

Lee, William C. 1980. Demand for Travel and the Gasoline Crisis. Transportation

       Research Record. No. 764: 38-42.

Li, Shanjun, Christopher Timmins, and Roger von Haefen. 2008. How do Gasoline Prices

       affect Fleet Fuel Economy? NBER Working Paper no. W14450. Cambridge, MA:

       National Bureau of Economic Research.

McAlinden, Sean P., Kim Hill, and Bernard Swiecki. 2003. Economic Contribution of the

       Automotive Industry to the U.S. Economy—An Update. Ann Arbor, MI: Center

       for Automotive Research.



                                             40
McConnell, Margaret M., and Gabriel Perez-Quiros. 2000. Output Fluctuations in the

       United States: What has Changed Since the Early 1980s? American Economic

       Review. 90(5): 1464-76.

Mork, Knut Anton. 1989. Oil and Macroeconomy When Prices Go Up and Down: An

       Extension of Hamilton’s Results. Journal of Political Economy. 97(3): 740-44.

Pindyck, Robert S., and Julio J. Rotemberg. 1983. Dynamic Factor Demands and the

       Effects of Energy Price Shocks. American Economic Review. 73(5): 1066-79.

Pisarski, Alan E. and Niels de Terra. 1975. American and European Transportation

       Responses to the 1973-74 Arab Oil Embargo. Transportation. 4: 291-312.

Ramey, Valerie A. and Daniel J. Vine. 2006. Declining Volatility in the U.S. Automobile

       Industry. American Economic Review. 96(5): 1876-89.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1996. Imperfect Competition and the Effects

       of Energy Price Increases on Economic Activity. Journal of Money, Credit and

       Banking. 28(4): 550-77.

U.S. Department of Energy. 2009. Transportation Energy Databook: Edition 28.

       Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy.

Wei, Chao. 2009. A Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Driving, Gasoline Use and

       Vehicle Fuel Efficiency. George Washington University working paper. George

       Washington University. Washington, DC.




                                             41
                                                           Table 1

                                The Peak Effects of Oil Shocks on U.S. Variables



                  Estimation period:            Jan. 1967 to Dec. 1985          Jan. 1986 to Dec. 2009
                                                                                                              Ratio
                                                                  Month                           Month
                                                 Peak effect                      Peak effect
                                                                 of peak                         of peak
                                                          (1)        (2)                  (3)        (4)    (3)/(1)

            Nominal gas price                          1.000             3             1.000           2

               Industrial production                  -0.202            24            -0.091          20       0.45

               Hours                                  -0.099            26            -0.035          32       0.35

               CPI                                     0.184            19             0.051          25       0.28


            Hamilton measure                           1.000             1             1.000           1

               Industrial production                  -0.005            24            -0.002          11       0.41

               Hours                                  -0.002            26            -0.001          24       0.39

               CPI                                     0.003            13             0.001           2       0.25


            Gas price adjusted for the cost
                                                       1.000             1             1.000           2
            of shortages
               Industrial production                  -0.072            25            -0.091          20       1.27

               Hours                                  -0.038            27            -0.035          32       0.92

               CPI                                     0.084            20             0.051           2       0.61


            Consumer sentiment about gas               1.000             3             1.000           1

               Industrial production                  -0.002            27            -0.003          31       1.67

               Hours                                  -0.001            27            -0.002          37       1.97

               CPI                                     0.002            15             0.001           2       0.30


Note: The impulse responses are based on vector autoregressions with monthly data. The variables include: (1) a selected oil
price measure, (2) industrial production, (3) hours, (4) the headline CPI, (5) nominal wages, and (6) the federal funds rate.
The VARs included six lags and a linear time trend. Shocks to oil prices are defined using a standard Cholesky
decomposition with oil ordered first. The oil shocks are standardized to be the same size in each sample period. The
standard deviations for the shocks to each oil price measure are as follows: The nominal gas price shock is .013 in the early
period and .038 in the late period. The shock to the Hamilton measure is .797 in the early period and 1.751 in the late period.
The shock to the gas price adjusted for the cost of shortages is .045 in the early period and .038 in the late period. The shock
to gasoline sentiment is 1.364 in the early period and 2.028 in the late period.

                                                                   42
                                                          Table 2

                             Fluctuations in Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP)



                                 Period       Share of GDP       Standard deviation        Share of GDP
                                                 (percent)         (percent quarterly
                                                                                             volatility
                                                                 changes, annual rate)        (percent)


                                 1967 to
                                  1985              100                   4.3                   100

               Goods and         1986 to
                                                    100                   2.1                   100
               services           2007

                                 1986 to
                                 2009Q3             100                   2.5                   100


                                 1967 to
                                  1985              37                    9.2                    54

                                 1986 to
               . . Goods          2007              30                    5.0                    51

                                 1986 to
                                 2009Q3             30                    5.6                    50


                                 1967 to
                                  1985              4.0                  38.1                    22

               . . Motor         1986 to
                                                    3.5                  19.2                    14
               vehicles           2007

                                 1986 to
                                 2009Q3             3.3                  24.9                    16


Note: Data are from the National Income and Product Accounts. Share of GDP volatility attributable to each component is
calculated as 100 less the variance of growth contribution of GDP excluding each component relative to the variance of total
GDP. Figures for the early period exclude 1970Q4, when a long strike severely reduced motor vehicle output and sales.




                                                                43
                                                           Figure 1. Petroleum Prices
                                                        January 1967 through March 2010
                  Panel A: Price indexes                                                            Panel B: Real price indexes
                                             Log index (1990 = 100)                                                                 Log index (1990 = 100)
       Gasoline CPI                                                   300                     Gasoline CPI                                                   300
       Crude oil PPI (W561)                                                                   Crude oil PPI (W561)
       Refiners acquisition cost - imported crude oil                 250                     Refiners acquisition cost - imported crude oil                 250


                                                                      200                                                                                    200


                                                                      150                                                                                    150


                                                                      100                                                                                    100


                                                                      50                                                                                     50


                                                                      0                                                                                      0


                                                                      -50                                                                                    -50


                                                                     -100                                                                                  -100
    1970   1975   1980    1985    1990    1995    2000    2005   2010                     1970   1975    1980     1985   1990    1995    2000   2005   2010


Note: Data come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The real indexes normalize the changes in petroleum prices by the
changes in headline consumer price inflation. Refiners acquisition cost data begin in 1974. For each series x, the log index is
calculated as 100 + 100 ⋅ [ log ( x ( t ) ) − log ( x (1990 ) )] .




                                                         Figure 2. Real Gasoline Prices
                                                        January 1967 through March 2010
                                                                                         Log index (1990 = 100)
                                                   Gasoline CPI                                                   180
                                                   Gasoline CPI adjusted for shortages
                                                                                                                  160


                                                                                                                  140


                                                                                                                  120


                                                                                                                  100


                                                                                                                  80


                                                                                                                  60


                                                                                                                 40
                                               1970     1975   1980   1985   1990   1995     2000    2005    2010


Note. The dashed line represents the CPI for gasoline augmented with the shadow cost of waiting time in gas lines in 1973,
1974, and 1979 as estimated by Frech and Lee (1987). The log index is calculated as in figure 1.


                                                                                    44
                               Figure 3. Consumer Sentiment toward Gasoline

Share of respondents to the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment that cite high gasoline
                       prices or shortages of gasoline as reasons that car buying conditions are poor

                                               January 1970 through April 2010
                                                                                            Percent
                                                                                                      30



                                                                                                      25



                                                                                                      20



                                                                                                      15



                                                                                                      10



                                                                                                      5



                                                                                                      0
                      1970     1975     1980      1985     1990    1995     2000     2005      2010


Note. The gasoline price question was asked on a quarterly basis prior to January 1978 and the series was extrapolated to a
monthly frequency by the authors.




                                                                  45
                                            Figure 4. Responses of Consumption to Two Gasoline Shocks

       Shock to the gas price                                                                                  Shock to sentiment toward gasoline                  .
                                  Response of gas price                                 Response of sentiment toward gasoline
                           1.0                                                                                 1.0




                                                             1972 - 1985                                                                   1972 - 1985
                           0.5                                                                                 0.5
                                                             1986 - 2009                                                                   1986 - 2009
          Index (1=peak)




                                                                                              Index (1=peak)
                           0.0                                                                                 0.0
                                        6    12   18    24      30   36    42      48                                  6   12   18    24   30      36    42   48




                           -0.5                                                                                -0.5
                                                       Months                                                                        Months


     Response of consumption excl. motor vehicles                                       Response of consumption excl. motor vehicles
                           1                                                                                   0.20

                                                                                                               0.15
                           0
                                    6       12    18    24   30      36    42      48                          0.10                            1972 - 1985

                           -1                                                                                                                  1986 - 2009
                                                                                                               0.05
          Percent




                                                                                              Percent




                           -2                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                       6   12   18    24   30      36    42   48
                                                                                                          -0.05
                           -3
                                                                     1972 - 1985
                                                                                                          -0.10
                                                                     1986 - 2009
                           -4
                                                                                                          -0.15


                           -5                                                                             -0.20
                                                       Months                                                                        Months


      Response of consumption of motor vehicles                                          Response of consumption of motor vehicles
                                                                                                               1.00
                           5
                                                                                                               0.80

                                                                                                               0.60
                           0
                                                                                                                                                1972 - 1985
                                    6       12    18   24    30      36    42      48                          0.40
                                                                                                                                                1986 - 2009

                           -5                                                                                  0.20
         Percent




                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                               0.00

                                                                                                               -0.20
                                                                                                                       6   12   18    24      30   36    42   48
                  -10

                                                                     1972 - 1985                               -0.40

                  -15                                                1986 - 2009                               -0.60

                                                                                                               -0.80

                  -20                                                                                          -1.00
                                                       Months                                                                        Months


Note. Solid dots indicate periods in which the responses are more than 2 standard deviations from zero, and open circles
indicate periods in which the responses are between 1 and 2 standard deviations from zero.
                                                                                        46
                                Figure 5. Motor Vehicle Industry in the U.S. Economy
                     Panel A: Output                                                   Panel B: Manufacturing Value Added
                  1967Q1 through 2009Q4                                                                  1967 through 2007
                                                            Percent                                                                                 Percent
                                                                      16                                                                                      8

   Share of goods GDP                                                                       Share of goods manuf. value added
                                                                      14                                                                                      7


                                                                      12                                                                                      6


                                                                      10                                                                                      5


                                                                      8                                                                                       4


                                                                      6                                                                                       3
                                  Share of total GDP
                                                                      4                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                             Share of total GDP

                                                                      2                                                                                       1


                                                                   0                                                                                         0
    1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000     2005    2010                      1970   1975    1980    1985    1990     1995   2000      2005   2010


Note. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals for the sample means in two periods: 1967 to 1985, and 1986 to 2007.
Expenditure shares are based on nominal data. For value added, motor vehicles and parts is defined on a NAICS basis from
1977 through 2007; earlier periods are plotted as best changes from the SIC definition. Goods manufacturing includes
agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting; mining; construction; and manufacturing.




                                 Figure 6. Vehicle Distance Traveled per Household
                                                         January 1970 to October 2009
                                                                                                        Miles, ratio scale
                                                                                                                      2300

                                                                                                                    2200

                                                                                                                    2100

                                                                                                                    2000


                                                                                                                    1900


                                                                                                                    1800


                                                                                                                    1700


                                                                                                                    1600
                                                                                                                    1550
                                                                                                                    1500

                                                                                                                    1450
                                1970     1975        1980      1985        1990   1995     2000        2005


Note. Data on vehicle miles are from Traffic Volume Trends, Office of Highway Policy Information in the Department of
Transportation. Data on the number of households in the United States are from the U.S. Census Bureau. Data were
smoothed with a 12-month moving average.

                                                                                  47
                      Figure 7. Average Fuel Economy for the U.S. Light Vehicle Stock
                                                     December 1970 to December 2009
                                                                                              Miles per gallon
                                                                                                                   24


                                                                                                                   22


                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                        All light vehicles
                                                               Cars                                                18


                                                                                                                   16


                                                                       Light trucks                                14


                                                                                                                   12


                                                                                                                   10


                                                                                                                   8
                                      1970    1975      1980      1985      1990      1995    2000      2005


Note. Data from the Transportation Energy Databook: Edition 28, U.S. Department of Energy. Data points for light trucks
for 2003 and 2004 were interpolated. Light vehicles include cars and light trucks.




                        Figure 8. Domestic Sales Shares for Selected Vehicle Segments
                                      Percent of domestic vehicles sold

        January 1972 through December 1984                                                   January 1996 through November 2009
                                                         Percent                                                                                     Percent
                                                                      50                                                                                       50



                                                                                        Full-size trucks, vans and utilities

                  Small cars                                          40                                                                                       40




                                                                      30                                                                                       30



                                        Standard cars

                                                                      20                                     Small cars and cross utilities                    20




                                                                      10                                                                                       10
    1972   1974    1976        1978   1980    1982      1984                          1996    1998      2000       2002     2004     2006     2008     2010


Note: Shares are calculated from U.S. sales of domestic light vehicles. Domestic light vehicles are defined as vehicles
produced in North America. The category “small cars” include compact and subcompact cars; “standard cars” include full
size and luxury cars. Cross-utility vehicles are small utility vehicles assembled on a car chassis.


                                                                                   48
                                   Figure 9. Responses to a Segment-shifting Shock to Sales
                          Response of sales                                                          Response of prices
                    10                                                                                     12

                     8                                                                                     10

                                                                                                           8
                     6
                                                                                                           6
                     4
                                                                                                           4
                     2




                                                                                                 Percent
          Percent




                                                                                                           2

                     0                                                                                     0
                           2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24                                                2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                     -2                                                                                    -2

                                                                                                           -4
                     -4
                                                   Small                                                   -6                               Small
                     -6
                                                   Large                                                   -8                               Large
                     -8
                                                                                                        -10
                                          Months                                                                                 Months
                    -10                                                                                 -12


                    Response of capacity utilization                                             Response of days’ supply
                    130                                                                                    65



                                                                                                           64

                    115

                                                                                                           63
          Percent




                    100                                                                                    62
                                                                                                 Days




                                                                                                                2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                           2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24

                                                                                                           61
                                                               Small                                                                      Small
                     85
                                                               Large                                                                      Large
                                                                                                           60


                                          Months                                                                                Months
                     70                                                                                    59


                                            Response of the variance of days’ supply
                                                          100


                                                               75


                                                               50


                                                               25
                                                    Variance




                                                                0
                                                                       2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                               -25


                                                               -50


                                                               -75

                                                                                        Months
                                                       -100

Note. Graphs show impulse responses from the production model presented in equations (2) through (9).


                                                                                          49
                        Figure 10. Domestic Days’ Supply of Selected Vehicle Segments
         January 1972 through December 1984                                          January 1996 through November 2009
                                                            Days                                                                                      Days
                                                                   120                                                                                       120

                                     Standard cars

                                                                   100                   full-size trucks, vans and utilities                                100




                                                                   80                                                                                        80




                                                                   60                                                                                        60



                                                                                                                     Small cars and cross-utilities
                                                                   40                                                                                        40


        Small cars

                                                                   20                                                                                        20
      1972    1974     1976   1978   1980      1982     1984                      1996      1998       2000     2002      2004     2006     2008      2010


Note: Days’ supply is calculated with end of month inventories and the three-month moving average of sales. Inventories
include finished vehicles held at dealerships, assembly plants and vehicles in transit. Domestic vehicles refer to vehicles
produced in North America. “Small cars” include compact and subcompact cars, and “standard cars” include full size and
luxury cars. Cross-utility vehicles are small utility vehicles assembled on car chassis.




                     Figure 11. Variance of Domestic Days’ Supply across Vehicle Segments
                                                   January 1972 through December 2009
                                                                                              days squared
                                                                                                               1500




                                                                                                               1200




                                                                                                               900




                                                                                                               600




                                                                                                               300




                                                                                                              0
                                            1975     1980   1985    1990   1995     2000        2005      2010


Note: Domestic days’ supply is calculated from U.S. inventories and sales of vehicles assembled in North America. Variance
is calculated across 5 car segments (subcompact, compact, intermediate, full-size, and luxury) and 6 light truck segments
(compact vans, full-size vans, compact pickups, full-size pickups, cross-utility vehicles, and standard utility vehicles).




                                                                           50
                        Figure 12. Responses to a Shock to Consumer Sentiment toward Gasoline
                                                          Combined sample: 1972 through 2009


       Response of sentiment toward gasoline                                                             Response of days’ supply
                   3                                                                                     3




                   2                                                                                     2
        Percent




                   1                                                                                     1




                                                                                      Days
                   0                                                                                     0
                         6   12   18    24      30   36   42    48                                              6   12   18    24   30      36   42   48


                                       Months                                                                                 Months
                  -1                                                                                     -1




      Response of the variance of days’ supply                                      Response of capacity utilization
                  80                                                                                      1




                  60
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                6   12   18    24      30   36   42   48
                                                                                      Percentage point




                  40
       Variance




                                                                                                         -1

                  20


                                                                                                         -2
                   0
                         6   12   18     24     30   36    42   48

                                       Months                                                                                 Months
                  -20                                                                                    -3



Note. Dashed lines enclose 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                             51
                                 Figure 13. Responses to a Shock to Consumer Sentiment toward Gasoline
                                                                  Split samples: 1972 to 1985 and 1986 to 2009

      Response of sentiment toward gasoline                                                         Response of days’ supply
                           1.0                                                                                   1.0




                                                             1972 - 1985                                                                                      1972 - 1985

                           0.5                               1986 - 2009                                         0.5                                          1986 - 2009
          Index (1=peak)




                                                                                                   Days
                           0.0                                                                                   0.0
                                      6   12   18    24      30   36       42   48                                             6       12    18    24    30      36    42    48



                                                    Months                                                                                        Months
                      -0.5                                                                                 -0.5




     Response of the variance of days’ supply                                                     Response of capacity utilization
                    30
                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                    1972 - 1985
                                                                                                                                                    1986 - 2009
                    20                                         1972 - 1985
                                                               1986 - 2009
                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                                   6    12    18    24      30    36    42    48
                                                                                                     Percentage point
      Variance




                    10



                                                                                                                        -0.5
                           0
                                  6       12   18   24    30      36       42   48


                                                    Months                                                                                         Months
               -10                                                                                                      -1.0



Note. Solid dots indicate periods in which the responses are more than 2 standard deviations from zero, and open circles
indicate periods in which the responses are between 1 and 2 standard deviations from zero.




                                                                                          52
     Figure 14. Response of Capacity Utilization to Shocks to Consumer Sentiment toward
                                           Gasoline

Scenario: Level of days’ supply held constant                                                                     Scenario: Variance of days’ supply held constant
                   0.2                                                                                                                 0.2


                   0.0                                                                                                                 0.0
                          6   12   18    24      30   36                   42    48                                                                6   12   18    24      30   36   42    48
                   -0.2                                                                                                                -0.2
Percentage point




                                                                                                                   Percentage points
                   -0.4                                                                                                                -0.4


                   -0.6                                      Baseline                                                                  -0.6                                    Baseline


                                                             Counterfact.                                                                                                      Counterfact.
                   -0.8                                                                                                                -0.8

                                        Months                                                                                                                   Months
                   -1.0                                                                                                                -1.0




                                         Scenario: Level and variance of days’ supply held constant
                                                                          0.2


                                                                          0.0
                                                                                      6   12   18    24      30    36                    42   48

                                                                          -0.2
                                                      Percentage points




                                                                          -0.4


                                                                          -0.6
                                                                                                                            Baseline


                                                                          -0.8                                              Counterfact.


                                                                                                    Months
                                                                          -1.0




                                                                                                     53
