                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INDIAN EQUITY MARKETS:
                            MEASURES OF FUNDAMENTAL VALUE

                                            Rajnish Mehra

                                         Working Paper 16061
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16061


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




Prepared for the India Policy Forum. I thank Surjit Bhalla, Barry Bosworth, Ajay Shay and the participants
of the India Policy Forum for their helpful comments; Ellen McGrattan, Edward Prescott and especially
John Donaldson for many helpful discussions and Viral Shah for his excellent research assistance.
The usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Rajnish Mehra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Indian Equity Markets: Measures of Fundamental Value
Rajnish Mehra
NBER Working Paper No. 16061
June 2010
JEL No. E0,E13,E21,G0,G1,G12

                                                ABSTRACT

In this paper, we take a critical look at the relationship between the value of capital stock in the Indian
corporate sector and the valuation of claims to this capital stock in capital markets. We address the
question of whether Indian equity valuations over the period 1991- 2008 are consistent with three key
market fundamentals: corporate capital stock, after tax corporate cash flows and net corporate debt.
Our analysis extends the neo-classical growth model to include intangible capital and key features
of the tax code and uses national account statistics to estimate the equilibrium value of corporate equity
relative to GDP. Our framework can provide policy makers with a benchmark to identify deviations
in equity markets relative to those implied by economic fundamentals. In addition, it facilitates a quantitative
assessment of policy changes such as, for example, the effect of changes in dividend taxation on stock
prices. We caution the reader that although our framework is well suited to examining secular movements
in the value of equity relative to GDP, it is not suitable to address high frequency price movements
in the stock market. In fact, we know of no framework that can satisfactorily account for these movements
in terms of the underlying fundamentals. High frequency volatility remains a puzzle. Based on our
analysis, we conclude that in a large measure, Indian equity markets were fairly priced over the 1991-2008
period.


Rajnish Mehra
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
mehra@econ.ucsb.edu
                                     Summary




       In this paper, we take a critical look at the relationship between the value
of capital stock in the Indian corporate sector and the valuation of claims to this
capital stock in capital markets. We address the question of whether Indian
equity valuations over the period 1991- 2008 are consistent with three key market
fundamentals: corporate capital stock, after tax corporate cash flows and net
corporate debt. Our analysis extends the neo-classical growth model to include
intangible capital and key features of the tax code. Unlike the standard partial
equilibrium valuation framework, our paradigm allows us to explicitly capture
the interaction between the growth in per capita consumption and interest rates,
which fundamentally changes the role of the present value of growth
opportunities in explaining a run up in equity prices. In a general equilibrium
model with production, growth per se will not increase the value of equity
relative to GDP. A second advantage is that it allows us to examine dividends
and stock prices relative to GDP. These series are themselves non-stationary;
however, they appear to be co-integrated with GDP. Examining these aggregate
values relative to GDP induces stationarity and is a natural normalization that
eliminates the need for adjustments due to inflation. Finally, it provides a
framework to evaluate policy changes such as the effect of changes in dividend
taxation on stock prices.
       We specify the price per share of corporate equity as a function of tax
rates and capital stocks and define an equilibrium relationship between the
market value of equity and the reproduction value of the tangible and intangible
capital, to which the equity represents claim. Next, we estimate the intangible
capital stock in India and use this to develop estimates for equilibrium equity
valuations. The challenge in estimating equity valuation is that we do not have



                                                                                      2
readily available measures for the intangible capital stock in India. We estimate
this stock of intangible capital for the two periods 1991-2004 and 2005-2008 using
three different techniques. We have chosen these periods to capture a structural
break in data: Indian equity valuations as a fraction of GDP were fairly constant
over the period 1991-2004, rising sharply starting in 2005.
      We begin by using the methodology in McGrattan and Prescott (2005).
Next, we use the measures in Corrado et al (2005) for the U.S economy to infer
the corresponding capital stock levels in India. We conclude by constructing our
own measures using actual investment data for India.
     The McGrattan and Prescott approach uses data on corporate profits and
assumes that after-tax returns to both tangible and intangible capital are equal.
This facilitates an estimate of the stock of intangible capital. An advantage of
this approach is that it does not require any knowledge of the rate of depreciation
of intangible capital. Corrado et al (2006) provide estimates for the value of
various forms of intangible capital in the U.S based on investment data. Since we
did not have access to a data set for India that details the investment in
intangible capital for all the categories considered in Corrado et al, we tease out
information from their data to estimate the stock of intangible capital in India.
Working with investment data for innovative property and brand equity and
assuming that depreciation rates for tangible capital are similar in the U.S and
India, we use the transformation rates for flows into stocks implied by their data
for our estimation.
      Further, using India specific investment data on Innovative Property,
which includes R&D and Technical knowledge and Brand Equity, we construct
direct measures of the stock of these types of intangible capital and compare
them with our earlier estimates derived using the Corrado et al (2006) data.
While these estimates for the intangible capital stock are similar to each other,
they are lower than the estimates using the McGrattan –Prescott methodology.


                                                                                 3
One reason is the high depreciation rates used by Corrado et al (2006); another
possibility is that organizational capital, in particular investment in learning-by-
doing, is probably underestimated in their analysis.
     We relate the price earnings ratio and Tobin’s q, defined as the ratio of the
market value of equity and net debt to tangible capital at replacement cost, and
a popular ratio to estimate over and undervaluation of equity, to the quantities
identified in our model formulation. In the absence of intangible capital, the
equilibrium value of q is 1. Unfortunately, in an economy with changing tax rates
and significant intangible capital the usefulness of qt is limited. In a setting with

corporate taxes, distribution taxes (i.e. taxes on dividends and capital gains) and
subsidies to investment (e.g. investment tax credits) not only is its equilibrium
value not 1, but it is significantly impacted by changes in the tax code, in
particular, with changes in the tax rates on corporate distributions which have
varied considerably in India from year to year. Thus qt may differ from 1 either

because of over or undervaluation in capital markets or simply as a result of
changes in the tax rates – the ratio per se does not distinguish between the two.
       A measure closely related to q is the price earnings (P/E) ratio - the ratio
of the stock price to earnings per share or at the aggregate level the value of
equity normalized by after tax corporate profits. We parse its mechanics and
usefulness for Indian equity markets and conclude that both q and P/E ratios,
which implicitly abstract from tax rates and intangible capital, offer inadequate
measures of under and over valuation of capital markets. In particular, for
economies with sizable secular growth in intangible capital, as has been observed
in India over the last 15-20 years, these metrics offer limited analytical utility.
       Our analysis suggests that an optimistic estimate of fundamental value of
the current Indian equity market is about 1.2, considerably lower than the 1.6
value observed in 2008. One effect that we have not accounted for is demand
from foreign institutional investors. If the effect of this is to change the marginal


                                                                                      4
investor, the relevant marginal rate of substitution will change, and with it
valuations as well. These are issues that we plan to pursue in subsequent
research.




                                                                           5
1. Introduction:

          Indian equity markets had their inception in the early 1830s with trading
in shares of banks and cotton mills1. The first organized exchange -- the Native
Share and Stock Brokers’ Association (forerunner of the Bombay Stock
Exchange) -- was established in 1887, making it the oldest in Asia2. By
independence, in 1947, the number of exchanges had increased to seven and the
market capitalization of listed companies was approximately Rs. 10 billion (0.11
GDP3). In the subsequent forty odd years, however, equity markets languished,
and by 1990, although market capitalization of equity had increased to Rs. 697.16
billion in nominal terms, its relative value was only 0.135 GDP (Figure1).
          Following economic reforms instituted after the balance of payments crisis
in 1991, equity valuations increased sharply. By 1993, equity values had risen to
about 0.4 GDP and remained at approximately that level for almost 12 years4.
Beginning in 2005, Indian equities went through a period of exponential growth
culminating in a peak value of Rs.67.46 trillion (1.56 GDP) in early 2008. This
propelled India into the ‘trillion-dollar club’ and the Bombay Stock Exchange
(BSE) became a ‘top ten’ exchange in terms of market capitalization. However,
by the end of 2008, Indian equity valuations had dropped to around 0.83 GDP
and by March 2009 even further to 0.7 GDP. India had exited the ‘trillion-dollar
club’5.



1
  The market experienced its first crash in 1865. The run up in stock prices prior to the crash was
a consequence of the increased demand for Indian cotton precipitated by the disruption of cotton
supplies from America due to the American Civil War.
2
  Bajpai (2004).
3 In Section 2, we argue that in the case of India, a more accurate representation is obtained if we

normalize valuations with respect to non-agricultural GDP (NAGDP) rather than GDP.
4
  Since real GDP growth over this period was 8% a year, the near constancy of the market value
of equity/ GDP ratio implies that equity markets also appreciated at this rate, doubling every 9
years.
5
  By early June 2009, the market capitalization of Indian equities was again USD 1 trillion.


                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                        Source:	  Market	  Value	  of	  Equity	  is	  for	  the	  CMIE	  COSPI	  set.	  GDP	  data	  is	  from	  National	  Accounts




Figure 1: The top line plots market value of equity as a multiple of non –agricultural GDP.
          The bottom line plots market value of equity as a multiple of GDP.



        These large swings in equity valuation were not limited to India alone.
Starting in the mid 90s, there was a considerable increase in U.S equity prices to
an extent that prompted then Federal Reserve Chairman, Alan Greenspan, to
characterize the run up as “irrational exuberance”.
        These dramatic changes in valuation suggest the possibility that at least
part of this fluctuation was a response to changes in determinants other than the
underlying factors of production or technology. Largely as a consequence of this
run up, the possibility of departures of stock price valuations from “ equilibrium
or fundamental values ” has gained center stage in academic research. In the 70s
and 80s, the halcyon days of the efficient market hypothesis, the prevailing
paradigm was that stock prices were an unbiased estimate of some underlying



                                                                                                                                                                                       7
“fundamental” or “intrinsic” value. If at any point in time, the observed price of
an asset is a fair indicator of it’s intrinsic worth, over and undervaluation become
meaningless constructs. What these underlying fundamental values actually were,
was left unspecified and for good reason: there was no explicit theoretical
framework linking the value of the capital stock to prices of claims to this capital
stock – debt and equity – prevailing in the capital markets6. The first models7 to
make these connections appeared in the early 1980s; however, they were ill suited
to the task of quantifying over and undervaluation in capital markets, as they
abstracted from two key ingredients: intangible capital8 and taxes. The
equilibrium conditions in these models required that the value of the claims to
the capital stock be equal to the tangible capital of the firm or, equivalently, that
their ratio (Tobin’s q) be 1. This was not empirically observed and together with
the models’ inability to address the equity premium puzzle, cast doubt on their
usefulness as a measurement tool and provide a benchmark for capital markets
valuations. In 2005, McGrattan and Prescott (2005) extended the standard
growth model to incorporate both intangible capital and taxes. In doing so, they
were able to account for the secular movements in the value of U.S equity
relative to GDP. The extended standard growth model can serve as a reference
for over and undervaluation in capital markets. Their analysis highlights the
importance of the role that intangible capital and distribution taxes play in
explaining variations in equity valuation.
        In this paper, we take a critical look at the relationship between the value
of the capital stock in the Indian corporate sector and the valuation of claims to

6 See Bosworth (1975) for an early empirical study linking stock prices to economic activity.
7
  Prescott and Mehra (1980), Brock (1979 and 1982), Donaldson and Mehra (1984) and Cox et al
(1985).
8 Unlike tangible capital, intangible capital cannot be measured directly: it includes brand names,

scientific and technical knowledge, patents, and organizational capital. As an example, consider
the difference between owning a thousand trucks (tangible capital) and running a trucking
company that owns a thousand trucks. The difference in the value of the trucking business and
the thousand trucks is a measure of intangible capital. I thank Ajay Shah for this example.


                                                                                                  8
this capital stock in capital markets. We address the question of whether Indian
equity valuations over the period 1991- 2008 are consistent with three key market
fundamentals: corporate capital stock, after tax corporate cash flows and net
corporate debt. Our analysis extends the neo-classical growth model9 to include
intangible capital and key features of the tax code. This paradigm has several
advantages. Unlike the standard partial equilibrium valuation framework10, it
allows us to capture explicitly the interaction between the growth in per capita
consumption and interest rates. This interaction fundamentally changes the role
of the present value of growth opportunities (PVGO) in explaining a run up in
equity prices. In a general equilibrium model with production, growth per se will
not increase the value of equity relative to GDP11. A second advantage is that it
allows us to examine dividends and stock prices relative to GDP. These series are
themselves nonstationary; however, they appear to be co-integrated with GDP.
Examining these aggregate values relative to GDP induces stationarity and is a
natural normalization in this theoretical setting. It also eliminates the need for
adjustments due to inflation. Finally, it provides a framework to evaluate policy
changes such as the effect of changes in dividend taxation on stock prices.
        Although our framework is well suited to examining secular movements in
the value of equity relative to GDP, it is not a suitable framework to address
high frequency price movements in the stock market. In fact, we know of no
framework that can satisfactorily account for these movements in terms of the
underlying fundamentals. High frequency volatility remains a puzzle12.


9
  This model and its stochastic variants are a central construct in contemporary finance, public
finance and business cycle theory. It is the basis for much of our economic intuition and has been
used extensively by, among others, Abel et al. (1989), Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), Barro and
Becker (1989), Brock (1979), Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985), Donaldson and Mehra (1984), Lucas
(1988), Kydland and Prescott (1982), McGrattan and Prescott (2005) and Merton (1971).
10 See for example Fama and Miller (1972).	  
11 For an elaboration see Kiley (2004)
12
   The “volatility puzzle” has its origins in the important early work of Shiller (1981) and LeRoy
and Porter (1981), which found evidence of excessive volatility of stock prices relative to the


                                                                                                 9
        This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we derive an equilibrium
relationship between the value of equity and net debt and the value of tangible
and intangible corporate capital. Corporate tax rates and tax rates on
distributions to equity and debt holders figure prominently in these relationships.
We calibrate the economy in Section 3. In Section 4, using firm level investment
data in intangible capital from CMIE, we estimate the intangible capital stock. In
Section 5, we use the relationships developed in Section 2 to obtain estimates of
Indian equity valuation. In doing so, we are able to provide a theoretically
grounded sense of market efficiency. In section 6, we take a critical look at two
popular valuation metrics, Tobin’s q and price earnings (P/E) ratio and examine
their appropriateness in light of the theory developed in section 2. Section 7
concludes the paper.


2. An Equilibrium Valuation Model

2.1 Overview

       We extend standard growth theory by incorporating intangible capital and
use it to value the Indian equity market13. Our model is similar to that analysed
by McGrattan and Prescott (2005) and our exposition closely follows their paper.
One implication of the model is that the value of corporate equity and debt
should be equal to the value of the productive assets in the corporate sector. The
challenge is to find the value of these assets in terms of the consumption good.
The table below classifies the components of corporate capital stock and the

underlying dividend/earnings process. These studies use a constant interest rate, an assumption
subsequently relaxed by Grossman and Shiller (1981) who addressed the issue of varying interest
rates. They concluded that although this reduced the excess volatility, Shiller's conclusion could
not be overturned for reasonable values of the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
	  
13
   The importance of intangible capital, both for growth accounting and corporate valuation has
received considerable attention. See papers by Bond and Cummins (2000), Corrado et al (2005),
McGrattan and Prescott (2001 and 2005) and Hall (2000 and 2001) and the volume by Corrado
et al (2005). Bond and Cummins stress the importance of brand names for valuing corporations
like Coca Cola. Hall stresses the importance of “e-capital,” for valuing high tech companies.


                                                                                                10
claims to this capital stock. In the model, in the absence of all taxes, the
equilibrium relationship specifying the price of equity ( pt ) and net debt ( bt ) as a

function of corporate capital stocks is


                        pt + bt = km,t +1 + ku,t +1                               (1)

where km,t and ku,t are, respectively. the tangible (measured) and intangible

(unmeasured) capital stock.
                                         Table 1


           Corporate Capital Stock	          Claims to Corporate Capital	  

             Tangible Capital km                        Equity p
            Fixed corporate capital
               Inventory stocks                       Net Debt b 	  
                Corporate land

             Intangible Capital ku
                 Brand names
                    Patents
             Organizational capital
                        	  


       In Table 1, capital stocks are measured or estimated in terms of their
reproduction cost, while the values of debt and equity are market values. The
empirical counterpart of tangible corporate capital is the sum of fixed corporate
capital stocks, inventory stocks and the value of corporate-owned land. Intangible
capital includes brand names, patents, and forms of organizational capital.
Intangible capital is not measured directly and as Indian National Accounts do
not report its value, it must be estimated. One approach to estimate the value of
intangible corporate assets is to attribute the return on capital used in the
corporate sector to both tangible and intangible capital and assume that the



                                                                                     11
after-tax returns to both types of capital are equal. We detail this and other
estimation procedures in Section 4.
2.2 Model Formulation

        To derive an equilibrium relationship between the value of productive
capital and the market value of corporations, we initially assume that firms are
all equity financed.14 Following McGrattan and Prescott (2005) we also abstract
from uncertainty, as it is an unimportant feature for our results. We take note of
the findings in Bosworth et al (2007) who point out the heterogeneity in the
contribution of different sectors of the economy to India’s growth rate. The large
agriculture sector in India has a very low capital labour ratio and little of its
capital is publicly traded. Since the focus of this paper is on capital valuation in
securities markets, we exclude the agriculture sector from our analysis and only
model the non-agricultural sector15. One implication of our approach is that
when we normalize capital valuations relative to GDP, we will use only the
contribution to GDP of the non-agricultural sector (NAGDP). Within the non-
agricultural sector, we introduce a dichotomy between workers and
shareholders16. This distinction is particularly germane to the Indian context as
workers generally do not hold equity either directly or indirectly and hence may
have different future marginal rates of substitution compared to stockholders as
their consumption growth rates may differ. In valuing equity, we use the
marginal rates of substitution of the stockholders.
        In light of the discussion above, we model the economy as one with two
agents, workers and shareholders who take prices as given. There is also one firm
that maximizes its value taking prices as given. These single entities, the workers,

14 We relax this assumption when we discuss our results.
15 Equivalently, the reader may view the Indian economy as being split into two disjoint sectors,
one of them being the agriculture sector. For a balanced growth model with integrated
agricultural, services and manufacturing sectors see Kongsamut et al (2001). Their model features
a rapidly declining agricultural sector which is beginning to be observed in India.
16 See Danthine et al (2008) and Mankiw and Zeldes (1991)	  




                                                                                              12
shareholders and the firm are respectively ‘stand in’ representatives of a
continuum of such agents distributed on the unit interval. We abstract from
population growth in the analysis below, as it does not change the valuation
relation we derive but simplifies the notation and allows us to use per capita and
aggregate quantities interchangeably. We will re-introduce it when we calibrate
the model17.


The Worker

        The representative worker supplies labour ( ntw ) inelastically and consumes

his aggregate wages ( wtntw ). The workers does not trade securities and thus does

not borrow or save. He maximizes the present value of his present and future

utility of consumption ( ctw ):
                                                    ∞
                                        max
                                        {
                                        ctw , nt   }
                                                     ∑ β v(c
                                                           t   w
                                                               t
                                                                   )
                                                    t =0


        subject to                                                                        (P1)

                                            ctw ≤ wtntw and ntw ≤ 1

The solution to this problem is ctw = wt and ntw = 1 since there is no presumed

disutility of work.


The Shareholder

        The shareholder owns all the securities ( zt ) in the economy and consumes

the aggregate dividends ( dt ). There is one perfectly divisible equity share

outstanding. Shareholders do not supply any labour. The representative



17 In the absence intangible capital, tax rates and subsidies our model reduces to the standard
decentralized growth model. Thus setting these quantities to zero in section 5 gives us the
equilibrium valuation implied by the standard model.


                                                                                                  13
shareholder also maximizes the present value of his utility of consumption ( cts ):
                                                         ∞
                                             max
                                             {
                                             cts , zt   }
                                                          ∑ β u(c )
                                                                t   s
                                                                    t
                                                         t =0


       subject to                                                                                (P2)

                cts + pt zt +1 ≤ (pt + dt (1 − τd )) zt + πt and 0 ≤ zt ≤ 1


where pt is the price per share, τd is the tax on dividends or share buy backs and

πt is the value of taxes rebated back to the shareholder in lump sum form. The

budget of shareholder specifies that his consumption plus the value of shares that
he carries over to the next period be less than or equal to the value of the
portfolio at the beginning of the period plus government transfers.


The Firm

       The firm uses labour and capital (tangible and intangible) to produce

output yt . It is characterized by a constant returns to scale production function

yt = f (km,t , ku,t ,λtntf ) with productivity growth rate γ so that

                                                 λt +1 = (1 + γ)λt

Firms act competitively to maximize shareholder value using the marginal rate of
substitution provided by the representative shareholder. It solves:


                                                                        ∞     β j u1(cts+ j )
                          max              p + dt = max ∑                                    d
                     {xu ,t , xm ,,t ,ntf } t      {xu ,t , xm ,,t ,ntf } j =0 u1(cts ) t + j
       subject to                                                                                (P3)

                dt = f (km,t , ku,t ,λtntf ) -wtntf − x m,t − x u,t − taxes + subsidies

                                          ku,t +1 = (1 − δu )ku,t + x u,t )
                                          km,t +1 = (1 − δm )km,t + x m,t )


                                                                                                        14
                             taxes = τc (f (km,t , ku,t ,λtntf ) -wtntf − km,t δm − x u,t )

                                                   subsidies = τs x m,t

where τs is the subsidy for investment in tangible capital (such as an investment

tax credit), τc is the corporate tax rate, x m,t and x u,t represent tangible and

intangible investment at time t and δu and δm are the depreciation rates for these

capital stocks respectively. ntf is the per capita labour demanded by the firm.

        In (P3) the first constraint defines the dividend as output net of wages,
investments, taxes and subsidies. The second and third are the standard laws of
motion of capital stock, both tangible and intangible. The constraint on taxes
recognizes that wages, intangible investment and depreciation of tangible capital
are tax-deductible expenses. The final constraint defines the subsidy to capital
investment.
        The rate of return, defined by the marginal rate of substitution of the
stockholders in this economy, is:

                                            u1(cts )
                            1 + rt +1 =
                                          βu1(cts+1 )

    Equilibrium in this economy is defined by per capita sequences of

consumption ( cts , ctw ), investment ( x m,t ,x u,t ) and labour ( ntw ,ntf ) that

simultaneously satisfy:
    a) the necessary and sufficient first order conditions for the firm’s problem



                         (1 − τc )[f1(km,t , ku,t ,λtntf ) − δm ]
        (1 + rt +1 ) =                                              +1                        (2)
                                       (1 − τs )

        (1 + rt +1 ) = f2(km,t , ku,t ,λtntf ) − δu + 1                                       (3)

        wt = f3(km,t , ku,t ,λtntf )                                                          (4)



                                                                                                    15
   b) the necessary and sufficient first order conditions for the shareholders
problem:

       u1(cts )pt = βu1(cts+1 )(pt +1 + dt +1(1 − τd ))                          (5)



   c) market clearing conditions:

       zt = 1

       ntw = ntf = 1

       ctw + cts = f (km,t , ku,t ,λtntf ) − x m,t − x u,t + πt

       where πt = taxes − subsidies



       Equations 2 and 3 equate the marginal return on tangible and intangible
capital to the marginal rate of substitution of the shareholders while equation 4
defines the wage rate. It follows from (2), (3) and (5) that the equilibrium
relation specifying the price per share of corporate equity as a function of tax
rates and capital stocks is

                          pt = (1 − τd )[(1 − τs )km,t +1 + (1 − τc )ku,t +1 ]   (6)

which is also the total equity value.
       Equation 6 represents the equilibrium, full information, rational valuation
relationship between the market value of equity and the reproduction value of
the tangible and intangible capital, to which the equity represents claim. In the
next section, we estimate the intangible capital stock in India and then use (6) in
Section 4 to develop estimates for equilibrium equity valuations. In Section 5, we




                                                                                       16
will use (6) to evaluate the theoretical appropriateness of other commonly used
valuation techniques.


3. Calibration

        In the analysis below, we have split the time period 1991-2008 into two
sub periods 1991-2004 and 2005-2008 since 2005 marked the beginning of a
substantial run up in the equity markets18.
                                              Table 2
                             Parameter                        1991-2004        2005-2008

     Population Growth Rate of shareholders ( ζ )                0.015            0.015


     Growth Rate of Technology ( γ )                             0.052            0.088


     Growth of Real NAGDP ( γ + η )                              0.067            0.103

     Growth of Real Consumption ( ν )
                                                                 0.049            0.049
     Estimated over the period 1991-2008

     Discount Factor ( β )                                       0.96             0.96


     Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution ( η )              0.33             0.33


     Real Interest Rate Implied by Model Parameters ( rt )       0.141            0.141


     Effective Corporate Tax Rate on PBDIT ( τc )                0.098            0.159


     Distribution Tax Rate ( τd )                                0.10             0.125


     Investment Tax Credit ( τs )                                  0                0


     Growth of Real NAGDP ( γ       +ζ )                         0.067            0.103




18The theory that we have developed is meant to deal with low frequency movements in the
underlying factors of production and technology and averaging over the 2005-08 period assumes
that this trend will continue.


                                                                                            17
   Profits Before Interest and Taxes ( CP )                   0.156              0.192


   Corporate Tangible Capital ( km )                          0.783              0.939



             Unless otherwise stated all data is from the CMIE Business Beacon


The parameters that need to be “calibrated” are those related to the shareholders

{β,ζ,u(.)} ; the firm {δm , γ,x m ,km ,after tax cash flows (CF) } and the policy

parameters { τc , τd , τs }. Some of these parameters are well documented in the

literature; others are not. Table 2 details the parameter values that we use for
the Indian economy. We explain below the motivation for choosing these values.
       We choose ζ to match the population growth of the shareholders. The

population growth rate for this group we believe is lower than the general
population growth rate (1.7%) or for the working age population (2%). We
calibrate the growth rate of productivity γ by matching γ + ζ to the average real

growth rate of output from the non-agricultural sector (NAGDP). As discussed
earlier, we use this growth rate rather than the growth rate of GDP as
agriculture in India uses very little capital, and is likely to have a markedly
different aggregate production function than the one that characterizes the non –
agricultural sector. We choose β = 0.96 as it is a standard value for the discount

factor in much of the macroeconomic literature. Out theory requires that the tax
τc , be the effective tax rate faced by the suppliers of capital to the firm. Since

interest payments are tax deductible this effective rate is much lower than the
marginal corporate tax rate. Each year we estimate the effective corporate tax
rate from data on corporate taxes paid and profits before interest and taxes and
then take the appropriate averages: τc = actual corporate taxes paid/ profits

before interest and taxes. We calibrate τd to the marginal tax rate. We note that

the tax rate on dividends has changed frequently and we will revisit this issue


                                                                                         18
when we discuss our results. We fix τs = 0 , as there is no investment tax credit

in India. To calibrate the interest rate, we use CRRA preferences with elasticity
of intertemporal substitution η = 1 / 3 and calculate the marginal rate of

substitution of the shareholders. We use the average growth rate of per capita of
consumption over the entire period 1991-2008 for this calibration.

                                              1
                                         r≈     + ν / ζ −1 .
                                              β

        It is well known that the real interest rate implied by the growth model is
counterfactually high in economies with high growth rates and this is probably
the case in our model19.

        We use data on net private stock of corporations to estimate km . It is

expressed as a fraction of the non-agricultural output. We estimate the after tax
cash flow to debt and equity holders (net of depreciation of tangible capital and
investment in intangible capital), CF by making appropriate adjustments
corporate profits before depreciation, interest and taxes. It is also expressed
relative to NAGDP. We assume that the economic depreciation rate is equal to
the accounting depreciation rate, which averages 5% when measured relative to

km . The depreciation rates allowed by the Indian tax code are far more generous,

however, net of inflation they average to around 5%, which is what is reported in
the Indian National Accounts.


4. Methodology for Estimating Intangible Capital Stock

        The challenge in using the relationship developed in equation (6) for
equity valuation is that we do not have readily available measures for the


19 High growth rates that characterize developing economies are unlikely to continue indefinitely

and hence are not likely to be observed in steady state. For example, a growth rate of 6% implies
a doubling in standard of living ever twelve years compared to a doubling every thirty six years
in the U.S.


                                                                                               19
intangible capital stock in India. We estimate the intangible capital stock using
three different techniques. We begin by using the methodology in McGrattan and
Prescott (2005). Next, we use the measures in Corrado et al (2005) for the U.S
economy to infer the corresponding capital stock levels in India. We conclude by
constructing our own measures using actual investment data for India.


4.1 The McGrattan and Prescott Methodology

     McGrattan and Prescott start by using data on corporate profits and
assume that after-tax returns to both tangible and intangible capital are equal.
This enables them to estimate the stock of intangible capital. An advantage of
their approach is that it does not require knowledge of the rate of depreciation of
intangible capital.
     We illustrate their approach in a world without taxes. The accounting
concept that corresponds to the model counterpart of pre tax corporate profits is
profits before interest and taxes (PBIT) can be written as

                      PBIT = yt − wtntf − x u,t − δmkm,t

Using the first order conditions (2) and (3) and the fact that the production
function displays constant returns to scale i.e.

                      f1(km,t , ku,t ,λtntf )km,t + f2(km,t , ku,t ,λtntf )ku,t + wtntf = yt

we can re write (PBIT) as

                      PBIT = rtkm,t + (δu + rt )ku,t − x u,t

Finally using the fact that on a balanced growth path

                            x u,t = (γ + η + δu )ku,t



                      PBIT = rtkm,t + (rt − γ − η)ku,t




                                                                                               20
In the presence of taxes this expression is modified to


                                       rt
                           PBIT =             km,t + (rt − γ − η)ku,t                 (7)
                                     1 − τc

where we remind the reader that τc is defined as

                           corporate taxes paid
                    τc =
                                  PBIT
It is the average tax rate on PBIT not the marginal corporate tax rate.
       The intangible capital stock can thus be estimated from equation (7) in
terms of the observed parameters of the economy. We note that in deriving (7)
we have assumed that the economy is (approximately) on a balanced growth
trajectory, a condition that may not have been be true in India in the early 90s.
       Using values in Table 2, we can estimate the average value of the
intangible capital for the two periods 1991-2004 and 2005-2008. As mentioned
earlier, we have chosen these periods to capture a structural break in 2005.
Indian equity valuations as a fraction of GDP were fairly constant over the
period 1991-2004, rising sharply starting in 2005. Our estimates are presented in
Table 3.



                                     Table 3
           Average values measured as a fraction of non-agricultural GDP

                                                              1991-2004   2005-2008

           After Tax Cash Flows                                 0.1754     0.1991

           Estimate of Intangible Capital                       0.447       0.883




                                                                                            21
4.2 Alternative Estimates of Intangible Capital in India – 1



      Corrado et al (2006) provide estimates for the value of various forms of
intangible capital in the U.S based on investment data. The investment data is
presented in Table 4 below and the corresponding estimates of intangible capital
in Table 5.


                                            Table 4
                     Intangible Investment (U.S 2000-2003 annual average)

                                                     Billions of Dollars    Percentage of GDP
                Intangible Investment                       1226                 11.19%
Computerized Information                                     173                  1.58%
Innovative Property                                          468                  4.27%
   R&D (Scientific)                                          231                  2.11%
   Non-scientific                                            237                  2.16%
Economic Competencies                                        586                  5.35%
   Brand equity                                              161                  1.47%
   Firm-specific resources                                   425                  3.88%
                               From Corrado et al (2006), Table 2



                                            Table 5
                        Estimate of Intangible Capital Stock (U.S 2003)

                                                    Billions of Dollars     Percentage of GDP
              Intangible Capital Stock                     3636                  33.18%
Computerized Information                                    512                   4.67%
Innovative Property                                        1786                  16.30%
   R&D (Scientific)                                         922                   8.41%
   Non-scientific                                           864                   7.88%
Economic Competencies                                      1338                  12.21%
   Brand equity                                             272                   2.48%
   Firm-specific resources                                 1066                   9.73%
                              From Corrado et al (2006), Table 3




                                                                                        22
       Corrado et al (2006) report that for the period 2000-03, the aggregate U.S
investment in intangible assets averaged 11.19% of GDP and estimate that these
investment levels translate into a stock of intangible capital valued at 33.18% of
GDP. As Tables A1 and A2 show (see the Appendix), due to differing
depreciation rates the rate of transformation of investment flows into capital
stock vary considerably.
        Unfortunately, we do not have access to a data set for India that details
the investment in intangible capital for all the categories considered by Corrado
et al (2006). We can, however, tease out information from their data (Tables 4
and 5) to estimate the stock of intangible capital in India. Since, we have
investment data for innovative property (both scientific and non scientific) and
brand equity (Table 6), if we assume that depreciation rates for tangible capital
are similar in the U.S and India, we can use the transformation rates for flows
into stocks implied by their data for our estimation. Our capital stock estimates
are reported in Table 7.


                                          Table 6
                    Intangible Investment (India 2004-2008 annual average)

                                                     Billions of INR         Percentage of NAGDP
                Intangible Investment
Computerized Information
Innovative Property                                        393                      1.11%
   R&D (Scientific)                                         99                      0.28%
   Non-scientific                                          294                      0.83%
Economic Competencies
   Brand equity                                            286                      0.81%
   Firm-specific resources




                                                                                            23
                                                 Table 7

                                                India 2008
                 Estimate of Intangible Capital Stock using Corrado et al (2006)

                                                             Billions of INR   Percentage of NAGDP
              Intangible Capital Stock
Computerized Information
Innovative Property                                              1,467                   4.15%
   R&D (Scientific)                                               394                    1.11%
   Non-scientific                                                1,073                   3.03%
Economic Competencies
   Brand equity                                                   482                    1.36%
   Firm-specific resources




4.3 Alternative Estimates of Intangible Capital in India -2

       Since we have investment data on Innovative Property, which includes
R&D and Technical knowledge and Brand Equity, we can also construct direct
measures of the stock of these types of intangible capital and compare them with
our earlier estimates derived using the Corrado et al (2006) data. To do so, we
use the law of motion for capital stock relative to non - agricultural GDP



        kt +1        kt               xt      1
                =[        (1 − δ) +        ]
        yt +1        yt               yt (1 + γ + η)
                                                                                   (8)
        k0
             : given
        y0



       For a given initial capital stock, the future capital stock at any date t can
be calculated by recursively using equation (8). We initialize the capital stock to


                                                                                                 24
zero in 1990 and use a variety of depreciation rates for our estimates. Given that
depreciation rates for intangible capital are high (Corrado et al (2006) report
rates as high as 60%) the initialization assumption is innocuous. The contribution
of an investment to the stock of the asset is only 25% after two half-lives so
investments made prior to 1990 have little effect on the capital stock levels in the
late 90s. A depreciation rate of 20% implies a half-life of less than 3.5 years while
a rate of 30% reduces the half-life of the investment to 2.3 years. We report our
estimates in Table 8 for the depreciation rates used by Corrado et al (2006).
Capital stock levels for alternate depreciation rates are shown in Tables A1 and
A2 in the Appendix.


                                           Table 8

                                          India 2008
                   Estimate of Intangible Capital Stock using investment data

                                                       Billions of INR          Percentage of GDP
               Intangible Capital Stock
Computerized Information
Innovative Property                                         1295                     3.66%
   R&D (Scientific)                                          315                     0.89%
   Royalties, Technical Knowledge                            980                     2.77%
Economic Competencies
   Brand equity                                             545                      1.54%
   Firm-specific resources


        It is comforting to note that the estimates that we get from the Corrado et
al (2006) measures are similar to those using investment data and their
depreciation rates. One advantage of using investment flows is that it explicitly
allows us to vary the depreciation rate and examine its effect on the capital
stock. In Figure 2 we show the evolution of the stock of brand equity (advertising
and marketing) and innovative property. We also observe that while intangible
capital associated with advertising and marketing has stabilized as a fraction of
GDP, innovative property capital is still increasing. This leads us to conclude


                                                                                             25
that Indian equity valuations relative to GDP will continue to rise as the stock of
intangible capital approaches its steady state value.




                                       Figure 2




       Finally, we use the estimates in Tables 7 and 8 to construct estimates of
the entire intangible capital stock in India. We report this in table 9. In
constructing Table 9, we have assumed that investments in firm specific resources
in India mimic those in the U.S. Although we do not have investment data for
this category we feel that investment in human and organizational capital is
likely to be similar in India especially for large firms. In addition, we use the
estimates of intangible capital from the Indian National Accounts for the
category Computerized Information.




                                                                                    26
                                             Table 9
                         Estimate of Intangible Capital Stock (India 2008)



                                          Following Corrado et al (2006)     Using Investment Data


                                            Rs. (billion)      % GDP          Rs. (billion)    % GDP
        Intangible Capital Stock                5724           16.17%            5,947         16.81%
Computerized Information                         296            0.84%             296           0.84%
Innovative Property                             1463            4.13%            1,295          3.66%
   R&D (Scientific)                              394            1.11%             315           0.89%
   Royalties, Technical Knowledge               1069            3.02%             980           2.77%
Economic Competencies                           3893           11.00%            3,988         11.27%
   Brand equity                                  450            1.27%             545           1.54%
   Firm-specific resources                      3443            9.73%            3,443          9.73%
Other intangibles (from accountants)             368            1.04%             368           1.04%



            While these estimates for the intangible capital stock are similar to each
other, they are lower than the estimates that we obtain using the McGrattan –
Prescott methodology. One reason is the high depreciation rates used by Corrado
et al (2006) another possibility is that organizational capital, in particular
investment in learning by doing, is probably underestimated in their analysis20.



 5. Equilibrium Equity Values

            In this Section, we use the theoretical framework developed earlier and our
estimates of intangible capital to compute equilibrium values for corporate
securities in India and compare these to observed values. We begin by
documenting the average observed values for both debt and equity in Table 10
and predicted fundamental values in Table 11.

20	  The
        reader is referred to McGrattan and Prescott (2005) and the commentary by Edward
Prescott at the end of the chapter by Corrado et al (2005) for a discussion on organization
capital.	  


                                                                                              27
                                                 Table 10

                             Average Observed Corporate Values for India


                                                         1991-2004        2005-2008
                        Corporate equities                 0.452            1.200
                        Net corporate debt                 0.335            0.268

                        Total relative to NAGDP              0.787          1.468
                        Total relative to earnings          17.378         18.272




                                              Table 11

                        Predicted Fundamental Corporate Values for India


                                                              1991-2004               2005-2008
                      McGrattan –Prescott
      Contribution of Domestic tangible capital21               0.701                   0.821
      Contribution of Domestic intangible capital22             0.362                   0.650
      Foreign capital                                           0.000                   0.000
      Total relative to NAGDP                                   1.063                   1.471

                             Corrado et al
      Domestic tangible capital                                                         0.774
      Domestic intangible capital                                                       0.152
      Foreign capital                                                                   0.000
      Total relative to NAGDP                                                           0.926

                     Using Investment Data
      Domestic tangible capital                                                         0.774
      Domestic intangible capital                                                       0.168
      Foreign capital                                                                   0.000
      Total relative to NAGDP                                                           0.942




21   km (1 − τd )
22   ku (1 − τc )(1 − τd )



                                                                                                  28
      Although we have abstracted from debt in deriving our valuation
relationship (equation 6) the empirical counterpart of claims to the corporate
capital stock is the market value of the corporate sector, which includes both equity
and net debt. The total market value of the corporate sector is plotted in Figure 3.




                                         Figure 3
      The top line plots market value of equity and net debt as a multiple of NAGDP.
      The bottom line plots market value of equity as a multiple of NAGDP.



We observe that for the 1991-2004 period the ratio of total corporate value to
NAGDP has been relatively constant with a mean value of 0.787. The predicted
equilibrium value for the same time period is 1.09 (Table 11). If we use our model
as a benchmark then the conclusion is that, the Indian market was not
overvalued over most of the 1991-2004 period – certainly not on average. In fact,




                                                                                       29
tangible assets alone account for over 95% of the value23 of the entire market - a
point reinforced by Figure 4, which plots corporate capital as a multiple of
NAGDP.




                                                    Figure 4




          The Indian experience during 1991-2004, where both capital output and
corporate valuations relative to GDP were constant presents a contrast to the
U.S, where a major puzzle is that while the capital output ratio is fairly constant,
corporate valuations relative to GDP have moved considerably. McGrattan and
Prescott (2005) attribute this to changes in the tax and regulatory framework.
          Next, we examine the 2005-2008 period. One explanation for the run up in
equity values relative to GDP is that there was a change in the capital structure


23   The effective distribution tax rate over this period was 4.9%. Note that from equation 6 the
contribution of tangible capital stock to corporate valuation is km (1 − τd ) .



                                                                                                    30
of firms. If there were debt equity swaps24, equity values relative to GDP would
increase. To see if this was the case in India we examine the net corporate debt
relative to GDP and the debt equity ratio (Figure 5).




                                               Figure 5




24 With corporations buying back debt and issuing equity or changing the debt equity mix in
financing new investments.


                                                                                              31
       Looking at Figure 5, we see a gradual decline in debt financing starting in
1998 but nothing significant in the 2005-08 period. Hence, this is an unlikely
explanation for the precipitous decline in the debt equity ratio in Figure 5, which
seems to be the result of an increase in equity valuation.
       Is this increase in corporate valuations consistent with changes in the
underlying corporate capital stock? The average observed value over this period
was 1.468, which is almost exactly equal to our high estimate of 1.471 but over
50% more than the low estimate for the fundamental value. That market
valuations should increase is apparent from Figure 4. We should have expected a
20-25% increase in valuations, based solely on the increase in tangible capital.
This increase in the tangible capital stock is consistent in the increase in gross
private investment over this period. This rate, which averaged 16.51% during
1991-2004, jumped to 25.5% during 2005-08. (Figure 6)




                                                                                     32
                                                            Source: Panagariya (2008)

                                               Figure 6



However, this increase in the savings rate does not imply the valuations observed
at the end of 2008. Our analysis suggests that an optimistic estimate of
fundamental value of the current Indian equity market is about 1.2 (since debt is
about 0.25). This is considerably lower than the 1.6 value observed in 2008. One
effect that we have not accounted for is the demand from foreign institutional
investors. In 2007, Foreign Institutional Investment was valued at 300 billion
dollars (versus a low of 60 billion) and this fact may have important implications
in valuing Indian stock markets25. If the effect of this demand is to change the
marginal investor, the relevant marginal rate of substitution will change, and
with it valuations as well. These are issues that we plan to pursue in subsequent
research.


25   I thank Surjit Bhalla for this insight.


                                                                                   33
In closing, we revisit Figure 2, which suggests that intangible capital in India is
still increasing in some sectors. This will lead to a future increase in the
equilibrium value of the Indian equity markets relative to GDP. If cross country
data is any guide, we expect these markets to stabilize at around 1.5 GDP once
intangible capital reaches steady state levels.
6. Valuation Ratios

       In this section, we relate the price earnings ratio and Tobin’s q, to
quantities identified in the model developed in Section 2. Both these ratios are
widely used as measures of over and undervaluation of equity.
        James Tobin introduced q, defined as the ratio of the market value of
equity and net debt to tangible capital at replacement cost:
                                         pt + bt
                                 qt =                                                   (9)
                                          km,t +1



In the absence of intangible capital, equation 1 implies that the equilibrium value
of qt = 1 . Persistent departures from qt = 1 26 are interpreted as an indication

of the over or undervaluation of capital markets. Unfortunately, in an economy
with changing tax rates and significant intangible capital the usefulness of qt is

limited. As was shown in the Section 2, in a setting with corporate taxes,
distribution taxes (i.e. taxes on dividends and capital gains) and subsidies to
investment (e.g. investment tax credits) the equilibrium relation specifying the
price of corporate equity and capital stocks is27:

                        pt = (1 − τd )[(1 − τs )km,t +1 + (1 − τc )ku,t +1 ]         (6)




26 Some times the historical average value of q is used as an ad hoc benchmark instead of q=1.
See Smithers and Wright (2000)
27
   We remind the reader that in deriving equation 5 we have abstracted from net corporate debt.
Empirically this is a small relative to equity.
	  


                                                                                              34
                                             pt
In this general setting if we define qt =             it is readily seen that not only is
                                            km,t +1

its equilibrium value not 1 but that it will change with changes in the tax code.
In particular, it will change with changes in the tax rates on corporate
distributions (dividends and buybacks) and these rates have varied considerably
in India from year to year. Thus qt may differ from 1 either because of over or

undervaluation in capital markets or simply as a result of changes in the tax
rates – the ratio per se does not distinguish between the two effects. For the time
period 1991-2008 qt is plotted in Figure 7.




                                       Figure 7



       To eliminate the variations in qt due to changes in distribution taxes one

can define a tax adjusted qtτ as
                                            pt
                               qtτ =
                                       (1 − τ d )km,t +1

The advantage of this measure is that it abstracts from the high frequency
variation in dividend taxation characteristic of India. If corporate tax rates and



                                                                                        35
investment tax rates are relatively stable, then the historical average value of
qtτ provides a benchmark for relative valuation. qtτ is plotted in Figure 8. In the

presence of intangible capital and changing tax rates, it is apparent that changes

in qtτ do not necessarily represent periods of over or undervaluation of equity

markets.




                                       Figure 8



With these caveats in mind, we examine the behavior of qtτ . From 1991 to 2004,

the value was fairly constant with a mean of 0.88. In the absence of intangible
capital, theory predicts that this value should be (1 − τ s ) . Since τ s was

negligible in India over this period, the average estimated value is slightly below
the equilibrium value, leading one to conclude that over the period 1991-2004 the

Indian equity market was not overvalued. Starting in 2005, q has increased at an

average rate of 23% per year. Since there was no change in τ s , one can only



                                                                                      36
conclude that either the amount of intangible capital dramatically increased or
that the market was overvalued relative to its fundamentals.
           A measure closely related to q is the price earnings (P/E) ratio28. It is the
ratio of the stock price to earnings per share or at the aggregate level the value of
equity normalized by after tax corporate profits. It is widely used by financial
analysts, and in recent years has been popularized by academics29. The P/E ratio
for the Indian equity markets is plotted in Figure 9.




                                                  Figure 9



           As expected, the P/E has fluctuated considerably over the period 1991-
2008 with a low of 10, a high of 30 and a mean value of 17.6. The mean value of
the P/E ratio in India is about that same as the historical average for the S&P


28
     In a deterministic world an equilibrium relation is P/E = q/r, where r is the discount rate.
Under uncertainty, variations in r will make P/E more variable than q. The reader is referred to
Smithers and Wright (2000) for a detailed comparison of the relative merits of q and the P/E.
29   See Shiller (2000) and Campbell and Shiller (2001).	  


                                                                                                    37
500, which is 18. Many practitioners consider the market overvalued when the
actual value exceeds 24 or 27 (corresponding to a 33% or 50% increase over
historical norms). Using this criterion, we conclude that except for a brief period
in 1999-2000 the India market was fairly priced.
       In conclusion, we reiterate that q and P/E ratios, which implicitly
abstract from both tax rates and intangible capital, offer inadequate measures of
under and over valuation of capital markets. In particular, for economies that
exhibit sizable secular growth in intangible capital, as has been observed in India
over the last 15-20 years, these metrics offer limited analytical utility.


7. Concluding Comments



       In this paper, we take a critical look at the relationship between the value
of capital stock in the Indian corporate sector and the valuation of claims to this
capital stock in capital markets. We address the question of whether Indian
equity valuations over the period 1991- 2008 are consistent with three key market
fundamentals: corporate capital stock, after tax corporate cash flows and net
corporate debt. Our analysis extends the neo-classical growth model to include
intangible capital and key features of the tax code and uses national account
statistics to estimate the equilibrium value of corporate equity relative to GDP.
Our framework can provide policy makers with a benchmark to identify
deviations in equity markets relative to those implied by economic fundamentals.
In addition, it facilitates a quantitative assessment of policy changes such as, for
example, the effect of changes in dividend taxation on stock prices. We caution
the reader that although our framework is well suited to examining secular
movements in the value of equity relative to GDP, it is not suitable to address
high frequency price movements in the stock market. In fact, we know of no




                                                                                   38
framework that can satisfactorily account for these movements in terms of the
underlying fundamentals. High frequency volatility remains a puzzle.
      Based on our analysis, we conclude that in a large measure, Indian equity
markets were fairly priced over the 1991-2008 period.




                                                                                39
                                  References

Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence H. Summers and Richard J.
Zeckhauser (1989), "Assessing Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence,"
Review of Economic Studies 56,1-20.

Auerbach, Allan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1987), Dynamic Fiscal Policy
(Cambridge University Press).

Bajpai, GN (2004), A Historical Perspective of the Securities Market Reforms
http://www.sebi.gov.in/chairmanspeech/histspeech.html

Becker, Gary S & Barro, Robert J, 1988. "A Reformulation of the Economic
Theory of Fertility," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol.
103(1), pages 1-25, February.

Bond, Stephen R., and Jason G. Cummins (2000) “The Stock Market and
Investment in the New Economy” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 61-
125.

Bosworth, Barry P., (1975) “The Stock Market and the Economy,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity,2, 257-90.

Bosworth, Barry P., Susan M. Collins and Arvind Virmani, (2007), “Sources of
Growth in the Indian Economy,” India Policy Forum 2006/07,3,1-50.

Brock, William A. (1979), "An Integration of Stochastic Growth Theory and the
Theory of Finance, Part 1: The Growth Model," in J. Green and J. Scheinkman
(eds.), General Equilibrium, Growth & Trade (Academic Press, New York).

Brock, W.A., 1982, “Asset Prices in a Production Economy,” in: JJ. McCall, ed.,
The Economics of Information and Uncertainty (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL).

Campbell, John, Y. and Robert J. Shiller, (2001) “Valuation Ratios and the Long
Run Stock Market Outlook,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 24 (2). 11-26.


Corrado, C., Hulten, C. R. and Sichel, D. E. (2005), “Measuring Capital and
Technology: An Expanded Framework”, in C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger and D.


                                                                               40
Sichel (eds.) Measuring Capital in the New Economy (University of Chicago
Press).

Corrado Carol A., Charles R. Hulten and Daniel E. Sichel, (2006).
"Intangible Capital and Economic Growth," NBER Working Papers 11948,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, and Stephen A. Ross (1985), "A Theory of
the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Econometrica 53, 385-407.

Danthine, Jean-Pierre, John B. Donaldson and Paolo Siconolfi (2008) “
Distribution Risk and Equity Returns” in Rajnish Mehra, Editor, Handbook of
the Equity Premium Puzzle (Elsevier)

Donaldson, John B., and Rajnish Mehra (1984), "Comparative Dynamics of an
Equilibrium Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model," Review of Economic Studies 51,
491-508.

Fama, Eugene F. and Merton H. Miller (1972), The Theory of Finance,
(Holt, Rinehart and Winston).

Grossman, Sanford J., and Robert J. Shiller (1981), "The Determinants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review 71 (May), 222-
27.

Hall, Bronwyn H and Robert E. Hall (2000), “The Value and Performance of
U.S. Corporations” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1993:1, 1-47

Hall, R. E. (2001), “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation”, American
Economic Review, 91, 1185–1202.

Kiley, Michael T. (2004) ''Stock Prices and Fundamentals: a Macroeconomic
Perspective,'' Journal of Business, 77, 909-936.

Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie (2001).”Beyond Balanced Growth,”
Review of Economic Studies, 68, 869-882

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott (1982), "Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations," Econometrica 50, 1345-1371.




                                                                              41
LeRoy, Stephen F., and Richard D. Porter (1981), "The Present-Value Relation:
Tests Based on Implied Variance Bounds," Econometrica 49, 555-74.

Lucas, Robert E. (1988), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal
of Monetary Economics 22, 3-42.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Stephen P. Zeldes. (1991) “The Consumption of
Stockholders and Nonstockholders.” Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97–112.

McGrattan, E. R. and Prescott, E. C. (2001), “Taxes, Regulations, and Asset
Prices” (Working Paper 610, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis).

McGrattan, E.R. and Prescott, E. C. (2005), “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value
of U.S. and U.K. Corporations”, Review of Economic Studies, 72, 767-796

Merton, Robert C. (1971), "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
Continuous Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413.

Panagariya, Arvind. (2008). “India: The Emerging Giant.” (Oxford University
Press).

Prescott, E.C. and R. Mehra, 1980, Recursive Competitive Equilibrium: The
Case of Homogeneous Households, Econometrica 48, 1365-1379

Shiller, Robert J. (1981), "Do Stock Prices Move too Much to be Justified by
Subsequent Changes in Dividends?" American Economic Review 71, 421-36.

Shiller, Robert J. (2000). “Irrational Exuberance.” Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.

Smithers, Andrew and Stephen Wright (2000).”Valuing Wall Street: Protecting
Wealth in Turbulent Markets.” (McGraw-Hill).




                                                                                  42
Appendix
                               Table A1

             Capital stock of Innovative Property (GDP)

                             Depreciation rates

                                   (Half-life)

              10%           20%                  30%      CHS (20%)

    Year   (6.9 years)   (3.5 years)        (2.3 years)   (3.5 years)

    1991     0.00%         0.00%                 0.00%      0.00%
    1992     0.16%         0.16%                 0.16%      0.16%
    1993     0.46%         0.45%                 0.43%      0.45%
    1994     0.86%         0.80%                 0.75%      0.80%
    1995     1.17%         1.04%                 0.94%      1.04%
    1996     1.28%         1.09%                 0.92%      1.09%
    1997     1.43%         1.17%                 0.95%      1.17%
    1998     1.93%         1.60%                 1.35%      1.60%
    1999     2.29%         1.86%                 1.55%      1.86%
    2000     2.45%         1.92%                 1.54%      1.92%
    2001     2.69%         2.07%                 1.64%      2.07%
    2002     2.91%         2.20%                 1.73%      2.20%
    2003     3.32%         2.51%                 2.01%      2.51%
    2004     3.72%         2.80%                 2.24%      2.80%
    2005     4.11%         3.09%                 2.46%      3.09%
    2006     4.44%         3.29%                 2.59%      3.29%
    2007     4.76%         3.49%                 2.74%      3.49%
    2008     5.03%         3.65%                 2.82%      3.65%




                                                                        43
                           Table A2

            Capital stock of Brand Equity (GDP)

                          Depreciation rates

                               (Half-life)

          10%           20%                  30%     CHS (60%)

Year   (6.9 years)   (3.5 years)       (2.3 years)   (1.2 years)

1991     0.00%        0.00%              0.00%        0.00%
1992     1.08%        1.08%              1.08%        1.08%
1993     2.25%        2.15%              2.05%        1.74%
1994     3.36%        3.08%              2.81%        2.13%
1995     4.39%        3.87%              3.41%        2.37%
1996     5.30%        4.50%              3.84%        2.51%
1997     5.83%        4.75%              3.90%        2.33%
1998     6.15%        4.80%              3.80%        2.13%
1999     5.99%        4.41%              3.32%        1.63%
2000     6.08%        4.35%              3.22%        1.67%
2001     5.87%        4.02%              2.88%        1.41%
2002     5.76%        3.84%              2.72%        1.37%
2003     5.71%        3.75%              2.66%        1.40%
2004     5.70%        3.70%              2.65%        1.44%
2005     5.75%        3.73%              2.70%        1.51%
2006     5.78%        3.75%              2.73%        1.54%
2007     5.79%        3.74%              2.73%        1.52%
2008     5.83%        3.76%              2.75%        1.54%




                                                                   44
