                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                SOME HISTORICAL EVIDENCE 1870—1933
                 ON THE IMPACT AND INTERNATIONAL
                 TRANSMISSION OF FINANCIAL CRISES



                         Michael D. Bordo


                      Working Paper No. i6oE




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions etpressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1606
                                                  April 1985

                     Some Ristorical Evidence 1370—1933
                      on the Impact and International
                      Transmission of Financial Crises


                                  ABSTRACT


        This study presents historical evidence for six countries (the U.S.
U.K., Germany, France, Canada, Sweden) in the period 1870—1933 on the impact
of financial crises on economic activity and on the international
transmission of financial crises. The paper examines two approaches in the
literature to the role and importance of financial crises as disturbances to
domestic and international economic activity, that of the
monetarists——Friedman and Schwartz and Cagan, and that of Fisher—Minsky and
Kindleberger.

        In a comparison of reference cycle contractions for the six
countries over the period 1870—1933 severe contractions in economic activity
were in all cases accompanied by monetary contraction, in most cases with
stock market crashes, bat not with the exception of the U.S., by banking
crises. The unique performance of the U.S. can be attributed to the absence
of a nationwide branch banking system compared to the five other countries
examined, and the less effective role played by the U.S. monetary authorities
in acting as a lender of last resort.

        Our principal findings on the international transmission of finan-
cial crises are two. First, consistent with the monetarist approach, that
under the Classical gold standard, in periods containing financial crises,
nations' money supplies were linked by gold flows and changes in high powered
money, while under periods of flexible exchange rates there is evidence of
insulation of domestic monetary and real variables from foreign shocks.

        Second, in sympathy with the Kindleberger—Minsky approach, the
similarity between countries of turning points in stock market prices, the
common incidence of stock market crises, and the similar importance of the
deposit reserve ratio as the key determinant of monetary contraction in all
countries (except the u.s.) suggests that arbitrage in stock prices was a
channel for the international transmission of crises.



                                                 Michael D. Bordo
                                                 University of South Carolina
                                                 College of Business
                                                 Administration
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Columbia, SC 29203
       Some Historical Evidence (1870-1933) on the Impact and International
                        Transmission of Financial Crises*


                                 1 .   INTRODUCTION

     Recent fears of insolvency of major U.S. banks and the threat posed to

world economic stability has raised considerable interest in the topic of

financial crises and in financial crises of the past.1 This study presents

historical evidence for six countries in the period 1870—1933 on the impact

of financial crises on economic activity and on the international transmission

of financial crises.

     Two approaches to financial crises predominate in the literature.2 The

nonetarist approach of Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Cagan (1965) and Schwartz

(1985) identifies financial crises with banking panics viewing them as either

producing or aggravating the effects of monetary contraction. The second

approach identified with the work of Minsky and Kindleberger, following the

seminal work of Fisher (1932), views financial crises as a key element of

the upper turning point in the business cycle and as the inevitable consequence

of the boom.

     Many financial crises in the past two hundred years have occurred world

wide (see Kindleberger, 1978) although they have differed markedly in degree

of severity. Monetary and real channels have been emphasized in the two approaches

to international transmission.

     According to the monetarist approach, financial crises (and also business

fluctuations) are transmitted internationally primarily through the monetary

standard.3 Under a fixed exchange rate, such as the classical gold standard,

a financial crisis in one count'y by reducing the money supply or velocity

in that country will attract gold flows from other countries. These countries
                                                                                 2


will in turn suffer a contraction in their money supplies and a reduction

in economic activity. Transmission can also occur through short—tern capital

flows, changes in real income, and commodity arbitrage, but the way in which

these channels affect activity is primarily through monetary change. By contrast,

under flexible exchange rates, according to the monetarist approach, one would

expect the transmission of financial disturbances to be considerably muted.

     According to the Kindleberger-Minsky approach financial crises are

transmitted primarily through nonmonetary channels such as link portfolios

of financial institutions, capital flows, commodity arbitrage, and changes

in the balance of trade. Monetary factors are treated as of secondary importance.

     In some detail Section 2 examines these two approaches to the role and

importance of financial crises as disturbances to domestic and international

economic activity. The two approaches can in some sense be treated as complements

rather than substitutes. Both emphasize the role of monetary and nonmonetary

factors in precipitating and transmitting crises, with different weights placed.

by each approaches on each set of factors. In what follows we do not run

a race between the two views but rather ascertain the extent to which historical

evidence is compatible with elements of each of them.

     Section 3 examines the evidence for six countries: the United States,

Great Britain, France, Germany, Sweden and Canada on the relationship between

monetary contraction, the sources of monetary change, declines in economic activity

and the incidence of financial crises.   In a comparison of reference cycle

contractions for the six countries over the period 1870-1933 severe contractions

in economic activity were in all cases accompanied by monetary contraction,
                                                                                  3


in most cases with stock market crashes, but not with the exception of the

U. S., by banking crises. The unique performance of the U.S. can be attributed

to the absence of a nationwide branch banking system compared to the five

other countries examined, and the less effective role played by the U.S. monetary

authorities in acting as a lender of last resort.

     Section 4 examines the evidence for the six countries on the international

transmission of financial crises. Our principal findings are two. First,

consistent with the rnonetarist approach, that under the Classical gold standard,

in periods containing financial crises, nations' money supplies were linked

by gold flows and changes in high powered money, while under periods of flexible

exchange rates there is evidence of insulation of domestic monetary and real

variables from foreign shocks.

     Second in sympathy with the Kindleberger—Minsky approach, the similarity

between countries of turning points in stock market prices, the common incidence

of stock market crises, and the similar importance of the deposit reserve

ratio as the key determinant of monetary contraction in all countries (except

the U.S.) suggests that arbitrage in stock prices was a channel for the international

trZansmission of crises.

     Finally section 5 contains a conclusion and discusses some implications

of the historical record for the present situation.

                 2. THEORETICAL APPROACHES TO FINANCIAL CRISES

     Of two main approaches to understanding the role and importance of financial

crises, the approach of Friedman and Schwartz (l963a) and Cagan (1965) identifies

financial crises with banking panics. Banking panics in turn may be a source

of monetary contraction or may aggravate the effects of monetary contraction
                                                                                  4


on economic activity.4 The second approach following the seminal work of

Fisher (1932), views financial crises as a part of the normal functioning

of the business cycle, and explains them as a natural consequence of "financial

fragility" and "overindebtedness."

The Monetarist Approach to Financial Crises

     In their monumental A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960,

Friedman and Schwartz devote considerable attention to the role of banking

panics in producing monetary instability in the United States.   For Friedman

and Schwartz, banking panics are important because of their effects on the

money supply and hence on economic activity. Over the approximate one—hundred-year

span studied, the United States had six severe contractions, of which four

were marked by major banking or monetary disturbances (Friedman and Schwartz,

l963a, p. 677). Indeed banking panics "have greatly intensified (severe)

contractions if indeed they have not been the primary factor converting what

would otherwise have been mild contractions into severe ones" (1963a, pp. 441-442).

     According to Friedman and Schwartz, banking panics arise out of the loss

of confidence by the public in the ability of banks to convert deposits into

currency. A loss of confidence is typically precipitated by the failure of

some important financial institution (e.g. as in 1873, 1893). Attempts by

the public to increase the fraction of its money holdings held in currency

in a fractional reserve banking system can only be met by a multiple contraction

of deposits. A banking panic in turn, if not allayed by the suspension of

convertibility of deposits into currency and the issuance of clearing house

certificates (as was often the case before the establishment of the Federal
                                                                                  S


Reserve in 1914) or by early intervention by the monetary authorities, will

produce massive bank failures. Such failures will be the consequence of otherwise

Sound banks being forced into insolvency by a fail in the value of their assets

induced by a mass scramble for liquidity.

     Banking panics leading to widespread bank failures, such as occurred

in the 1929—33 period, primarily by reducing the money stock through a decline

in both the deposit—currency and deposit—reserve ratios, have deleterious

effects on economic activity.

     Friedman and Schwartz make an important distinction between the arithmetic

and the economic aspects of a banking panic.   In their discussion of the panic

of 1893 they state "the panic had important effects on the banking structure,...;

and it undoubtedly affected the detailed timing, form, and impact of the economic

adjustment.   At the same time, it was at bottom simply the way in which an

adjustment, forced by other considerations, worked itself out. The price

declines abroad and the distrust of the maintenance of the gold standard by

the United States meant that there were only two alternatives:   (1) a sizable

decline in U.S. prices and a decline or a reduced rate of rise in money income;

or (2) the abandonment of the gold standard and the depreciation of the dollar

relative to other currencies. Given the maintenance of the gold standard,

the adjustments in prices and income were unavoidable. If they had not occurred

through the banking panic and the accompanying deepening of the recession

underway, they would have taken place in some other way" (Friedman and Schwartz,

1963, pp. 110—11 ).

     Indeed the peculiarities of the U.S. banking system as it developed in

the nineteenth century with its unit fractional reserve banking system and
                                                                                  6


reserves pyramided in New York made it highly susceptible to banking panics.

This vulnerability was finally ended by the introduction of federal deposit

insurance in 1934 which served to remove the public's fear for its ability

to convert deposits into currency.

     Friedman and Schwartz highlight the importance in the pre FDIC system

of strong and responsible leadership exercising timely judgment in intervening

to allay the public's fears. Before the advent of the Fed, such intervention

by the New York clearing banks in suspending convertibility and issuing clearing

house certificates and, on occasion, in conducting open market purchases by

the Treasury was generally successful, although not sufficient to prevent

severe monetary contraction. The Federal Reserve System established in part

to provide such leadership failed dismally in the 1929—33 contraction.

     According to Friedman and Schwartz, had the Fed conducted open market

operations in 1930 and 1931 to provide the reserves needed by the banking

system, the series of bank failures producing the massive unprecedented declineS

in the money stock would have been prevented.

     Finally according to Friedman and Schwartz, economic disturbances are

spread internationally by the monetary standard. U.S. monetary disturbances

during the 1929-33 contraction quickly spread abroad to other gold countries

through the gold exchange standard. Only countries on flexible exchange rates

with the U.S., such as China, and Spain, escaped its ravages.5

     Cagan (1965) in Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money,

1875—1960, carefully analyzed the role of banking panics in the cyclical behavior

of the [1.5. morLey supply. Cagan, like Friedman and Schwartz, explained the
                                                                                 7


incidence of panics by events such as the failure of prominent financial institutions

or railroads. The resulting decline in the public's confidence in the banks,

by raising both the public's currency-money ratio and the banking system's

reserve-deposit ratio, led to a contraction in the money supply.6 Cagan attributed

the high incidence of banking panics in the U.S. experience "to the pre—World

War I banking system with its inverted pyramid of credit resting on New York

City banks and the absence of emergency reserves provided by a central bank.

and to "sharp outflows of gold which sometimes forced banks to contract credit

too fast" (Cagan, 1965, pp. 226—227).

     Finally, Cagan presented strong evidence that panics in the U.S. experience

did not precipitate cyclical downturns since they all followed peaks in economic

activity. Moreover, though panics were important in several cycles in reducing

money growth more than would otherwise have happened and in converting mild

contractions into severe contractions, he concluded based on the evidence

of two severe cyclical downturns not associated with banking panics——l920—21

and 1937-38—-and two mild cyclical downturns that were associated with panics—-1890

and 1914-—that panics were neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for

producing a severe contraction.

     Huffrnan and Lothian (1984) focus on the international transmission of

business cycles under the pre—1933 gold standard. They view monetary shocks

as the key sources of cyclical fluctuations, with the fixed—exchange—rate

gold standard the primary mechanism for transmission of shocks abroad. An

unexpected decline in the money supply in one country (say, the United States)

will reduce income and prices and raise interest rates in that country leading

to a balance of payments surplus and a gold and capital inflow from another
                       -
                                                                                  8

(say Great Britain).   In Great Britain, the gold outflow will reduce the money

supply, prices and real output and raise interest rates, leading to a new

equilibrium. Empirical evidence based on Granger—Sims causality tests provides

support for the paramount role of specie flows and money supplies in the pre—1933

gold standard transmission mechanism.

     Since financial crises are important only to the extent that they affect

the money supply, they should not be a crucial part of the transmission mechanism.

In a comparison of coninon cycles in the United States and Great Britain, 1830-1933,

Huffman and Lothian found panics in only three of twelve common cycles. This

leads them to conclude that little importance should be attached to panics

as a direct channel of international transmission of cyclical fluctuations.

The Fisher—Minsky—Kindleberger Approach

     In contrast to the monetarist approach which regards financial crises

as important via their influence on monetary aggregates, a tradition going

back to the nineteenth century regards financial crises as an essential part

of the upper turning point of the business cycle——as a necessary consequence

of the "excesses" of the previous boom. The modern proponents, Minsky and

Kindleberger, basically extend the views Irving Fisher expressed in Booms

and Depressions (1982).

     According to Fisher (1932) and (1933) the business cycle is explained

by two key factors: overindebtedness and deflation.

     "Disturbances in these two factors——debt and the purchasing power of

the monetary unit-—will set up serious disturbances in all, or nearly all,

other economic variables. On the other hand, if debt and deflation are absent,

other disturbances are powerless to bring on crises comparable in severity

to those of 1837, 1873, or 1929—33" (Fisher, 1933, p. 341).
                                                                                 9


     The upsiing in the cycle is precipitated by some exogenous event that

provides new, profitable opportunities for investment in key sectors of the

economy. Such 'starters" can be new inventions, gold discoveries or wars.

The exogenous shock encourages new investment in those sectors that increase

output and prices. Rising prices by raising profits encourages more investment

but also encourages speculation for capital gain. The whole process is debt

financed, primarily by bank loans, which in turn by increasing deposits and

the money supply raises the price level. An overall sense of optimism will

raise velocity, fueling the expansion even further. Moreover the rising price

level by reducing the real value of outstanding debt more than the increase

in nominal debt encourages further borrowing.   The process continues until

a general state of "overindebtedness"——defjned as 'whatever degree of indebtedness

multiplies unduly the chances of becoming insolvent"—— is reached (Fisher,

1932, p. 9). A state of overindebtedness exists when individuals, firms,

and banks have insufficient liquid assets to meet their liabilities.   In such

a situation a crisis can be triggered by •errors in judgment by debtors or

creditors. Debtors unable to pay debts when due and unable to refinance their

positions may be forced by creditors to liquidate their assets

     Such "distress selling" if widespread then triggers a "liquidity crisis"

that could in turn lead to a "debt crisis," a "banking crisis," and a deep

depression unless the process is averted by intervention by the monetary authorities..

Distress selling if engaged in by the whole community produces a decline in

the price level because, as loans are extinguished and not renewed, bank deposits

decline. As the price level falls the real value of outstanding debt rises

and, according to Fjsher, based on the assumption of money illusion both by
                                                                                10


debtors and creditors, it rises faster than nominal debt is extinguished. Thus

creditors see the nominal value of their collateral declining with the price

level and hence continue to call their loans, while the real debt burden of

debtors rises so they continue to liquidate. A fallacy of composition takes

over, each individual joining the liquidation to avoid being worse off, while

the community as a whole by reducing the price level actually becomes worse

off. The process can proceed to involve bank runs as fears for their solvency

rise, and to raise the demand for money as a sense of pessimism spreads.

     Real economic activity is affected by falling prices that reduce net

worth and profits leading to bankruptcy. Both factors contribute to a decline

in output and employment.   In addition, while nominal interest rates fall

with deflation, real rates are increased, worsening the situation. The process

can continue until either widespread bankruptcy has eliminated the overindebtedness,

or at any state a reflationary monetary policy is adopted. However, once

recovery begins, the whole process will repeat itself. Finally, depressions

are transmitted from country to country by the monetary standard.7

     Minsky in a series of articles since 1957 has elaborated and extended

Fisher's theory.8 Basically Minsky has extended the notion of overindebtedness

and the processes which produce it by his concept of fragility.

     According to Minsky, as the economy proceeds through the upwsing of the

business cycle, the financial structure becomes more fragile. A crisis occurs

when a fragile financial structure is shocked by some event that triggers

a sell-off of assets in a thin market producing a sharp decline in asset prices

(Minsky, 1977, 140). The fragility or robustness of a financial structure

is determined by three factors: a) the mix of hedge, speculative, and Ponzi
                                                                                 11


 finance; b) the liquidity of the portfolio; c) the extent to which ongoing

 investment is debt financed.

      Minsky's terms are defined as follows: "if a unit's cash flow commitments

 on debts are such that over each significant period the cash receipts are

 expected to exceed the cash payments by a significant margin, the unit is

 said to be engaged in hedge financing." Speculative financing is defined

as "cash flow payments over some period——typically near term-—that exceed

the cash flows expected over this period." A Ponzi finance unit "is a speculative

unit for which the interest portion of its cash payment conirnitrnents exceeds

its net income cash receipts. A Ponzi unit has to increase its debt in order

to meet its commitments on outstanding instruments" (1977, p. 143). The importance

 of speculative and Ponzi finance is that a rise in the interest rate can convert

a positive into a negative present value, precipitating insolvency.

     According to Minsky's approach, in the upswing of the cycle, the demand

for new investment in response to improved profit opportunities leads to a

demand for finance. Part of the new investment is directly financed by short-term

bank loans, part by equity, and part by long-term debt. As the economy expands

it geneates an excess demand for finance, raising interest rates. However,

the excess demand is partially and temporarily offset by financial innovation,

which in turn fuels the finance of further investment.9 Thus, the investment

boom is fueled both by an endogenous (elastic) money supply and elastic velocity.

     As interest rates rise, four factors work to create a fragile financial
                10
envi ronment:
                                                                                   12

     a)   an increase in debt finance
     b)   a shift from long term to short term debt
     c)   a shift from hedge to speculative to Ponzi finance
     d)   a reduction in financial institutions' margin of safety

     Once a fragile environment is in place, a further rise in interest rates

by shifting hedge to speculative to Ponzi financing can precipitate a refinancing

crisis where firms are unable to "rollover" their debt. In that situation

Fisher's "distress selling" process can be generated with all the attendant

consequences. The crisis can be aborted however by the central bank acting

as a lender of last resort to the money marketsit

     Finally, Minsky's thesis can also explain the international transmission

of crises. Commercial banks lending abroad face additional risks. The risks

include reater economic and political uncertainty that increase the likelihood
                                                                              13
of default and capital losses from unexpected changes in exchange rates.]tt

     Kindleberger (1978) follows Minsky and Fisher, embellishing the story

with pages of anecdotes from history. Basically some displacement which improves

profit opportunities leads to an investment boom, fueled by bank money and

rising velocity. This in turn produces a "speculative mania" involving a

shift from money to goods, "overtrading" and then "distress". At that point

some event triggers a massive shift from goods to money and a "panic" results

(Kindleberger, 1978, p. 5).

     Kindleberger expands on the international transmission mechanism. In

addition to the traditional links of gold flows, the balance of trade, and

capital flows, he stresses the importance of psychological factors, commodity

arbitrage, and interest arbitrage which, by linking the banking systems of

different countries directly, can offset the normal operations of the classical

price—specie—flow mechanism.
                                                                                 13

           Although Minsky's model is limited to a single country, over—
      trading has historically tended to spread from one country to another.
     The conduits are many. Commodity prices may rise and so may the
      prices of securities that are traded internationally. Speculation
      in exports, imports, or foreign securities furnishes direct links
     between markets of countries. By these means euphoria and overtrading
     in one country can be fed by capital inflows from foreign purchases
     of particular goods and assets. And if these capital flows lead
     to inflows of gold or silver, monetary expansion in the original
     country is enhanced as the boom is fueled by additional supplies
     of money on which higher pryamids of credit can be supported.   In
     an ideal world, of course, a gain of specie for one country would
     be matched by a corresponding loss for another, and the resulting
     expansion in the first case would be offset by the contraction in
     the second.   In the real world, however, while the boom in the first
     country might gain speed from the increase in the supply of reserves,
     or "high-powered money", it might also rise in the second despite
     the loss in monetary reserves, as investors respond to rising prices
     and profits abroad by joining in the speculative chase.   In other
     words, the potential contraction from the shrinkage on the monetary
     side might be overwhelmed by the increase in speculative interest
     and the rise in demand. For the two countries together, in any
     event, the credit system is stretched tighter.

     Kindleberger views a flexible exchange rate as an important conduit for

the international transmission of financial crises-—exchange appreciation

and deflation, or exchange depreciation and inflation.. .can be connected with

bankruptcies, bank suspensions and changes in the money supply" (p. 119).

     Finally, as do Fisher and Minsky, Kindleberger assumes a role to a lender

of last resort to abort the crisis but, with his additional emphasis on the

international nature of financial crisis, he stresses the need for an international

lender of last resort)4

A Comparison of the Two Approaches

     The two main approaches to the role and importance of financial crises

differ in two ways. The first is over the importance of monetary change as

the primary conduit through which financial crises affect economic activity.

According to the monetarist approach, it is primarily by reducing money growth
                                                                                14


more than otherwise that the banking system when affected by a crisis, has

an impact on the economy. By contrast, the Kindleberger—Minsky approach sees

financial crises as being important largely independent of effects on the

money supply.

      A second difference is the importance of monetary factors in the international

transmission of financial crises. According to the rnonetarist approach, transmission

should occur primarily via the monetary standard by precipitating gold flows

(or changes in international reserves) between countries that affect monetary

bases and hence money supplies. Under flexible exchange rates, transmission

would be muted. By contrast, in the Kindleberger—Fiinsky approach, transmission

can occur through a wide variety of channels including the monetary channel.

One key channel stressed by Kindleberger and Minsky is the direct link between

the banking systems of different countries. Moreover, flexible exchange rates

may serve to accelerate transmission.

      In what follows we examine the extent to which historical evidence for

six countries in the period 1870—1933 conforms to each of these theories.

 3.   MONEY, ECONOMIC ACTIVITY AND FINANCIAL CRISES: THE INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE

      In this section is presented evidence in Table 1 for six countries in

the period 1870—1933 on the behavior of real and monetary variables during

cyclical contractions marked by financial crises. Because of data limitations

for the majority of countries much of the focus is on annual data. The use

of annual data, though the best available, makes it more difficult to discuss

the influence of a phenomenon such as a banking panic or a stock market crash

than would be possible with monthly or weekly data.
                                                                                  15

      Six countries are included. The United States, Great Britain, Germany

 and France were the "core" countries in the
                                               period, with virtually all of
 the "crises' either originating in them or greatly amplified by them.
                                                                           The
 four countries were linked over much of the period by the gold standard and

 gold exchange standards as well as by close real trade and financial links.

 Unfortunately, reliable monetary data are available over the entire period

 for only two of the countries——the United States and Great Britain. For Germany

coverage is limited to the pre World War I period and for France to the
                                                                          post
World War I period, and even then the data are spotty. Two "peripheral" but

important countries with reliable data were chosen in addition to the four

•core countries——canada (for the period 1900—1933) and Sweden (over the whole

period). The two were closely linked to the "core" countries—-canada to the

U.S., and Great Britain; Sweden to Great Britain and Germany.

Real Variables

     Twelve "common international" reference cycles are isolated by picking

turning points in the NBER reference cycle chronology for each country that

corresponded as closely as possible to the British reference cycle pattern.

Thus for example, the second cycle for Great Britain has a peak in 1883 and

a trough in 1886, the comparable cycle for the United States has a peak in

1882 and a trough in 1885. Moreover the five other countries (in fact) had

more (the U.S. had 16) or fewer reference cycles (Germany had 11), than Great

Britain, but all these deviations in dating occurred within or very close

to the British cycle. These deviations are characterized as subcycles to

the common international cycle and the dates are presented in parentheses under

the common international cycle dates.15 Thus e.g., in the third cycle Great
                                                                                    16


Britain has a peak in 1890, a trough in 1894, the comparable "common" U.S.

cycle is designated as having a peak in 1890 and a trough in 1894. This dating

involved combining for the U.S. three NBER reference cycles designated here

as subcycles—-taking the peak from the second NBER reference cycle and the

trough frohi the third.

        In addition, following Burns and Mitchell (1946), six cyclical contractions

are designated as severe denoted by (S)——cycles (1), (2), (3), (7), (9), and

(12). Column (1) of Table 1 presents the annual, and the monthly, displayed

in [], "common international" reference cycle chronology, for the peaks and

troughs in business cycle contractions. Both annual and monthly data exist

for all countries except Sweden, for which only annual data is available. Cyclical

contractions are focused on since most financial, banking and stock market

crises have occurred at or shortly after the reference peak and have been

associated with the severity of the ensuing cyclical contraction.

        Column (2) presents a measure of the severity of decline in real economic

activity during cyclical contractions in each country——the deviation of the

average annual percentage change in real output from the long-run trend growth

rate.

        In general the severity of contractions differed considerably across

countries in the "common cycles" although the six NBER designated severe cyclical

contractions had the greatest declines in real activity in all the countries.

Financial Variables

        Columns (3), (4) and (5) show the incidence for the core countries based

on various sources, of crises. Three definitions reflecting the literature

are used. For the two peripheral countries, only minimal comparable evidence

was available, shown in two columns for Canada, one for Sweden.
                                                                                  17


      Column (3) cites the presence of "financial crises"
                                                            according to Kindleberger's
 (1978) chronology of international financial crisesH6' 11    Column (4) cites
the presence of stock market crises
                                      according to Morgenstern's (1959) chronology.
In addition, following Morgenstern, superscripts indicate whether a crisis

was a major or minor, and international or local in scope. Finally, column (5)

cites, based on Thorp (1926), Friedman and Schwartz (1963a) and other sources,

the presence of banking crises, classified by superscripts as banking panics

(runs, failures, and suspension of payments) and banking crises (runs and

or failures). Most banking crises and virtually all banking panics were confined

to the U.S. in thi's period.

     The qualitative evidence on the incidence of crises is supported by the

timing of turning points in two key financial variables——the long—term—short—term

interest rate differential, and Morgenstern's index of stock prices. Columns (6)

and (7) show the peaks and troughs on a monthly basis of these two financial

variables.

     In column (6) the interest differential chronology is reversed, reflecting

financial pressure at the specific cycle trough and ease at the peak.    In

general the troughs in this series are very close to the corresponding reference

cycle peaks, tending to follow them by only a few months. At the same time

peaks in the stock price index (column 6) tend to precede reference cycle

peaks, reflecting the stock markets role as a frequent leading indicator

of economic activity.

Monetary Variables

     Columns (8) to (13) for the three core countries except France, and column (14)

for the U.S. and Great Britain display monetary variables. Monetary variables

for Canada appear in columns (5) to (10) and for Sweden in columns (4) to (8).
                                                                                        18


          Column (8) for the care countries, columns (5) and (4) far Canada and

    Sweden, respectively, present a chronology of peaks and troughs of specific

    cycles in monetary growth corresponding to the reference cycle chronology
-   of   column (1). Annual or monthly (depending on the frequency of the available

    data) turrtfng points were derived following procedures developed by Friedman

    and Schwartz (1963b).

          For the U.S., turning points in money growth generally precede those

    in business by a calendar year. However, as can be seen from the monthly

    series in brackets, the use of annual averaged data greatly distorts the true

    measure of the lead. Nevertheless since monthly data are available only for

    Canada besides the U.S. ,   the annual data is used as a crude measure of timing.

          For the other countries, the turning points in money growth generally

    precede but in numerous cases coincide with the turning points in business.18

          Column (9) shows the deviations from long—run trend of the average rate

    of money growth between peaks and troughs as a measure of the severity of

    monetary contraction.   In virtually every case, with the principal exception

    of World War I in Great Britain, declines in money growth below trend are

    associated with declines in economic activity in the corresponding reference

    cycle contraction. Indeed the greater is the deviation of money growth from

    trend, the greater the decline in economic activitiy. The most severe declines

    in both money and real output occur in severe cycles characterized in many

    instances by financial and stock market crises. However, the greatest declines

    of all the countries examined here (with the exception of the 1920—21 episode)

    occurred in the U.S. in contractions associated with banking crises.
                                                                                  19

      Columns (10) to (12) for the three core countries
                                                          (excluding France),
 column (7) to (9) for Canada and (6) to (8) for Sweden show the contributions

 to the specific cycle contractions in monetary growth for the three determinants

 of the money supply: high-powered money; the deposit-currency ratio; and

 the deposit—reserve ratio.

      Cagan (1965), in his pioneering study for the U.S., found the currency-money

 ratio to be the key determinant of cyclical movements in the noney supply

with high—powered money and the reserve ratio each having about one half of

the influence of the currency ratio. For severe cycles, the order of magnitude

remained the same but the influence of the currency ratio increased)9 Both

Cagan and Friedman and Schwartz present evidence for the U.S. that in severe

cycles characterized by banking panics, declines in the deposit—currency ratio

and hence in the deposit reserve ratio on several occasions led to declines

in money growth sufficient to produce a severe contraction in economic activity.

Such results for the U.S. can be clearly seen in column (12) for the banking

panics of 1893, and the great contraction of 1929—33.

     For Great Britain, in contrast to the U.S., high-powered money was

the key determinant of cyclical contractions in money, followed by the deposit—

currency ratio and the deposit—reserve ratio.2° For Great Britain, again

in contrast to the U.S., there were no banking crises in the period under

consideration, yet the two ratios acting along or jointly produced significant

declines in money in several severe contractions associated with major stock

market crises: 1872-78; 1890—93; 1900-01; 1902—03; 1907-08; and 1928—31.

However, none of the declines of the ratios, with the exception of 1930-31,

were comparable to those observed in the U.S. case.
                                                                                20

     For Germany, the deposit—currency ratio was the most important determinant

of cyclical changes in money in specific cycle contractions. However, in

contrast to other countries, money only declined in one specific cycle contraction——

1906—07. With the exception of that episode where a decline in D/C produced

a decline in M, the Reichsbank caused H to vary countercyclically to offset

the procyclical behavior of the ratios.21 Similar to Great Britain, German

experience was characterized by the absence of banking crises (with the exception

of a mild crisis associated with several bank failures in 1901). Yet the

decline in the ratios, especially the DIR, seemed to coincide with major stock

market crises.

     In both Canada and Sweden H and DIR were the key determinants of changes

in M in cyclical contractions,22 with D/C playing a minor role. Also both

countries were characterized by stable banking systems and the absence of

panics. In the Canadian case, the banking system's DIR declined significantly

in three severe contractions associated with financial crises abroad: 1877—78;

1894—95; and 1927_31.23

     Column (14) for the U.S. and G.B. presents the loan—earning asset ratio.

This ratio reflects, in periods of financial stringency, the banking system's

desire for liquidity. Thus in a severe contraction in an effort to increase

liquidity, banks will convert loans into (primarily) government securities

in order to reduce the ratio. As can be seen in the table, in both countries

the ratio declined during several severe cycles characterized by crises.

     The evidence in Table 1 suggests a number of conclusions on the relationships

of money, financial crises, and real activity in the different countries.
                                                                                 21


      First, severe declines in economic activity in all countries are associated

with (prior) declines in money growth. Second, most severe cyclical contractions

in all the countries examined are associated with stock market crises but

not, with the exception of the U.S., with banking crises. Third, the junior

partners to high—powered money as determinants of change in money——the D/R

and D/C ratios——played an important role in reducing money growth in all countries

but not to the extent they displayed in U.S. experience, especially the role

played by the deposit—currency ratio in reducing the money supply during contractions

involving banking panics.

     Why was monetary contraction associated with financial crises more severe

in the U.S. experience than in other countries? One explanation is the greater

instability, compared to that of the five other countries, of the U.S. banking

system--a system composed largely of unit fractional reserve banks with reserves

pyramided in the New York money market. Though numerous institutional reforms

were devised to strengthen the system in the period 1862—1934, none, until

the advent of federal deposit insurance in 1934, removed the basic instability

associated with potential threats to convertibility. Bank runs and panics

occurred whenever a shock threatened the solvency of a few key banks or other

financial institutions.

     In contrast with the U.S. experience, the five other countries in the

sane period all developed nationwide branch banking systems consolidated into

a few very large banks. The system of bank branching, first successfully

developed in Scotland in the eighteenth century and emulated by other countries

including Canada and Sweden,24 represented a method of pooling risks which
                                                                                22


proved quite effective in guarding against the type of "house of cards" effects

common to the U.S. (and early nineteenth century British) banking system.

     A second explanation for the relatively poor performance of the U.S.—-

stemming from the massive literature on the development of central banking

and especially of the Bank of England25——is the absence of an effective "lender

of last resort." Four of the six countries in our sample had central banks,

which by the beginning of period had (in various degrees) learned in the face

of a crisis to follow Bagehot's rule "to lend freely but at a penalty rate,"

and to a certain extent to cooperate amongst themselves in times of severe

international crisis, such as the Baring crisis of 1890.26 One exception,

Canada, did not have a central bank until 1936, but the chartered banks had,

by 1890, with the compliance of the government, established an effective self—

policing agency, the Canadian Bankers Association, which acting in "locus

parentis" successfully helped insulate the Canadian banks from the deleterious

effects of U.S. banking panics in 1893 and 1907.27 The existence of such

a mechanism, whether provided by the government or by the private market,

once it proved effective would educate and instill a sense of confidence in

the public sufficient to prevent incipient crises.28

     In sum the stark comparison of the U.S. with the other five countries

suggests, consistent with the monetarist approach, that financial crises involving

banking crises, had strong effects in aggravating (if not producing) the effects

of monetary contraction on the real economy.

             4. THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF FINANCIAL CRISES

     In this section we present evidence on the international transmission

of financial crises. According to the monetarist approach, financial crises

(and also business cycles) are transmitted internationally primarily through
                                                                                 23

the monetary standard. Under the gold standard which characterized much of

the period for all the countries (see the last column of each table for a

chronology of monetary standards by cycle,) one would expect changes in the

monetary gold stock to be the key source of change in high powered money over

the cycle unless significant sterilization is occurring. Under perfectly

flexible exchange rates no such link should prevail. Column (13) of Table 1

for the Ii. S., Great Britain, and Germany and column (10) for Canada show

the percentage change in the monetary gold stock between the specific cycle

peaks and troughs.

     For the U.S., for every specific cycle contraction, except that of 1871-78

under flexible exchange rates, there is a close correlation between changes

in the monetary gold stock and changes in high—powered money; however, the

link is far from one-to—one, reflecting priodic sterilization especially

of gold outflows during contractions.

     For Great Britain the association though positive is much weaker, in

accordance with the evidence of Bloomfield (1959) and others that the Bank

of England engaged in active sterilization.

     For Germany, the association, though positive, is also weak. According

to McGouldrick (1984), this reflects the deliberate policy of the Reichsbank

to shield the domestic money market from external influence.

     For Canada, for the few observations we have, the association is positive

and quite strong. During this period, Canada did not have a central bank

and with the exception of the operation of the Finance Act in in the interwar

period (see Shearer and Clark, 1984) did not engage in extensive intervention.
                                                                                   24


     Such evidence, though rough, shows, in agreement with I-luffman and Lothian

(1984) linkages between the money supplies of the different countries through

gold flows and high—powered money.29

     Finally, the last column in each table distinguishes between periods

of fixed and flexible exchange rates. There are too few degrees of freedom

to make other than very casual comparisons. The two significant periods of

floating: 1862—78 for the U.S. and the early 1920's for all countries except

the U.S. provide some ground for comparison of the insulation properties of

fixed and flexible rates. Thus, for example, in the 1873—79 contraction we

observe both the interest differential and stock price index cycles for the

U.S. to be more out of phase with those of the European countries than in

the rest of the period, and the U.S. contraction to be considerably milder

than its European counterpart. However, the U.S. was affected by various

European crises. Similarly in the 1920's when both France and Germany floated

over much of the period, we can observe more cycles for France and fewer for

Germany than for other countries. Also France in 1926 experienced a major

financial crisis that was not transmitted abroad.

    According to the Kindleberger—Minsky approach financial crises are transmitted

primarily through nonmonetary channels such as link portfolios of financial

institutions. Evidence for this approach can be seen in an international

comparison of the peaks and troughs of the interest differential (column (6))

and the stock price index (column (7)) for the four core countries. First,

troughs in the interest differential series are more closely related between

countries than are the peaks (as discussed in detail in Morgenstern (1959),

and closer links are found between the three European countries than between

any of them and the U.S.   In addition, Morgenstern demonstrates that movements
                                                                                 25


in the differential are largely explained by movements in short—term interest

rates. The behavior of this series according to Morgenstern is evidence for

a tightly linked European short—tern capital market.   Morgenstern's evidence,
as well as that of Lindert (1969) on the relative pulling power of the discount

rate in different financial centers, suggests that in time of financial pressure,

securities markets were especially closely linked.

     Second, turning points in the stock price index are very closely related

between the four countries, although the links between the European countries

are closer than those between the U.S. and Europe.3° A comparison of the

peaks in this series and Morgenstern's chronology of stock market crises,

shown in column (4) shows a remarkable coincidence for major crises, that

are international in scope. Such crises often originated in the U.S. and

then spread quickly to Europe.

     Third, a comparison of the turning points in the two financial variables

in columns (6) and (7) with the chronology of financial, banking, and stock

market crises in columns (3), (4), and (5) suggests that crises in the gold

standard era often tended to be international in scope but, the way in which

they manifested themselves in different countries differed considerably, especially

comparing the response of the banking system in the U.S. to that of the other

countries.

     A final piece of evidence consistent with the Kindleberger—Minsky view

of transmission is based on the behavior of the deposit reserve ratio in a

number of countries and the incidence of stock market crises. In four countries,

Great Britain, Germany, Canada and Sweden, declines in the deposit reserve

were key determinants of cyclical contractions in the money supply and such

contractions often occurred at the same time as stock market crises. The apparent
                                                                                 2€


association between declines in the DIR ratio and the incidence of stock market

crises suggests a possible additional channel of influence whereby financial

crises link money supplies between countries. The evidence indicates a link

between turning points in moneygrowth and stock price indexes (seen for the

U.S. monthly data in Table l.A by comparing columns (8) and (7))3l The link

in turn may reflect early signs of the effects of changes in money growth

on real economic activity. In combination with the evidence on the DIR, the

link suggests the following hypothetical scenario:

     A sharp decline in the money stock in one country, e.g. the U.S., produced

initially by say a gold outflow, leads to a sharp decline in stock prices

(a 'crash'). The stock market crash in turn could produce, as described in

sections 1 and 2 above, in the absence of intervention, both a liquidity crisis

and a banking panic, resulting in declines in the deposit—currency and deposit—

reserve ratios. Concurrently, reflecting the tight linkage between stock

exchanges in different centers shown by Morgenstern, e.g. through a decline

in the prices of U.S. securities traded in foreign markets, the decline in

securities prices of the initiating country are transmitted to the stock market

of other countries. The decline in securities prices in these countries could

impact quickly on commercial banks that have extended call loans and brokers'

loans to the stock market and attempt to strengthen their liquidity by calling

these loans and thus reducing the loan earning asset ratio. At the same time

they increase their precautionary reserves, hence lowering the deposit—reserve

ratio.

     In other words, arbitrage in stock market securities may link national

money supplies directly via their effects on commercial bank reserve ratios.

Such effects may occur before the monetary shock has had time to spread its
                                                                    32
influence abroad via the traditional price specie flow mechanism.
                                                                                 27

                                  5.   CONCLUSION

     This paper has examined two main theoretical approaches to financial

crises and provided some historical evidence sympathetic to each of them based

on the relationship of financial crises to the money supply, the financial

system, and real activity over the period 1870—1933 in six countries. The

evidence though highly suggestive yields the following conclusions.

     The first is the important role of monetary institutions, particularly

the banking system, in explaining why some countries had more serious monetary

and real contractions in the face of crises. The absence of a nationwide

branch banking system in the United States compared to five other countries

examined, and the less effective role played by the U.S. monetary authorities

in acting as a lender of last resort may explain why the U.S. experienced

banking panics in a period when they were an historical curiosity in other

countries.

     The second is an apparent connection in all the countries examined between

crises in the stock market and a decline in the commercial banking systems

deposit reserve ratio. Such a relationship may provide an alternative link

between the money supplies of different countries in addition to the traditional

linkages through gold flows and the balance of payments. A possible avenue

for fruitful further research might be to examine, using monthly data and

time series analysis, the timing of the relationship between different international

monetary linkages——on the one hand, between the stock market and other asset

markets and commercial bank portfolios, and on the other hand between gold

and international reserve flows and the monetary base.

     In sun we can ask what lessons does the record of financial crises from

1870 to 1933 have for the present day situation? Key differences in institutional
                                                                                 28


arrangements suggest that most of the factors conducive to financial crises,

especially banking crises, and their international propagation have declined

in importance.                  -




     First   the domestic banking systems of most major countries are more stable——

less likely to be subject to runs and panics——than they were before 1933.

This is especially the case of the United States following the adoption of

FDIC in 1934 and acknowledgement by the Federal Reserve System of its role

as lender of last resort. Second, we are no longer part of the fixed exchange

rate gold standard which tended to transmit economic disturbances from country

to country (although there is increasing evidence that flexible exchange rates

may not be as effective insulators as were believed).

     This is not to say that financial crises can no longer occur but that

the likelihood of events such as the recent near failure of the Continental

Illinois bank producing a worldwide series of financial crises (as often occurred

before 1933) is less likely.
                                                                                29


                                    FOOTNOTES


     *professor of Economics, University of South Carolina and Research Associate,

National Bureau of Economic Research. For helpful comments and suggestions

I would like to thank: Robert Barro, Philip Cagan, Ehsan Choudhri, Steve

Faston, Milton Friedman, Lars Jonung, John McDermott, Jim Lothian, and Anna

Schwartz. For excellent research assistance I am indebted to Fernando Santos.

      1lndeed this interest has in the last three years spawned three conference

volumes (Kindleberger and Laffargue (1983), Wachtel (19.82), and Capie and

Wood (1985)) and a number of important journal articles.

      2A third recent approach is that of rational expectations that views

financial crises as a consequence of rational behaviour. According to this

approach, "manias" are viewed as examples of speculative bubbles. (Flood

and Garber, 1982, Blanchard and Watson, 1982), 'runs" are defined as a speculative

attack on an asset price fixing scheme (Garber, 1981) and 'panics' characterize

a run whose timing was not perfectly foreseen. (Garber, 1981).

      3See Fisher (1935) and Huffman and Lothian (1984).

      4A recent approach taken by Bernanke (1983) and Diamond and Dybvig (1983)

argues that financial crises including bankruptcies have direct effects on

economic activity over and above their effects on the money supply. To the

extent that financial crises produce losses in the financial sector of the

economy, this raises the cost of financial intermediation and hence reduces

the efficiency of resource allocation.

      5See Choudhri and Kochin (1980) for evidence of the insulation properties

of flexible exchange rates in the Spanish case and Jonung (1981) for the case

of Sweden.
                                                                                30


      6According to Gorton (1982) banking panics are not a unique event but

represent a rational response by depositors wishing to smooth out their consumption

flows over time. Rational depositors wish to dissave in periods of expected

low consumption such as business cycle troughs but, since the likelihood of

suspensions of convertibility also would be highest at the trough, depositors

will rush to convert their deposits to currency when they expect a trough

to occur.

      7See Fisher (1935) for evidence on the transmission of economic disturbances

in the great depression.

      8See Minsky 0957, (1963), (1977), (1979), (1980), (lY82a, b, c).

      9Minsky (1957).

     10Minsky (1982a).

     11 Ibid.


     12Minsky (1979).

     13Minsky's thesis has been criticized by Sinai (1979) for not yielding

any testable hypotheses, and by Goldsmith (1979) on the ground that the evidence

of history is against a key implication of Minsky's view——that financial development

and financial fragility are positively correlated. Melitz (1979) argues that

Minsky's thesis is inconsistent with evidence on the behavior of the term

structure of interest rates and the experience of countries with universal

lenders of last resort such as Sweden.   Finally, Fleming (1979) argues that

one implication of Minsky's thesis——that the boom lulls economic agents into

taking a risky financial position conducive to a crisis——leads to the implausible

suggestion that central banks should increase the amount of risk in the economic

system.
                                                                                  31


      141n his discussion of the 1873, 1920—21 and 1931 crises, Kindleberger

 (1978) and (1973) argues that the crises could have been aborted by the effective

 operation of a supernationa] monetary authority.
                                                      However, Moggridge (1982)
effectively argues that in the case of 1920-21   ,   there was no crisis hence
no need for the lender of last resort and in 1931 that though there was a

considerable amount of international cooperation, the fundamental disequilibrium

of the international monetary system could not have been alleviated by an

international lender of last resort.

      15The use of the common international
                                              cycle is purely descriptive to

facilitate international comparisons. The discussion which follows for each

country alone is based on the NBER reference cycle chronology.

     16Also included are a number of extra "financial crises" based on Thorp

(1926), Veager (1972), and others.

     17This demarcation of crises begs the question of whether all these events

really were crises. On this point, see Schwartz (1985)

     18The observed lead from the turning points in money growth to the reference

cycle for the U.S. has been widely cited as an important piece of evidence

for "causality" from money to business. See Friedman and Schwartz (l963b),

Poole (1975). For a counter view, see Tobin (1970) and Friedman's (1970) reply.

Recent advances in the methodology of testing "for causality" Sims (1972)

confirm Friedman and Schwartz's evidence for a U.S. monetary cycle (the traditional

quantity theory approach) but the case is mixed for other countries. Mills

and Wood (1979) and Williams, Goodhart & Gowland (1976) provide evidence

for the U.K. of "causality" running from business to money in both the gold

standard and subsequent Bretton Woods era. These authors explain reverse
                                                                                  32

causality by arguing that the U.K. under fixed exchange rates operated as

a small open economy, according to the monetary approach to the balance of

payments, with changes in its money supply via reserve flows caused by changes

in money demand which in turn effect changes in economic activity. This is

compared to the U.S., viewed essentially as a closed economy in this period,

in which changes in the money supply, interact with a stable money demand

to produce changes in activity according to the traditional quantity theory

approach. However, Cassese and Lothian (1982) present convincing evidence

for a number of countries under fixed exchange rates consistent both with

a dynamic stock adjustment version of the monetary approach to the balance

of payments and a monetary theory of the cycle.

     19For the 16 reference cycles displayed here, the relative contributions

of the determinants to cyclical contractions were: H, 67.6; DIR, 3.9; and

0/c, 30.1. For six severe cycles, it was H, 38.7; DIR, 16.2; and DIG, 47.6.

     20Over the 12 British cycles the relative contributions of the determinants

to cyclical contractions were:     H, 79.3; D/C, 18.9; and DIR, 9.1. For severe

contractions, they were:   H,   109.0; OR, 19.7; and 0/C, —28.7.
     21See McGouldrick (1983).

     22See Hay (1968) and Jonung (1976).

     231n the gold standard period, the Canadian chartered banks kept a large

proportion of their gold reserves in the New York, and to a lesser extent,

London money markets. These outside reserves provided a direct link between

financial conditions in these countries and Canada through the D/R ratio. See

Hay (1967, 1968) and Rich (1983).
                                                                                 33

     24For the Scottish banking experience, see Cameron (1967) and White (1983);

for Canada, see Jamieson (1959); for Sweden see Jonung (1977). For a comparison

between the U.S. and Canadian experiences, see White (1982).

     25See e.g. Sayers (1957).

     26See Sayers (1936) and Presnell (1967).

     27This was done by quickly arranging mergers between sound and failing

banks, by encouraging cooperation between strong and weaker banks in times

of stringency, and by establishing a reserve fund to be used to compensate

deposit holders in the event of failure. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue

that the New York Clearing House performed a somewhat similar role in stemming

incipient crises before 1914 through the issue of clearing house certificates

and by arranging for syndicates of strong banks to assist those in trouble.

As Schwartz (1985) argues, in most cases the system worked but in two important

exceptions, 1893 and 1907, it did not. These may be explained, she argues,

by bad timing of relief in 1907 and public misinformation in 1893.

     28See Schwartz (1985).

     29Additional evidence is provided by significant correlations between

five successive pairs of countries, in periods characterized by severe cyclical

declines in economic activity, of the year to year rates of change of high

powered money. The correlations are: U.S.- G.B. .45; U.S.-Germany .53; U.S.-Sweden

.49; and Germany—Sweden .79.

     30Morgensterns indices include many securities which today would be

called bonds. Also a significant fraction of the securities in the samples

underlying the indexes for the European exchanges were foreign securities

(both government and private). See Morgenstern (1959), pp. 507-528 for an

extensive discussion of the several direct linkages between stock exchanges

in the gold standard era.
                                                                               34

     31See Sprinkel (1971) for additional U.S. evidence.

     320r even possibly before raising short—term interest rates and causing

short—term capital to flow. This would be consistent with Morgenstern's finding

that peaks in the short—term interest rates cycle tended to follow peaks in

business whenever the stock market index would precede it.
                                                                                    35

                                       REFERENCES

Bernanke, 8. 5. (1983).      "Non Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in

      in the Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review,

      Vol. 73, No. 3 (June), pp. 257—276.

Blanchard, D. and Watson, ii. (1982). "Bubbles, Rational Expectations, and

     Financial Market." in P. Wachtel (ed.). Crises in the Economic and Financial

     Structure. Lexington Books: Lexington, Mass.

Bloomfield, A. (1959). Monetary Policy Under the International and Gold Standard.

     New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Bordo, M. 0. (1977).    "The Income Effects of the Sources of New Money: A

     Comparison of the United States and the United Kingdom, 1870-1913." Explorations

     in Economic History, 14, 20—47.

Bordo, M. D. (1981).    "The U.K. Money Supply," ________________________________
                                                 Research in Economic History,

     Vol. 6, pp. 107—125.

Bordo, M. D. and L. Jonung (1981). "The Long—Run Behavior of the Income Velocity

     of Money in Five Advanced Countries, 1870—1975: An Institutional Approach,"

     Economic Inquiry, Vol. XIX (January), pp. 96—116.

Bouvier, J. (1973).    Un Siecle de Bangue Francaise. Hachette, Paris.
                       _____________________________

Brown, 14. A. Jr., (1940).   The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted,
                             ____________________________________________
     1914—1934, Vol. 1, N.B.E.R., New York.

Burns, A. F. and W. C. Mitchell, (1946). Measuring Business Cycles, N.B.E.R.,

     New York.

Cagan, p. (1965). Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money.

     Columbia, University Press: New York.
                                                                                  36

Cameron R. (1967). Banking in the Early Stages of Industrialization. Oxford

     University Press: New York.

Capie, F. and Wood, C. (eds.) (1985). Financial Crises and the World Banking

     System. London: MacMillan.

Carron, A: 5. (1982). "Financial Crises: Recent Experience in U.S. and International

     Markets,' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, pp. 395—416.

Cassese, A. and 3. R. Lothian (1982). "The Timing of Monetary and Price Changes

     and the International Transmission of Inflation," Journal of Monetary

     Economics, 10, pp. 1-23.

Choudhri, E. U. and L. A. Kochin (1980). "The Exchange Rate and the International

     Transmission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some Evidence from the

     Great Depression," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. XII, No. 4,

     Part 1 (November), pp. 565—574.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983). "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and

     Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, No. 3 (June), pp. 401—419.

Federal Reserve Board (1944). Banking and Monetary Statistics.

Federal Reserve Board (1955). All Bank Statistics.

Fisher, I. (1932). Booms and Depressions, Adelphi, New York.

Fisher, I. (1933).   "The Debt Deflation Theory of Great Depressions," Econornetrica,

     pp. 337-357.

Fisher, 1. (1935).   °Are Booms and Depressions Transmitted Internationally

     Through Monetary Standards?" Bulletin of the International Statistical

     Institute, 28, Vol. 1, pp. 1-29.

Fleming, 3. (1982). "Comments on Minsky .   .." in   C. P. Kindleberger and J. P. Laffargue.
                                                                                 37


Flood, R. P. Jr., and P. M. Garber (1981). "A Systematic Banking Collapse

     in a Perfect Foresight World," N.B.E.R. working paper No. 691.

Friedman, M. (1970). "Comment on Tobin,' Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (l963a). A Monetary History of the United

     States 1867-1960. N.B.E.R., New York.

Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1963b). "Money and Business Cycles," Review

     of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 45, No. I, Part 2/Supplement.

Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1982). Monetary Trends in the United States

     and the United Kingdom: Their Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest

     Rates, 1867—1975. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Garber, P. M. (1981). "The Lender of Last Resort and the Run on the Savings

     and Loans," N.B.E.R. working paper No. 823.

Garber P. and Flood, Ft. (1982). "Bubbles, Runs and Gold Monetization." in

     P. Wachtel, ed. Crises in the Economic and Financial Structure. Lexington

     Books, Lexin gton, Mass

Goldsmith, R. W. (1982). "Comment on H. P. Minsky 'The Financial Instability

     Hypothesis,'   in C. P. Kindleberger and J. P. Laffargue (eds).

Gorton G. (1983)     "Banking Panics and Business Cycles," (rnimeo.) Federal

     Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Hay, K. A. J. (1966). "Early Twentieth Century Business Cycles in Canada,"

     Canadi an Journal of Economics, XXXII, No. 3, pp. 354—361.

Hay, K. A. 3., (1967). "Money and Cycles in Post Confederation Canada," Journal

     of Political Economies, Vol. 75, No. 2, pp. 263—273.

Hay, K. A. 3., (1968).   "Determinants of the Canadian Money Supply," Carleton

     University (mimeo.).
                                                                                38


 Hoffman, W. (1965). Das Wachstuni der deutschen Wirtschaft seit der bUtte

      des 19 Jahrhundart. Berlin, Springer Verlag.

 Huffinan, W. E., and James ft. Lothian (1984). "U.S.—U.K. Business Cycle Linkages

-     Under the Gold Standard, 1834—1933,' in M. 0. Bordo and A. 3. Schwartz

      (eds) A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821-1931. Chicago,

     University of Chicago Press (in press).

 INSEE (1966). Annuaire Satistigue. Tableau, I., p. 515.

Jamieson, A. B. (1959). Chartered Banking in Canada. Toronto:      Ryerson

     Press.

Jonung, Lars (1975). "Studies in the Monetary History of Sweden," unpublished

     Ph.D. dissertation, U.C.L.A.

Jonung, Lars (1976). "Sources of Growth in the Swedish Money Stock, 1871—1971,"

     Scandanavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 78, pp. 611—627.

Jonung, Lars (1977). "The Legal Framework and the Economics of Private Bank

     Notes in Sweden, 1831—1902," in G. Skogh (ed) Law and Economics. Lund, Sweden.

Jonung, Lars (1981). "The Depression in Sweden and the United States: A

     Comparison of Causes and Policies," in K. Brunner (ed) The Great Depression

     Revisited. Martinus Nijhoff Publishing: Boston.

Kindleberger, C. P. (1973). The World in Depression 1929—1939. University

     of California Press, Berkeley.

Kindleberger, C. P. (1978). Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial

     Crises. Basic Books, New York.

Lindert, P. H. (1969). Key Currencies and Gold, 1900—1913. Princeton Studies

     in International Finance, No. 24. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
                                                                                        39

 McGouldrick, P. (1984) "Operations of the German Central Bank and the Rules

      of the Game, 1879—1923," in M. D. Bordo and A. 3. Schwartz (eds) A Retrospective

      on the Classical Gold Standard,
                                        1821—1931. Chicago, University of Chicago
      Press.

Melitz, 3. (1982). "Comments on H. P. Minsky     .   . ."   in C. P. Kindleberger and

     3. P. Laffargue.

Mills, 1. C. and G. E. Wood (1978). "Money Income Relationships and the
                                                                                 Exchange
     Rate Regime," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 60 (August),

     pp. 22—2

Minsky, H. P. (1957). "Central Banking and Money Market Changes," Quarterly

     Journal of Economics, Vol. LXXI, No. 2, pp. 175—87.

Minsky, H. P. (1963). Comment on Friedman and Schwartz's "Money and Business

     Cycles," Review of Economics and Statistics.

Minsky, H. P. (1977).     "A Theory of Systemic Fragility," in E. J. Altman and

     A. W. Sametz (eds) Financial Crises: Institutions and Market in a Fragile

     Environment. Wiley, New York, pp. 138—152.

Minsky, H. p. (1979). "Financial Interrelations, the Balance of Payment and

     the Dollar Crisis," in Jonathan Aron (ed) Debt and the Less Developed

     Countries. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.

Minsky, H. P. (1980). "Finance and Profits: The Changing Nature of Business

     Cycles," Joint Economic Comittee of the United States Congress, The

     Business Cycle and Public Policy, 1929-1980.

Minsky, H. P., (1982a).    "Debt Deflation Processes in Today's Institutional

     Environment," Banca Nazionale Del Lavoro, No. 143 (December), pp. 375—393.
                                                                                    40


Minsky, H. P. (1982b). 'Financial Innovations and Financial Instability:

      Observations and Theory," Seventh Annual Policy Conference of the Federal

      Reserve Bank of St. Louis (October).

Minsky, H. P. (1982c). "The Potential for Financial Crises," Washington University,

      St. Louis Working Paper, #46.

Moggridge, D. E. (1982). "Policy in the Crises of 1920 and 1929," in C. P.

      Kindleberger and ,.J. P. Laffargue (eds) Financial Crises: Theory, History,

     and Policy. Cambridge University Press: New York.

Morgenstern, 0. (1959). International Financial Transactions and Business

     Cycles, N.B.E.R., New York.

Poole, W. (1975). "The Relationship of Monetary Decelerations to Business

     Cycle Peaks: Another Look at the Evidence," Journal of Finance (June),

     pp. 698-712.

Presnell ,   L.S.   (1968).   "Gold Reserves, Banking Reserves, and the Baring Crisis

     of 1890," in C. R. Whittlesey and 3. S. G. Wilson, (eds) Essays in Money

     and Banking in Honour of R. S. Sayers, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Rich, G. (1980). "The Cross of Gold: Money and the Canadian Business Cycle,"

     unpublished manuscript.

Rich, Georg (1983). "Canada Without a Central Bank: Operation of the Price

     Specie Flow Mechanism, 1872—1913," in M. D. Bordo and A. J. Schwartz

     (eds) A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821—1931. University

     of Chicago Press: Chicago (in press).

Sauvy, A. (1954). "Rapport Sur le Revenue National ,"      Journal Official. Avis
     et Rapports du Consil Economigue.

Sayers, R. S. (1936). Bank of England Operations, 1890-1914. London: P. S. King

     and Son.
                                                                                      41

 Sayers, R. S. (1957). Central Banking After Bagehot. Oxford; Clarendon

      Press.

 Schwartz, A. 3. (1985). "Real and Pseudo Financial Crises," in Capie, F.

      G. Wood, (eds) Financial Crises and the World Banking System. Macmillan,

      London.

Sims, C. A. (1972). "Money, Income, and Causality," A.E.R. (September), Vol. LXII,

     No. 4, pp. 540—552.

Sinai, A. (1977). Comment on Minsky in D. Altman and A. W. Sametz (eds) Financial

     Crises: Institutions and Markets in a Fragile Environment.        Wiley, New
     York.

Shearer, R. A., and C. Clark (1984).        "Canada and the Interwar Gold Standard,

     1920—1935: Monetary Policy Without a Central Bank," in M. 0. Bordo and

     A. 3.    Schwartz (eds) A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard,

     1821—1931. Chicago, University of Chicago Press (in press).

Sheppard, 0. K.        (1971). The Growth and Role of U.K Financial Institutions,

     1880—1962. London: Mathuen.

Sprague, 0. M. W. (1915). "The Crisis of 1914 in the United States," American

     Economic Review, Vol. V, No. 3 (September), pp. 499-533.

Sprinkel, B. W. (1971). Money and Markets a Monetarist View. Richard D.         Irwin,

     Chicago.

Temiri, P. (1976). Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York,

     W. W. Norton.

Thorp, W. (1926). Business Annals, N.B.E.R., New York.

Tilley, R. H. (1973). Zeitreihen Zum Geldumlauf in Deutschland, 1870—1912,'

     3.   Fur Nationalekonomie und Statistik. Band 87, pp. 360—363.

Tobin, 3.    (1970).    "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc," Quarterly

    Journal of Economics.
                                                                                    42


Viner, J. (1924). Canada's Balance of International Indebtedness 1900—1913.

     Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Wachtel ,   p. (1982). "Introduction1' in P. Wachtel (ed) Crises in the Economics

     and Financial Structure. Lexington Books: New York.

White, E. M. (1982). The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System,

     1900—1929. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

White, L. H. (1981). "Free Banking in Britain: Theory, Experience and Debate,

     1900—1945," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, U.C.L.A.

Williams, D., C. A.E. Goodhart, and 3. H. Gowland (1976). "Money, Income

     and Casuality: The U.K. Experience," American Economic Review, Vol. 66,

     No. 3 (June), pp. 417—423.

Yeager, L.    (1976). International Monetary Relations: Theory, History, and

     Policy    second edition, Harper and Row: New York
                                                                                                                                                                                            TAOL[      I .0.-ll,iCCI States


                                                        Real    Variables
                                                                                    —_..________._,.___._.Uoant]A]j/ifljoIa]                                      _________ -———---                                                      Monetuay Oil-ic 0 60
                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ree'ceotnaQeCfl4nce n 4      dotemlnaOhll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         If
                                                                          (l    131                                        151                      It)                                                                                                   had
                                    A'In..a I                                                                                                                                                        101                  (9)           l.1%cota              c7tan,ed                                      (04)
                                                         Dtviutions coon                                                                  Pontoly Specific                                           I [mon0002)    Soul. 26 0I                         alr                              iij                          (IS)
                                     [owotl,Iy]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentoqe
                                    Referente Cycle      Tra,'d of Average                                                                Cycl I. cog' lent          kit thy               Specific tiunetary       free,
                                                                                                                                          Snort—lerp                 Specific                                                                                                 Percentage        Change
                                    contrsctiooo         Oninoeo Reel                 Skid                                                                                                 Growth cycle             Trend of Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Change in         Loan
          ci ,irce Cycle             (nelicycles!                                                                                         lnteratt                   Cycle Stock           C°flcroctloo,            Annual Ma ORnery                                                                               tochanqe
                                                         0.'tyot DruiDIc   Fhr,opclal Market                             ia,,k(ng         Dl Iferen   tail                                                                              11196        Depot I   D.posiC Oboetary                 torah              Rate
     0 ,•vuooi   to lro'aoh I       teat                                                                                                                             Price Index                                    Oroath Rote 2       Posie red    Retern.
                                -
                                                  Tryvol Paul Ct lrGool.   CrioGn     Crises                             Crises                           'eok                             )oabr.ycles)                                                        Currency Gold                    Asset              Reg me
                                                                                                                                          Trough                     Peak      tro.aglo    Peak                     Peak to Trough                   Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Trough                        Honey                  Ratio    Stock                   Ratio

           0960—1020                     673                                                                                                0/73           6/70
                                                  IS)     679             0.5         9/7]        73 75 79                9/739             9/73           a/18      6/72       6/71       107!            1620            —   4.1          - 1.0       4.2         2.7           64,9                  0.7        Flea 1619   28S8_910!S!0-    See   DoLa
                                        (10//3            3110)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9pgsd lx
                                                                                                                                           00/22           8/78                            1 1/71           5/17)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               iaateo:   a
           ,oyo Inc                     16012            0095         -   3,7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I crises atfect'i.g the 0.5.
                                        1 3/02
                                                  il      5/05]
                                                                                                  I0 s1 62                                  6/03           9/85      6/SI       I/OS       1060            0084                2.6          23.6        7.8         5.2           45-7                  7.2        Fl sod                     and ethercIonIc leo
                                                                                                  io.a                                                                                     1 5/00          02/0]]                                                                                                                        Dl Ifs. ut iffected but
     I.    1095      04                                               —                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        major
                                        11192     (3)     034             2.6                                                              02/90          10/94                             lano           lee]                2.6
                                                                                                                                                                     5/no       3/55                                                        00.6    - 3.a          0,5         -20.0               —    I_I                              C)
                                     I 7/00               6/04]                                                                           17/07           lI/DO                            [02/al          02/92]                                                                                                  P92.4                    Ioa)eriot.r,iatioeuI cr10,'.
                                                                                                                                                                     15/0 2     a/Os
                                    (Ott,                lilCe        - 6.7                       37,      05°                            fl2/l0           6/92      5/98                  0006             880                 .16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               olia. 71 yaffectina the
                                          4/07                                                                                                                                 12/00                                                         o.         8.6        0.3                          p5,8                                          0.5.
                                                          4/071]                                                                             7/93          0/94                            (02/65
                                                                                                                II                                                              3/95                       02/67]
                                        loOt             1091               .78                   30.      91              coat                                      _0/03                 0090            1091                                     —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4) 0.3. aft#cte.A close
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1_a                      0.4        0.5         • 0.6                   0.3
                                          71911           51913                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e) sankino IiuOic_.r,000
                                                                                                       a                                                                                   (12/99          12/90)
                                    ISO]          Ii)    10(4         - 9.0           0/03        '3                      2/93e                                                            1892             999                                                                                                                               faIlures, 081801,5 en
                                      1194                6/041                                                                                                                                                        L 0.3                k_I.8 U I-s            4.2        I.04.2                   9,2                                    of 0.308005
                                                                                                                                                                                           [92/52          (2/93)                                                                                                                           booting Sri 8,8——ru,.'.
 •
     -      foil89]                   '059               1900              .0]                                                              3/90                                           0099                                2.6                                                                                                            01.9/or tel Iu.et
                                                                                                                                                          11/00      4/59       9/00                       (900                              7_S        0.3    -   0.0                          —
                                    .1 6/90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6.4                 I,,         P I n.d               5) SIl"igtt' (1913)
                                                         02/00)                                                                            10/96           0/99      19/95      0/96       [37/90          12/99]
                                     1906                0607             6_k                                                               3/GO                                                                               7,8                                                                                                       SI SeAereoj..lucoot,'action
                                                                                                                                                          11/00                 9/00      (9695            1698                              3.25                                  0.8                 0_I
                                    '(12/or,              6/07]                                                                                                     \4/99                  [12/94           2/95)                                   JO.Z       I °-
                                11709                    (900              .51                     09,     1900                                                                                            0900                2.6                                                                                              OIly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       {               I—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i-s         .3                        6.4                 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cleric grooUl rote In ret) colon]
                                 ( 6/90                  13/101]                                                                                                                          10899                                                                1 a-a                                                            Woa
                                                                                                                                                                                                           12/99)                                                                                                                     1.60 7L'rceet lIter thy /eru,,0
                                                                                                                                                                                          .(02/00                                                                                                                                870—0941. Ituascalcul
           901'   -1004             1003                 1904        - 5.4                        l90l           l90l                       0/0]           0/OS                            0000            1903                2_a                                                                                              d,flerencc betorer, tho "oCural
                                                                                                                                                                     0/02      00/0]                                                         0.3        4.5        0.9            11.4                 0.          fixed                                                its
                                    1 9/112               0/104]                                                                                                                           [02/00           2/03)                                                                                                               of real output betuee,, Inot,sl and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                cer,,i,,aO yea,' di01304 Dy Lice 000kRr
           904—1906                 (0,11         (5)    0906         -'4.7                                                                                                                                                —
                                                                                                   ooo1                                    02/ti           7/09      9/96      10/87       8906            1900                1,1          21.7    - 8.3      —                                                                of years.
                                    £ 0/08/              6/04]                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.69           27.7         -0.6                Flied
                                                                                                                                                                                           [02/04          12/08)

          19018—1104                                                                                                                                                                                                       —
                                    lOll                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The trend '18°c1 ary 9mw cli ,'.te coo
                                                         19)5        - 6.5                        loI2          1514'     0/14'            8/13           9/0        02/09     12/04       1902            0003                9.5           2.2
                                    I (/1]                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0_I             2.9                 0.9         Plied        5.40 percent leer cne yerlod
                                                         12/04)                                                                            6/lu           Il/I)     (12/09      1/00       [11/11           4/03)
                                        900              (91'        - (.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ltiO—09a).    teauculnulated as
                                                                                                                                          to/I]           9/A                  12/14      Ioaoo             gig                 .03          '.65                                  0-4                                          In I about.
                                    I I/IS                1/12)                                                                                                    l9/I2                                    4/lu                                    Jo.o        p.o                                '2.3
                                    0913                             —                                                                                                                    j[00/038
                                                         1010             6.9         0/14                                                                                                                                     I'S
                                                                                                                                                                                          11412           190]                          72.2         /0.6                          2,9                 0.9
                                      I/la               12/14]                                                                                                                                             6/93)                                              110.1
                                                                                                                                                                                          Ut/lI
0- 1914-1909                            Ole              1010             6.9                                                             9/A             9/A       9/A         N/A            906         (906                7.0          39.]    —04,9          3-7            25.9
                                         0/la            3/19]                                                                                                                             [12/la                                                                                                                  flee)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            s/id]
 1-       1819-1921                 0920                 900         —
                                                 (3)                      7.6     Sprino 0921                                             00/20           0/72                             0519            1021                         - 0.35          4.2
                                      0/21'                                                                                                                          7/19       0/20                                                                                               4.6                             flte'J
                                                         7/21)                                                                                                                             (02,08           1/20)
'0.       1921—1926                                                  —
                                    0923                 0924             0,4                                                                                                                                                                       —
                                                                                                                                           5/21        10/24         0/23      12/23       092]            1974                 .11          2.7        0.2        2.9            00.5         —
                                    1    5/20            7/24)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0,1            Fixed
                                                                                                                                                                                                4/22        6/23]
          1926—1920                 0926                 1027        —                                                                                                                                                  —
II.                                                                       2.2                                                                                                              0925            1927                2.0           1.6        1.6                                    —
                                    (00/26              11/27]                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.0                              0.3            toted
                                                                                                                                                                                                7/24        2/26]
          19/0-0032                 0929          (5)    0932                     10/70.   3/3,                  10311            19300
                                                                                                  I929                   I9J0              8/29           9/34       9/29       8/37       0926           1932         —II.?                        - 4.]      -2L4           —   6.]
                                    £    8/29            3/33]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 —05.0
                                                                                                                         0033'             e/?9           n/Il                             (01/27         (0/32]
                                                                                                                                          Il/-Il          0/34
                                                                                                                                                                                   lADLE I,lo .—lireot        0r11310


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fnet3ry OarI 35139
                                              Ocal OorIai,Ia1                                                           Financial   lie        Alec
                           I                                           -.-                                                                                                                                                              percento9ech.nn.e in Ii f aeteml mint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Indicated alone 890 ct,an9nd
                                                                                                                                                (0;                             :82                  (0)                                             (II)
                                                                                                                                                                    I/I                                                                                         (III               (1])               '(4)              (Is)
                                                                                                                                        &nthly SpecifIc                    eneaal I,.e.nlliyJ  Den,, tion                                                                                      Porcoli Coon
                           Ir.ajetlil   13                Otoioticnne,'cs;                                                              Cycle LonQ—T9,e 2lontOIy           Spiel/Ic Itietory Crom                                                                         lercenta4e           Change
         '01199;           Retlrr.     Is C   Cyi.        t.'rnd   As'alle
                                                                     if                                                                 550rI—Tern:       Spec ho          OritI. Cycl         Trend of A carl-Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I                                                                    Charoo                Loan
                         L2,,t,;1c line                   "sin,' (eo        9                       S    DCI
                                                                                                     t                                   bOrn 00          Cy'!a Stock      Contract 081        loonnI Monesory                           6196    5079910      0es I I
     Arirence feds       isa1c.. lee0                     052111.     lr-.snti;                     Ilo,-ke C                           oirt;,rentioi     Pnica        lo,n                    Arolnth                       latO       Posers Reserve                   Ithaetlry             Earning                ticha ngy
                                                                                                                                                                           lIuOtftieoi                                                                       L3rr.ncy    Gold                  Asset
     Truu2,' to lri;;fhl Fell          I'-su.jOc          Pin!                                       Crises            Crises           I rou9h      Peak Peal      1-nool Pool        rro-jgh Pail to CrocI                                                                                                          Rota
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rot Is       S tack               Ratio                  Regime
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -
     •     12n9—Ig7o           1903            1119                   .09           7/791           lIt     oat                         II / 73        9/79    0/7]        7/79        1872             879           - 3.12             7.1        -4.8      -5.2                              9/A               Ftoed
                                  :72           1/79]                                                                               1919               4/li                                                                                                                                                                       Data sOurces.      3cc    Oato Oppenols
                                                                                                    78
                                                                                                                                    401/73            19/76
                                                                                                                                    L 8/70             9)79                                                                                                                                                                       luteso al or tooting li-h. and Otter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cAner rio
 2.         1379-1016          983             1506              —9.2                               lOt 02'                               7/93         6/85    9/90       I 9/47       9081         'HAS              - 2-H                      -0.2          2.3                                                                          0) 0,0.   mat affected hoot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2,4                             -95.8                 —4.9               F   laid
                                 2/02                                                               00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            major
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cl   aajorinten-natlonal cr151-
           10115-1599          1893            1894              —    .99                                                                 7/90                 10/89                   1891                           —
                                                                                   11/90            sit     il'                                       10/94                1/92                     9893                   2,51          2.7     -0.1         -2.2                             -0.9                                                sharply arrctiny 0.9.
                                 9/9ij (Si                                                                                              fiigo          9/92                                                                                                                                                       Floe]                     dl   0.0.     aFfected aloon
                                                                                                    92°
                                                                                                                                        1_8/93        30/94                                                                                                                                                                                 1)   macp 1991S)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sprootac (1916)
.0.        1395-100]           '1190           19,91                                                AaC        99990                    '2/99         ID/Ill   2/00           -         900         1901           - 3.70                0.5     —9.9                                                                                       H)   Ori,wn    (09401
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9.4            7.2               .12                FOs9,9                    •
                                 0/00           9/ti]                                                                                                                                               9891          F   .0s               (5.6    1   0.9     1-2.3        1                                                                       5.0. returned      80 goOd   Ii:
                                                                                                                                                                                      ('009                                                                                  3.7          I-    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0991          1—3.70                             .9                      7.2                                                                   kwh       09/5
                                                                                                                                                                                      11930                                          I_OS       Ii          jil.I                         t-l.2                                                  0.8. left gold in
                                                                 —                                                                                              —
 9,           901   0994    1903               1924                   .05                           oit     (140                          5/03         0/04                8/04         902             903           -    4.02         0.5         2.2                                                                                            Septonner 1931
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -3.8        - 3.4                 0_I               FIxed
                                6/03           I 1/04]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   time   trend grooath ratelen real
 A.        1904.i,2i           957             1009              —4.7                               ]3701                               11/07          4/39    2/01        3/09         9%           907                    .91          2.3        01       -'.0            4,4           -0-I                  Fined             over the IOn 0,14 '570—0939 0015 01(191  lb
                                6/07                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pertest. It,40ScalvIotea
                                                                                              9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    destrilono iii IonIc I-A.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ii
 I          11961-1914         00]             11114             —i   .1          09041,3           11t ]45                              7/13          Il/A    4/il        6/Il        1910          992                    .89         3.9      -0.0         4.2            5.0               2.4               F Into
                                2/Il            9/14)                                                                                    4/10          3/il
                                                                                                                                         7/I)                                                                                                                                                                                       the trend Jone5oi growth race
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    acer the s.ernad 16/0—0939 sos
6          11314-1919       IPJI?              (910              —0.0                                                                   li/A          K/A       -          1/19         90?         1919                  99.25         35.5        2.5      .3.9         447                  6.2           Fe09e4/               4,00.    twos disabLed as a
                            (10/16              4/19)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              °b0,ea.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Controls
 i         1919—1921           910              929              —6.9             SprIng    19121                                        5/20          5/23    1/20       101/21       9019         1922              -   8,09                      2.0       4.5            0.2           —1.6               Fleoibie
                                0/21            6/21
il         1971—1926        (024               1926              —-9                                                                     5/25           —      8/23        7/24        3924          925              —   3.72          0.0      —1.9         l.a            9.7               4.1            F   I mdi
                            (11/24              7/26]
ii         )92(,'1923       1927                928                   .46                                                                             7/26                             I 976         928              —    .49      —   2.2         2.9       3.6            9.0               1.9            F   Iced
                                9/29            C,'Illl
           19291—1033       1929                932              .3.7               9/31            799     31C                         10/29         7/33     2/23                    1928         1931            —4,21           - 4.1
                                                                                                                                    —                                                                                                               0.4      -Ii         -18.4             .6-I              F loed°'
                                7/79            0/333                                                                                   00/29         9/23                            :1920          929          I'- 4.2)          - 2-li      Io.i        t-n-z       c.b.s
                                                                                                                                                      7/33                                          1931              8.95                                                                (-0.l
                                                                                                                                    1 1/32                                            j930                        F                     0.91    1.-'-       I-i.;       1:10.2            1.3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                            T4ItL I(,-Oe,i,eo.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Olnell.-y Virl.bI.a
                                                  Poll     O.oIihl.s                                                                                                                         r                         ——
                                                                                                                              lMac0.l   9jrI.hI,.                                                                                                P2rc,ntsgfl.      In N 0'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ri                 deicrool   rc.,t,l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Iodloir.dal00.       l.d cl.ppgS
                                                                    (2)                        13)               (40         (01                   (8)                  (1)                                        (9)                                      (ii)
                             lrr.1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                14)                        II)
                                                                                                                                            n61,ly SpqciFlc                                  Arnia)Ri .t,thtyJ OcyTitlec                                               —
                             (7octOIy]                       I.e I.Orno       too,
                             PerIreac. Cc                    Yrsod     '0
                                                                                                                                         Cr'. La'g-Tu,'          9.ntI,l7                    000710IC 'et8—o Or.'
                                                    I.                      800,-,.l.                                                    Soort—Ic—
     lot.   oc. 0045         ConIric I TICS                  l,o,ojlI In. I                                 S Lock                                               SpotIFIt                    4,'s,.th CycI             I 'seed of      8,.r.e.
                                                                                                                                         Icteer.  it             coc   I. Stack              Coatr,ctiers              coo,.I FoOttI•o           670.     Ocrosi   t                      Ch,n9t
 bOor,'t.r.ycI,               aubcc    t)                     letter loootr                 F coloR;   I    'lirkit        linkInq                                            OdoR           C
                                                                                                                                         oo rosneoto. I          proc.                           iobc I,,              Growth RIl.a              .nr,,1 Resort.            t*aot It       hand 5ry          lo.ch.tgr
     (T'oe;hto7r,u,(         'o.k         Tr,s95             Feik     75 1ro,,gk            (rot,,          06050,         Cr11.8
                                                                                                                                         Trough         Polk     P.ut            Irtugl, #e.8                Iroslo,   r.sktoIrosor              19,,oy   '.tlo            Lurn.807       Gold               Pat.
     I,     157'I laiR   1472          1i),;o                    -     .88                   5/23                                             .          0/70    11/72               0(77    1072             '877           —                   —'.8      5.5
                                             -    2/75]                                                                                                                                                                                                                    090                 1.5         rind
                                                                                                                                                                                            1,8,1            II'S            - 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s.c               (9.0                                                                   0.10 blor009 Ire       flit.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '15.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1570        9077            —   0.0             —0.3       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f                                 {3.l          8,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9•6                —II.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :jnosy-    ii   c'la); pore-ti 04 r..ros;s            nod otOno
 7,         1970.1083        981       IS)       '086                                                      00 82                          2(82            9/34   8/99                195     loll             7905                .7             -2.0      -0.8                            . 2.0                                          ttyttr   lees
                                                   3/8/I                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17.8                                                                                        hut
                                                                                                           570                          (2/02             2/01                                               '040             2.6                                                                                                  6)   )hrnrony loot ofrecroo               as)'o"
                                                                                                                                         4/85             9/86                              1's"             1122         — 4.1                  [1.0     10.1          [3.0             F°'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.8                                    c)   rojor
                                                                                                                                                                                            l03
                                                                                                                                                                                            9f1               055          - 7.0                  —3.5 1.1.1            13.0                                                              ohOrplyi'frrS)tolt 'lrooOori
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (_8R  57               90.7             V 2...
 3.         020.1994         090      (II                        —                      -                              -                                                                                                                                                                                                           4)   70,t,eeno alone
                                                 1108                                                      7I1 9,!                       2/90            72/90 2/84              Il/Il       1019            '89]          - 1.0                   4.1   -0.7                                                                      .(   9c's.uldrisk (1913J        .
                              1/90                1/951                                                      •                           (2/89                                                                                                                              74                 45          ross
                                                                                                                                                           /08                              IlMO              887         C'. 2.8                                                                                                  F)   tI5l.6,.'ger (1473)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0.4                     [3.4                L7                                       Thorp (982/)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             9590                                 -9.5 ['0.3                              -    0,6                                 )
                                                                                                                                         8/93            11/94                               '897            9893            —23                  —0,8  -0.2               3.0                                                          Senninye.t,ro,)l..rSt.tderd
                                                                                                                                                                                            i1589                                                         (.3              3.l          {— 0.7
 0.         10)4.1713    1700                    071                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      oct01 ion. on o,,l) tkrr.iItfl
                               10)               17]
                                                                                            I99I                                         3/90             7/52   5/99            15g9            go          9900                0.45             61       09               jp                 7                                                                   thee   e''
                                                                                                                                                                                                             8096           ''                                                                 '°
                                                                                                                                          3/00
                                                                                                                                        u10?06           7/02                                0598            99                  0.45              0.2     —0.5             3.8
                                                                                                                                                                                            [0099                                                (.03                      (75                 7.1                          me cmoS 4,.'th rite          solo,,' ooen                 SO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
 S.         1002-1739        303
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ['                               [.31
                                                 590                 2.0                                   00t   04'                                                                                                                                                                                                        period 1070-5911an                  ooret.         II
                                                                                                                                         0/03            4/00
                             5/51                2/931                                                                                                                                           502         190]                9.1              4.0      0.4              2.0                2.5         rInod
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IllIcr..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,usc.IcoIut.d85 8.tcrlb./ II, 7R61r (7,,
 S.         1904-1303    10417        (91         579            -2.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                         1/07            tI/cl   0/09            8/00        '906            3907            —17.1               —0.1                                     —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16. t.'.nd 800ttpn7 9rree.tli      oile (]T'Oo-    5000
                              7/112.             '7/041                                                                                                                                                                                                   —0.3             —0.2                2.6         rl,s
                                                                                                                                                                                            (0958            1710                2,9              3.7                                          1I                           perIod1070—1313 —is                r.o-o-.t
 7.         19)8_lOll                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     kS                                                                ton r.lroiot.d                24
                         III)                    1914                                                            14"                     2/li                    7/92            12/I]       5900
                         C 4/li                   0/Ill                                                                                  8,10                                                                                                                                                              Flood
                                                                                                                                         2/li
 B.         914-1919     lOIS                    1017
                             9/Il                0/Ill                                                                                    .              7/91
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FloolkIe
 9. 19101123             (922         III     91]
                             5/22            11/11)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oltolkIe
70.         1923-1929    (225                1370
                             3/20                                                                                                                        7/25    7/25           12,23
                                                 7/73]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Flood'
II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Flood
Il.                      1929         (SI 1702                                              8/]'           29 1I           )93JT         0/29
                             0/70,                                                                                                                       8/32    4/27            8(32
                                                 9/32)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FI,ed
                                                                                                                                                         7/25
                                                                                                                                        10/20            9/10
                                                                                                                                         7/30            0/17
                                                                                                            TABLE   I .11

                                                                                                                                                                                               lnrel.a.y   'l.'r,-,hTex




                                             Real   Variables                                                         Financial Variables

                                       (1)                   (2)                                    (4)                 (5)                 (6)                (7)                       (8)                        (9)     (10)
                             Annuu I                                                                                             Monthly Specific                                 Annual [amnth!v]           levi a ton
                             (sonthly]                   Deviations fran                                                         Cycle long-mm             hlonthlS               Specific  Monetary         Iron
Comrn                        Reference Cycle             Trend of Average                                                        Short—Term                Specific               Growth Cycle        Trend uF Averaqe
International                Contractions                Annual Real                          Stock                               Interest                 Cycle Stock            Contractions        Annual              Exchange
                                                                                 Financial    liarket               Banklna                                                                                  Moneary      Rn Se
Peference Cycle              (subcycles)                 Output Growth1                                                           Differential             Price    Index         (subcyclei(         Growth Rate
                             Peak              Trn,anh   Peak to Trough          Crises       Crises                Crises                         Peak    Ppak         Trough    Pent         Trough Peak to Frouqh      nag   inn
(truugh to Trough)                                                                                                               Trough


I.     1868-18/9              873   (5) I879                                      18711      73a 75a                                              6/79                                                                     Ft
                             j 8//3      9/79]                                               7911
                             0869       t87l
                               8/70      2/72]
                             18/3       1876
                             1 9/73      8/76]
                              1878             1879
                                  3/78          9/79]
2.     1079-1881             1882        (5)   6887                                 1/82     81a, 87r                             I/f?            6/RI,                                                                    lixad
                             [12/81             8/87]
3.     18o6-1894              1890       (5) 1694                                            871 8md,                18891       12/88             8/95                 1198                                               fined
                             ii 1/91          1/95]                                                                              12/83             2/89
                                                                                             '90c, 91a                            3/91             6/97
                                                                                             .gc                                  8/93             3/91

4.     1894-1902             1900              1902                                                  00b                          1/DO             9/0 I    4/I'D                                                          Pius
                                  3/00          9/02)
5.     1902-1904              1903             1904             6 .43                                04a                          7/03             8/(14                2/04      0904            19135            '3.1    F,ne'l
                                  5/03         10/04]
6. 1904-1908                  8902       (5) 1908 '         -    .64               8/07                                           8/07             5/09     2/07       10/07                      90/              '3.4    Fis*d
                                  7/07        2/09]                                                                                                                              11906
                                                                             .

7.     19h18—19I4        .    1913             1914                               191a1       12a     1c                          h/Il             N/A      9/12        7/14                     1912              -4.6    FIa,,i
                                                                                                                                                                                 11911                              4-I
                                  6/13          8/14)                                                                                                                              908            1910
                                                                                                                                                                                 '1911            912               4.6
8.     1914-1918              1917             1918                                                                                                                     3/                                                Flen,tbie
                         -    1   6/18          4/19]
9.      1916-1921        , 1920 (5) 1921                    -9.6                                                                                            4/20        4/22      1920           192)              -7.'   Finaiblp
                          •
                            1 9/20   7/21)
10.    1921-1925              1924             1925         -    .56              l926y                                           4/25            11/25    10/74        5/25      1923           1924              —3.9   Flexible
                         I    [10/24            6/25]
II.    1945-19//              1926             1927         -4.9                                                                 10/76            10/?)     9/26       12/26      1925           1926                     Flexible
                              [10/26            6/27]
12,     1927-1932             193D       (5) 1932           -7.2                             29a      318            l930         6/29             6/33     2/26        5.33     1928            1929              -4 6    Iise,l
                                  3/30        7/32]

                                                                                                                                   I
             Sirces:   See Data          ppendix                                                                                       The trend growth rate in reil output oyei
      Data
                                                                                                                                       the period of 1990-1939 was 1.36 percent.
                                                                        g)   bank  failures in Paris                                   It wan calculated as described in table IA.
      Motes:   a) crises affecting Frence and nther
                  countries                                                     klndleberger (1978), pp. 136-137
                                                                        1)   Thorp (1926)                                                                                   the period
               b) France nut effected but major                                                                                        The trend minetary growth rune over
               C) major international crisis,                           9)   Teager (1976)                                                                           It was catoilate']
                                                                        *    Fr ante was on a bimetallic silver                        1900-1939 was 7.34 percent.
                       sharply affecting France                                                                                        a  in I above.
                                                                                standard until 18/B, although,
               d)    France alone
               e)    failure of Union Generale                                  gold was de Facto the standard
                                                                                after 1872
                       Source lcindleberger (1978)                      a.
                                             - Coniptoir                     France restnrei de factn gold
                F)   suspension of payments
                       IJtsconrte. Claphaan (1966) p. 384                       convertibility at the end of 192€
                                                                                                                                    FAult     i.E .-carada

                                                Real Variables                  Ii narcial                   Financial Variables         _______________ -.____________      JIO'WtYVihibiS
                                                                                             Vari,ablex
                                                                        '                              "1                          -I                                                     Percentage ciann in Ii    determinants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              if
                                                                (2)              (3)             (4)         (3)          (4)                                                             indIcated alone iad changed
                                Annual                                                                                                          (6)                    6)                   7)       (Nj      (9)         (10)
                                [eonthly)                Devia ens from,
                                                                 ti                                                                                                                                                                                         (Ii)
                                                                                                                                        Annual [rrcnthl 3']     Dcvii tion
  Conaion                       Reference Cycle          Trend of Average                                                                                       from
  International                                                                                                                         Specific 1lonetary                                                                         Pe'tmnta3x
                                contractions
                                        Annual Real                                                                                     Growth cycle            Trend OF Average                                                   Change     in,
  Reference Cycle    (scabcycles)       Output Growth                         Financial       Oanking     Financial     6anking         Contractions            Annual                High     DeposIt             Deposit          lopetary          Exchange
  (Trough to Trough) Peak        Trough Pan to Trough                         crises          Crisea      crises        crises          loubcyclei)             Growth M0neary
                                                                                                                                                                        Rate          Potiered Reserve                             Gold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Currency                           Rate
 -__________________—                                                                                                                   Peak           Trouqh   Peak   to T,-cugh     morel Ratio
                                                         __________________                                                                                                                                        Ratio           S tjck             1eq lee


  2.


  3.

  4.


  5.   1901-1904            1903                1904                                                                                     1901          1903            2.8                21.8           6.6            1.5            36.4
                                                                 (7            1902T                                                                                                                                                                Fixed
                            [12/02               6/04]                                                                                   [ 4/01         8/0?]
 6.                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
       1904-1908            1907        (5)     1908        -6.7               l907''                       19071J                      1906           1007            9.7                 a.o       —5.5                .8            11.7
                            [12/06               7/08]                                                                                  C 1/06         10/07]

 7.    1908-1915            1913                1915        - 7.5                                                                       1911           1914                               21.6       .10,3              2.!                         Fixed
                           [11/12                I/Is]                                                                                  C 4/12          5/131
                            1910                1911             2.5           iqio                                                                    1910                          C'    7.8           0.)           10.4            11.8
                                                                                                            1910T
                           '1    3/10            7/11]                                                                                  [12/08         10/10]
                           '1913                1915        -    2.5           l9l4'         1914a                      igl4             1911          1014                                          -10.3
                                                                                                            l9l4                                                                     121.6                         (2.1
                           [11/12                1/15                                                                                    C   4/12       5/1]]
                                                                                                                                        [1909
 8.    ;19151919           1917                 1919             1.25                                                                    1217          1916            0.8                13.9       —   5.4       -    2.2                         Flexible
                           1 3/17                4/Ic]                                                                                  [10/17          4/iS]
 9.    1919—1921           1920          (5)    1921        -16,8             1521T                                                      1919          1921         -7,1             -14,3               6.8           4.9
                                                                                                            l72l                                                                                                                                    Flexible
                           1    6/20             9/21]                                                                                   C   9/21       9/22]
113,   1921-1924           1923                 1924        . 6.9                                                                        1922           923         -4,5             -     1.1       -   2.5                       -   6.6          Fixed
                                6/23             8/2i1                                                                                   1   9/22       9/23]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fixed

       1924-1933           1929          5)     1932       -10.9              I9]]'                                                      1927          1931         -7.8             -20.6               9.1           2.0         .35.1                       **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fl oxible
                                4/29             3/3]]                                                                                   [10/27        lI/Il]



            Data Sources: See Data Appendin

            Notes:   a)   minor bank runs
                     b)   major bank failure
                     U)   JamIoson (1959)
                     T)   Thorp (1926)
                     •    Canada returned to gold de jure
                            1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                 F
                          Canada     left
                                       gold do facto in 1929,
                            de jam 1931
              The trend growth rate in real nutpljt over the
              period 19u0—1939 waS 3,10.  it was calculated
              as described    Table
                                in            l.A.
         2
             The trend oenmtary growth rale flyer the period
             i900—t939 was 3.49 percent.  it wao calculated
                                                                                                                                                                                                               F
             .5 iniabove
                                                                                                             SABLE ).F    — Swed'!n
                                                                Financial
                                    Real Verlahiec              Variabluc
                                                                                                                    Monetary_Varicbles      _________
                                                                                          PiAEiñtie clmn;i"ThT if            detFiinsMFTiiThrutri
                                                                                p
                                                                                             ii
                              (1)                (2)
                                                                E1  (3)
                                                                                        4)
                                                                                                  one had changed

                     Annual                                                                                        (5)                 5)        (7)
                     [monthly]               DeviatIons from                    Annual (nxinthlv]          Deviation
                                                                                                                                                                    )
Coiwson              reference Cycle         Trend of Average                   Seed !lc Monetary          iron,

International        Contractions            Annual    Real                     Growth CycIr               Trend of Average
                                                                Finencial       crtrectior,                Prnuel Planetary       iii'jh  DeniDoit
Reference Cycle      (subrycles)           Output Grouth                                                                                                    oeposst         Exchurnge
                     Peak                                       Crises           tsubcyclesl               Growth Rats2           9owered leserve
(trough to Trough)                  Trough Peak to Trough                                                                                                   Currency        late
                                                                                 Peak        Trouçph       Peek to Trough         loney     Ratio
                                                                                                                                            ________ Ratio                  Regin

 1.   186b.187$                     1878              1,1                       1876              1878             -8.4          -11.0           -8.0               5.?    Fixed        Pat.,   Sources:    See Data Appendin
                     ,1872    (5)
                      1872          1075              I.]                                                                                                       [-250.4]
                                    1878        ¶- 5.0                                                                                                                                  O.1fl      k) treuger Collapse
                     11876
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1) Thorp (1926)
 2.   1078-1806       1883     5)   1886         -    1.4                       1880              1886        - —1.7                  1.9            18.1           3.7    Fixed                   3) Joining (1981)
                                                                                1880              18821      -                        7.0    (14.5              C   0.6                            *  Sweden returned  to golddb facto
                                                                                1803              1886        7—2.3                   8.2    I,
                                                                                                                                                0.9                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1922, de jure in 1924
                                                                                                                                                                (0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sweden left gold in 1931
 3.                                 1895                                        1691               894                                9.4        -   1.0            0.8    Fixed
      1886-1895       1889 (5)                                                                                ,—2.9
                     fisog          1890              6.5                       11869             1890                                0.1   1'        1.1   P       0.4
                     J1891          1892        1- 3.7                           1891                              -5,1               1.0       0.4                 0.9
                                    1895                                        1189]
                                                                                                  1892                                5.1                           Ia                      The trend growth rate in real output
                     11894                      [— 5.6                                            1894)       .,-3.2                         .— 1.1                                         over the pe,rind 1871—1939   7.77.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wa
                                                                                                                                                                                            It was calculated45 descrIbed in
 4.   1895-1902       1900          1902          - 3,3                         1899              1932              2.7           36.4               5.4        -11.7      Eked             Table l.A.

 5.   1902—1905       1903          1905         —    1.4                       1903              1904             —1.5               9.0            0.5    -       5.6    Fixed        2
                                                                                                                                                                                            The trend monetary growth rate over
                      1906          1907         —    2,7                                                          -1.2               1.1            3,6            7.6
 6.   1906.1901               (5)                                 1007T         1907              1910                                                                     Fixed            the period 1871-1139 was 5,39 percent.
                                                                                                                                                                                            It was calculatedas in t above.
 7.   7907.1914       1913          1914         -    5.2         1914T

 0.   1914—1917       1916          1917         —11.9                                                                                                                     Flexible

 9.   3911-1921       1920    (5)   1921         -15.4                          1918              1923             -5.3           11.1               2.6        16.6       Flexible

10.

11.   1921.1921       1925          1928               .12

12.   i921_l931       1929    (5)   1931         -    6.1       1931.            1930             1932             -6.2               8.7        -11.0              0.8    Flxed*
                                                                          J k
                                                                    1932
                              APPENDIX: DATA SOURCES


 A. United States 1870—1933

     Reference Cycle Turning Points: Burns and Mitchell (1946). Table 16, p. 78
     Real Output: NNP Variant III in 1929 prices.    Friedman and Schwartz (1982)
          Table 4.8, p. 121.
     Money Supply and Determinants: M2 definition. Friedman and Schwartz (1932)
          Table 4.8, p. 121.
     Long-Term, Short-Term Interest Differential: Morgenstern (1959), Table 125,
          p. 501.
     Stock Price Index: Morgenstern (1959), Table 132, p. 531.
     Monetary Gold Stock: Cagan (1965), Table 5-7, p. 340.
     Loan Earning Asset Ratio: Ratio of Loans to Loans plus Investments, Federal
          Reserve Board (1944), p. 20.
     Feueral Reserve Board (1955), pp. 35-36.

B. Great Britain 1870-1933

     Reference Cycle Turning Points: Burns and Mitchell (1946), Table 16, p. 78.
     Real Output: NNP in 1929 prices. Friedman and Schwartz (1982), Table 4.9,
          p. 130.
     Money Supply and Determinants: Fl definition. Friedman and Schwartz (1982),
          Table 4.8, p. 30 and data suplied by A. 3. Schwartz.
     Long-Term, Short-Term Interest Differential: Morgenstern (1959), Table 125, p. 501.
     Stobk Price Index: Morgenstern (1959), Table 132. p. 531.
     Monetary Gold Stock: Bordo (1981), Table 4, Sheppard (1971), Table A 1.12.
     Loan Earning Asset Ratio. Ratio of Loans plus discounts to loans plus
          discounts plus investments: Bordo (1977) and Sheppard (1971), Table A 1.1.

C. Germany 1870-1913

     Reference Cycle Turning Points: Burns and Mitchell (1946), Table 16, p. 78.
     Real Output: NNP in 1913 prices. Hoffman (1965), Table 249.
     Money Supply and Determinants: M definition. Tilly (1972) Table 5. p. 347.
     Long-Term, Short—Term Interest Diferentia1: Nlorgenstern (1959), Table 125.
          p. 501.
     Stock Price Index: Morgenstern, (1959), Table 132, p. 513.
     Monetary Gold Stock: Tilly (1972), Appendix 1, p. 359.

D. France 1900—1933

     Reference Cycle Turning Points: Burns and Mitchell (1946), Table 16, p. 78.
     Real Output: GUP in 1938 prices. Sauvy (1954).
     Money Supply: M2. INSEE (1966).
     Long-Term, Short—Term Interest Differential: Morgenstern (1959), Table 125, p. 501.
     Stock Price Index: Morgenstern (1959), Table 132, p. 531.

E.   Canada 1900-1933

     Reference Cycle Turning Points: Hay (1966), Table III, p. 362.
     Real Output: GNP in 1949 prices. Data used in Bordo and Jonung (1977).
     Money Supply and Determinants: M2 definition. Data used in Bordo and doming
          (1977).
     MonetaryGold Stock 1900-1913: Rich. (1980), Table   ,   1920—33.   Data supplied
          by R. A.Shearer.
Appendix: Data Sources
Page 2


F. Sweden 1870-1933

   Reference Cycle Turning Points: Calculated from turning points in annual
        rates of change of real GNP.
   Real Output: Real GDP in 1913 prices. Data used in Bordo and Jonung (1977).
   Money Supply and Determinants:     definition. Jonung (1975), Table A-i.
