                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    NEGLECTED RISKS, FINANCIAL INNOVATION, AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY

                                          Nicola Gennaioli
                                           Andrei Shleifer
                                          Robert W. Vishny

                                        Working Paper 16068
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16068


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




We are grateful to Pedro Bordalo, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Anil Kashyap, Brock Mendel,
Vladimir Mukharlyamov, Adriano Rampini, Michael Rashes, Joshua Schwartzstein, Jeremy Stein,
seminar participants at the Harvard Business School, NBER, Stern School, and ChicagoBooth, as well
as the editor and two referees for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility
Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 16068
June 2010, Revised October 2010
JEL No. G01,G14,G21

                                              ABSTRACT

We present a standard model of financial innovation, in which intermediaries engineer securities with
cash flows that investors seek, but modify two assumptions. First, investors (and possibly intermediaries)
neglect certain unlikely risks. Second, investors demand securities with safe cash flows. Financial
intermediaries cater to these preferences and beliefs by engineering securities perceived to be safe
but exposed to neglected risks. Because the risks are neglected, security issuance is excessive. As investors
eventually recognize these risks, they fly back to safety of traditional securities and markets become
fragile, even without leverage, precisely because the volume of new claims is excessive.


Nicola Gennaioli                                      Robert W. Vishny
CREI                                                  Booth School of Business
Universitat Pompeu Fabra                              The University of Chicago
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27                              5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
08005 Barcelona (Spain)                               Chicago, IL 60637
ngennaioli@crei.cat                                   and NBER
                                                      Rvishny@gmail.com
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction.

       Many recent episodes of financial innovation share a common narrative. It begins

with a strong demand from investors for a particular, often safe, pattern of cash flows. Some

traditional securities available in the market offer this pattern, but investors demand more (so

prices are high).   In response to demand, financial intermediaries create new securities

offering the sought after pattern of cash flows, usually by carving them out of existing

projects or other securities that are more risky. By virtue of diversification, tranching,

insurance, and other forms of financial engineering, the new securities are believed by the

investors, and often by the intermediaries themselves, to be good substitutes for the

traditional ones, and are consequently issued and bought in great volumes. At some point,

news reveals that the new securities are vulnerable to some unattended risks, and in particular

are not good substitutes for the traditional securities. Both investors and intermediaries are

surprised by the news, and investors sell these “false substitutes,” moving back to the

traditional securities with the cash flows they seek. As investors fly for safety, financial

institutions are stuck holding the supply of the new securities (or worse yet, having to dump

them as well in a fire sale because they are leveraged). The prices of traditional securities

rise while those of the new ones fall sharply.

       A notorious recent example of this narrative is securitization of mortgages during the

last decade. Various macroeconomic events, including sharp reductions in government debt

during the Clinton administration and massive demand for safe US assets by foreigners,

created a “shortage” of safe fixed income securities. By pooling and tranching mortgages

and other loans, financial institutions engineered AAA-rated asset backed securities (ABS),

as substitutes for US government bonds. The perception that these securities were safe,

apparently shared by both buyers and intermediaries who engineered them, was justified by

historically low default rates on mortgages in the US and by more or less continuously


                                                                                              2
growing home prices since World War II. Trillions of dollars of asset back securities were

created and sold to investors.

       Both the holders of these securities and financial intermediaries appeared to be caught

by surprise in the summer of 2007, when the news that AAA-rated securities are not safe hit

the market. It is not that investors failed to realize that there was a housing bubble, or that

home prices could decline and mortgages could default. Yet two things came as rather

substantial surprises. The first was how fast home prices declined, and defaults grew.

Gerardi et al. (2008) show that few if any Wall Street professionals expected the housing

bubble to deflate so rapidly. The second surprise was the sensitivity of the prices of AAA-

rated securities engineered from mortgages, especially CDO’s, to home prices, a phenomenon

largely overlooked by the models utilized by rating agencies (Jarrow et al. 2007, Coval et al.

2009). As these securities were downgraded, prices fell further and new issuance stopped.

Perhaps as importantly, the willingness to lend against these assets as collateral collapsed,

causing many institutions to lose access to repo and asset-based commercial paper markets

that provided a substantial share of their financing needs (Gorton and Metrick 2010).

       This recent episode is far from unique in recent US financial history. In the 1980s,

investment banks began selling Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMOs), securities

created out of mortgage portfolios and intended to substitute for government bonds. To avoid

a possible risk to the value of CMOs resulting from mortgage prepayments by homeowners

(which would occur if interest rates fell and people refinanced their homes) and consequent

prepayments on the high-yielding bonds, intermediaries engineered CMOs nearly

invulnerable to prepayment risk if historical patterns continued. In the early 1990s, however,

as the Federal Reserve sharply cut interest rates, prepayments skyrocketed to levels

unprecedented by historical standards, so even the values of CMO’s most protected against

prepayment risk declined sharply. The investors were caught by surprise and dumped the


                                                                                             3
CMOs, turning back to government bonds (Carroll and Lappen 1994).                       Financial

intermediaries were evidently caught by surprise as well, and many (particularly those who

sold prepayment insurance) suffered substantial losses. Like the collapse of the housing

bubble in 2007-2009, extreme prepayments appear to have been unanticipated by the market.

         A similar narrative describes what happened to money market funds in 2008. The

industry was originally created to offer investors a substitute for bank deposits, with slightly

higher returns, instant liquidity, and no risk. Because investment in money market funds was

not protected by deposit insurance, however, these funds were engineered never to “break the

buck” – have their value per share drop below $1. To slightly raise returns, prime money

market funds invested in generally safe non-government securities, such as commercial

paper.    The collapse of Lehman Brothers in September of 2008 led to its default on

commercial paper, which caused one large holder of that paper, the Reserve Fund, to “break

the buck” (Kacperczyk and Schnabl 2010). This event shocked investors and precipitated

hundreds of billions of dollars in withdrawals not just from the Reserve Fund, but from the

whole prime money market fund sector, and a return to traditional bank deposits and

government securities only funds (Pozsar et al. 2010). Only government guarantees of prime

money market funds saved the industry.

         In this paper, we present a model that captures some key elements of this narrative.

The model shares with the traditional accounts of financial innovation, such as Ross (1976)

and Allen and Gale (1994), the view that innovation is driven by investor demand for

particular cash flow patterns. This demand allows intermediaries to profitably engineer these

patterns out of other cash flows. We add two assumptions to this standard story.

         First, we assume that both investors and financial intermediaries do not attend to

certain improbable risks when trading the new securities. This assumption captures what we

take to be the central feature of the historical episodes we described: the neglect of potentially


                                                                                                4
huge defaults in the housing bubble and of the sensitivity of AAA-rated securities to these

defaults, the neglect of the possibility of massive prepayments in the early 1990s, or the

neglect of the possibility that a money market fund can break the buck. We model the

neglect of certain states of the world using the idea of local thinking, introduced by Gennaioli

and Shleifer (2010), which is a formalization of the notion that not all contingencies are

represented in the decision maker’s thought process. The complete neglect of some states of

the world in models used to assess the risks of MBS is a good example (Jarrow et al. 2007).

        Second, we make the preferred habitat assumption that investors have a very strong

preference for very specific, namely safe, cash flow patterns. We model this assumption

through preferences, namely infinite risk aversion, but it can reflect psychological or

institutional characteristics of demand. For example, an alternative way to model such

demand might be to consider investors who have lexicographic preferences with respect to

particular characteristics of investments (e.g., AAA ratings). Yet another approach might be

to stress regulatory requirements imposed on investors such as banks and insurance

companies that favor safe assets. This assumption on demand is not strictly necessary for our

results, but makes them much stronger.1,2

        We then examine a standard model modified by these two assumptions, and obtain

three main results. First, as in a standard model, there is room for financial innovation to

offer investors cash flow streams that are not available from traditional securities in sufficient

supply. However, when some risks are neglected, securities are over-issued relative to what

would be possible under rational expectations. The reason is that neglected risks need not be

laid off on intermediaries or other parties when manufacturing new securities. Investors thus

end up bearing risk without recognizing that they are doing so.


1
  An alternative approach sees the demand for riskless debt as coming from the preference for information-
insensitive claims (Gorton and Pennacchi 1990, Demarzo and Duffie 1999).
2
  We formally verified this assertion by studying a version of the model with finitely risk averse investors
having Epstein-Zin preferences. The results are available upon request.

                                                                                                          5
        Second, markets in new securities are fragile. A small piece of news that brings to

investors’ minds the previously unattended risks catches them by surprise, causes them to

drastically revise their valuations of new securities, and to sell them in the market. The

problem occurs precisely because new securities have been over-issued: there are not enough

cash flows in the neglected states of the world to make promised payments in full. When

investors realize that the new securities are “false substitutes” for the traditional ones, they fly

to safety, dumping these securities on the market and buying the truly safe ones3.

        Third, in equilibrium financial intermediaries buy back many of the new securities.

But their wealth might be much smaller than that of investors as a whole, which limits their

ability to absorb the huge supply of the new securities (see point 1). As a consequence, the

prices of these false substitutes fall sharply, even without traditional fire sales due to leverage

(Shleifer and Vishny 1992). Prices of traditional securities rise as investors fly to safety.

        The model thus delivers the basic patterns of financial innovation and financial

fragility in a new way. The most important contribution is to connect financial innovation,

the glut of new securities, surprise about risk, and corresponding financial fragility through a

unified model of belief formation. We show that a model in the spirit of Allen and Gale

(1994), even modified by a preferred habitat formulation of preferences but without neglect

of certain risks, can deliver some aspects of the narrative, but not over-issuance and the

fragility it entails. Without a deviation from rational expectations, one cannot get the basic

idea of false substitutes: securities investors believe to be riskless turn out to be risky.

        Our model of financial innovation is related to the behavioral finance idea of security

issuance catering to investor demand as in Baker and Wurgler (2002) and Greenwood,

Hanson, and Stein (2010). Henderson and Pearson (2009) study equity derivative products

called SPARQS, which they argue are introduced to capitalize on investor misunderstanding
3
  Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) alternatively model the flight to safety as a response to Knightian
uncertainty. Our model accounts for investor optimism and flight to safety in the same framework. Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009) present a historical perspective on the neglect of low probability risks in financial markets.

                                                                                                              6
of equity payoff patterns. Shleifer and Vishny (2010) apply the idea of catering to the

financial crisis, but simply assume optimism as the stimulus for security issuance, and

pessimism as the shock precipitating a crisis. Here we present a unified model of belief

formation that accounts for the whole story.

       Our paper is also related to an important theme in the literature on financial fragility,

namely that both banks and the shadow banking system create “private money” or liquidity

that investors demand (Gorton and Metrick 2010, Stein 2010). Such creation of liquidity is

usually seen as socially valuable, but entailing systemic risks due to leverage and resulting

asset fire sales (Shleifer and Vishny 2010, Stein 2010). While we recognize the benefits of

financial innovation, we take a more skeptical view about the social value of liquidity

creation when investors neglect certain risks. In such a system, security issuance can be

excessive and lead to fragility and welfare losses, even in the absence of leverage. In this

respect, our paper is closer to Rajan’s (2006) prescient analysis of the risks of financial

innovation, although we emphasize neglect of unlikely events leading to over-issuance of

securities rather than incentive problems as a source of instability.

       In the next section, we present a benchmark rational expectations model of financial

innovation in a pure exchange economy. Section 3 modifies this model to allow for local

thinking, and derives our main results on financial innovation and fragility. In Section 4, we

study a production economy, in which innovation under local thinking can lead to investment

distortions. In Section 5, we discuss welfare in both the exchange and the production

economies. In the exchange economy, innovation under local thinking may benefit

intermediaries and harm investors; in a production economy, because innovation distorts

investment, it can leave everyone worse off. Section 6 examines the case of fully rational

intermediaries dealing with locally-thinking investors. Section 7 discusses some implications

of our work for the recent financial crisis. All proofs are collected in the Appendix.


                                                                                              7
2. The Model

       There are three dates t = 0, 1, 2 and two assets, B and A, which pay off at t = 2. The

assets stand for cash flows from projects. Asset B pays R > 1 for sure. Asset A pays yi with

probability πi where i = g (for growth), d (for downturn), r (for recession). We assume:

A1: yg > 1 > yd > yr , and πg > πd > πr.

Growth is the most likely outcome and the downturn is more likely than a recession.

       There is a representative intermediary, who is patient and risk neutral. At t = 0, the

intermediary owns both assets and sells claims on their returns. These “traditional” claims are

a riskless bond on B that yields R at t = 2, and risky shares in A, which yield yi at t =2. There

is a measure 1 of investors, each endowed with wealth w and maximizes utility:

                               U = E[C0 + C1 + θ∙min(C2g , C2d, C2r)],                       (1)

where Ct is consumption at t = 0,1 and C2i denotes consumption in state i at t = 2. Investors

are infinitely risk averse with respect to C2 but, since θ > 1, wish to postpone consumption to

t = 2. To do so, investors must buy claims on A and B. Investors can however freely transfer

resources from t = 0 to t = 1 without purchasing claims, so t = 0 and t = 1 should be viewed as

being close together. Formally, the initial endowment perishes right after t = 1. Our results

only become stronger if resources cannot be transferred from t = 0 to t = 1.

       These preferences conveniently pin down the gains from trade in assets. Because of

their greater desire to postpone consumption (θ > 1), investors seek to buy assets from

intermediaries. Because they are infinitely risk averse, investors want to buy riskless bonds.

With only traditional claims, however, some beneficial trades do not occur. Financial

innovation improves trading opportunities by splitting up the cash flows of asset A.

       At t = 0, financial claims on A and B are traded and consumption-savings decisions

are made. Competition in financial markets pins down the price pA of a share in A and the

price pB of a bond issued on B. At t = 1, after portfolios are formed and consumption has

                                                                                               8
taken place at t = 0, agents observe a noisy signal s                  s, s of payoff y, where s           s . After

observing s, agents can reassess their portfolio and consume. At t = 2 asset payoffs are

realized and distributed to the holders of the financial claims, and consumption takes place.

The signal is characterized by Pr(s| yg) = 1 – γ, Pr(s| yd) = δ, and Pr(s| yr) = ρ, where ρ > δ > γ

≥ 1/2. That is, s reduces the probability of growth and is a stronger signal of a recession than

of a downturn. The latter feature is captured by ρ > δ and plays a central role in our analysis.

Our results are starkest when the signal is mildly informative, i.e. ρ ≈ 1/2. .

         The timing of the financial markets is graphically represented in Figure 1:



     t=0                                             t=1                                              t=2
     financial claims are               signal s is observed, financial                 asset returns are realized
     traded, prices pB and              claims re-traded and new                        and distributed to claimants
     pA are set                         prices pB1 and pA1 are set.

                                                         Figure 1



2.1 Rational Expectations Equilibrium with Traditional Claims

         In choosing how many bonds b and shares a to buy at t = 0 (and thus implicitly the

initial and future consumption levels C0, C1, C2), each investor solves:4

                                         max w         pAa    pBb      ( Rb    y r a)
                                          b,a
                                                                                        .                        (2)
                                         s.t.      w    pAa     pBb     0

The infinitely risk averse investor cares about his time 2 consumption only in the worst state,

a recession. In contrast, at t = 0 the intermediary supplies b bonds and a shares to maximize:

                                max             pAa    pB b R(1 b) Ey(1 a) .                                     (3)
                                 a ,b


When b (or a) are negative, intermediaries are buying bonds (shares). This possibility never

arises in equilibrium, but it uniquely pins down equilibrium prices. To find these prices,

4
 As it will soon be clear, in our model under rational expectations there is no re-trading at t = 1, so the agent’s
portfolio problem can be formulated as one where assets are held to maturity until t = 2.

                                                                                                                      9
consider agents’ reservation values for different assets. From program (2), the investor’s

reservation prices are equal to θR for bonds and θyr for shares. Due to infinite risk aversion,

shares are valued at their lowest payoff. Whenever the price of one or both securities is lower

than the respective reservation price, the investor saves all of his wealth (setting C0 = C1 = 0)

and purchases securities, starting with the one with the lowest price to reservation value ratio.

       Program (3) implies that the intermediary’s reservation prices are equal to R for bonds

and E(y) for shares. The intermediary then sells all securities whose price is above the

reservation value and keeps the remaining ones. We assume for simplicity that:

A2: E(y|s) > θ∙yd and w > w      max[θ(R + yr),(R + yd)].


The first part of A.2 ensures that, even after observing a low signal s, the intermediaries value

shares substantially more than investors. This implies that there is no trade in shares either at

t = 0 or at t = 1, and that the portfolios formed at t = 0 will not be rebalanced after observing

s. The second part of A.2 ensures that investors are wealthy enough to absorb the total

supply of bonds even at their reservation price pB = θ∙R [formally, A.2 implies that

w /(   R) 1 ]. We can show that under A.2 the equilibrium at t = 0 is described by:


Lemma 1: Under rational expectations and a traditional claim structure, the financial markets

equilibrium at t = 0 is characterized by a = 0, b = 1, pA = Ey, pB = θ∙R.

       In this equilibrium, displayed in Figure 2, investors absorb all bonds, their price is

maximal, and shares do not trade (pA = Ey assures there are no trades among intermediaries).

                         pB
                                                supply
                       θ∙R

Figure 2                        profits
                                                                   demand
                         R



                                            1            w/(θ∙R)                 b            10
Intermediaries’ supply of bonds is initially flat at pB = R but becomes vertical after all

available bonds are sold. Investors’ demand is initially flat at pB = θR but begins to slope

down after all of their wealth is used to buy w/θR bonds, so pB must drop below θR for them

to absorb a larger supply. A.2 directly implies that there is a “shortage” of a safe store of

value; this shortage keeps pB at θR, allowing intermediaries to earn a unit profit (θ – 1)∙R from

bond sales. Investors’ payoff at t = 0 is UI = w, intermediaries’ payoff is Π = θ∙R + Ey.

       After a signal s is observed at t = 1, nothing happens to portfolios and consumption.

Investors keep the bonds purchased at t = 0, the price of which stays constant at pB = θ∙R.

Share prices fluctuate with the expected return of asset A since Ey is affected by the signal s,

but no trading in shares takes place. In this equilibrium, it is irrelevant how consumers and

intermediaries divide their t = 0 income between C0 and C1.



2.2 Rational Expectations Equilibrium with Financial Innovation

       We view financial innovation as the repackaging by intermediaries of the payoff on A

so as to relax the “shortage” of bonds. The intermediary carves out of the risky asset a new

claim having the same cash flow pattern as a riskless bond, namely promising to repay R in

all states of the world. The amount of these new riskless claims the intermediary can issue is

limited by the lowest possible return yr of A, since the maximum aggregate repayment the

intermediary can pledge in all states of nature under the new claims is precisely yr. As a

consequence, the volume f of the new riskless claims issued in this way must satisfy:

                                                 RE
                                         f   f        yr / R .                                (4)

If f > yr/R, the new claim is risky because in a recession intermediaries cannot pay out the

promised return R to all claim-holders. If f ≤ yr/R, the new claim is riskless: even in the worst

state, intermediaries can repay R to all claimants. Unlike the bond, which is necessarily

riskless because it pledges B’s riskless return, the new claim is paid out of a risky return, and


                                                                                              11
is therefore riskless only if issued in a sufficiently low volume. We thus model financial

innovation as the creation of substitute securities mimicking exactly the cash flows of bonds

that are demanded by investors but are in short supply. It is optimal for intermediaries to

introduce a safe claim because infinitely risk-averse investors do not value the upside of risky

claims. This innovation can also be interpreted as issuing riskless debt against the cash flow

of risky asset A. After having issued f new claims, the residual risky return y – fR from A is

pledged to the shareholders.

       Consider now the market equilibrium. Denote the t=0 price of the new claim by pN.

The new claim must fetch the same price as a bond (i.e. pN = pB), since the two securities

have identical cash flows. Financial innovation boosts the supply b of bonds by the amount

yr/R. The new equilibrium in the market for riskless claims is shown in Figure 3.
                     pB
                                                  new supply
                   θ∙R




                         R                                        demand


                                                                               b
                                        1   1+yr /R w/(θ∙R)

                                            Figure 3

       Under A.2, the boost in the supply of riskless claims triggered by financial innovation

reduces but does not eliminate this shortage, because w / R 1 y r / R . It is therefore still the

case that the price of safe claims is equal to investors’ reservation price, namely pN = pB =

θ∙R. The wealth of investors is sufficiently high to absorb all new claims at that price. Share

prices are now equal to pA = Ey – yr because the volume of innovation is maximal and so the

risky asset’s lowest payout is pledged to the holders of the new claim. In the equilibrium

depicted in Figure 3, the intermediary’s profit from innovation is equal to:



                                                                                              12
                                              RE
                                          f        (   1) R   yr (   1) .                     (5)

The intermediary’s profit rises when yr is higher, since more securities can be issued, and

when investors’ time preference θ is stronger, since the price of the new securities is higher.

       To summarize the analysis thus far, under A.2 the financial markets equilibrium at t =

0 under rational expectations and financial innovation is described by:

Lemma 2: Under rational expectations, equilibrium at t = 0 with financial innovation is

characterized by a = 0, b = 1 + yr /R, pA =Ey – yr, pN = pB = θ∙R.

       At t = 1, financial innovation does not affect the reaction of markets to the signal s.

Regardless of the signal, the price of riskless claims does not change and neither do portfolios

or consumption. Only pA fluctuates with the expected return on A. In this equilibrium, it does

not matter whether consumption takes place at t = 0 or t = 1. As we will see, neither of these

facts remains true with local thinking.

       Finally, consider the welfare consequences of innovation. With innovation, the total

payoff of investors as of t = 0 stays at UI = w while the intermediary’s payoff becomes Πinn =

θ∙R + (θ – 1)yr + Ey, which is the no-innovation profit Π plus the profits from innovation.

Social welfare at t = 0 is thus higher with innovation, just as in Allen and Gale (1994). The

social benefit of financial innovation here consists of relaxing the aggregate shortage of

riskless bonds. This benefit in our model accrues entirely to the intermediaries because, in the

market equilibrium, investors purchase riskless claims at their reservation price.

       Our model builds on the idea that a key feature of financial innovation is to allow

intermediaries to cater to investors’ demand for particular claims, namely riskless bonds. The

initial excess demand for such bonds gives intermediaries the incentive to manufacture an

identical riskless security out of a risky cash flow. With infinitely risk-averse investors, the

model literally describes securitizations expanding the supply of AAA securities.          With

rational expectations, financial innovation allows gains from trade to be realized, and is

                                                                                              13
strictly beneficial. Although this effect of financial innovation shows up in the case of local

thinking as well, in that world it can also lead to excessive innovation and financial fragility.



3. Financial Innovation under Local Thinking

        We consider departures from rational expectations due to agents’ limited ability to

represent uncertainty. To do so, we follow Gennaioli and Shleifer’s (2010) model of local

thinking. This model, which provides a unified explanation of several “anomalies” in

judgments but admits Bayesian rationality as a special case, builds on the notion that agents’

inferences are made on the basis of a selected subset of possible events rather than on the

entire state space. Intuitively, not all states of the world come to mind; the agent does not

think of everything when imagining the future5. Crucially, the selection of events from the

state space is shaped by their true underlying probabilities: more likely events are ceteris

paribus easier to retrieve from memory than less likely ones. This feature allows one to

consider how historical frequencies and news combine to create judgement biases,

particularly news that change the agent’s representations.

        We model local thinking by assuming that an agent does not think of all three possible

states i = g, d, r of the risky asset’s payoff but only the two most likely ones. The agent then

conditions his inferences about the payoff of A on the two states that come to mind, ignoring

the remaining state. To see how this works, consider a local thinker’s representation of the

future at t = 0. Since by assumption πg > πd > πr, the states that come to mind are g and d, so

the agent assesses PrL(yg) = Pr(yg| yg, yd) = πg/(πg + πd) and PrL(yd) = Pr(yd| yg, yd) = πd/(πg +

πd), where superscript L stands for “local.” At t = 0, the local thinker exaggerates the

probabilities of growth and downturn and neglects the possibility of a recession.



5
  Other models of unforeseen contingencies, surveyed by Dekel, Lipman, and Rustichini (1998) are less
tractable and focus on studying how the awareness of being unaware of some states affects choice, rather then
on how the set of contingencies that comes to mind is endogenously determined and updated.

                                                                                                          14
       After s is observed at t = 1, the agent’s assessments are revised. What comes to mind

at this point depends on the “true” posterior probabilities πi(s) = Pr(yi|s) for i = g, d, r. Since

the prior probability of growth is fairly high and we focus on scarcely informative signals

(formally ρ ≈ 1/2), yg is still the most likely outcome after s is observed. This implies that

state g is always included in the agent’s representation. Consider now the probability ranking

of a downturn and a recession. If the signal is good, ( s     s ), this ranking does not change as

πd( s ) > πr( s ). Observing a good signal after a history of economic stability confirms the

initial representations encoded in assumption A.1.

       A bad signal s = s in contrast is generally informative of lower growth, but especially

about a recession, as formally captured by the assumption that ρ > δ. In this case, so long as:


A.3:       ˆ        d
                        ,
                    r


we have that πr(s) > πd(s), namely a recession becomes more likely than a mere downturn. If

the prior probabilities πd and πr are not far apart, A.3 is easily met and we henceforth assume

that it is. This implies that after s = s the representation of uncertainty changes drastically: the

agent now neglects the possibility of a mere downturn by including state r at the expense of d

into his representation and thus forms his assessments conditional on yg and yr.

       By formalizing the change in agents’ representations, local thinking allows us to

identify two general, distinct, effects of bad news. The first and most fundamental effect is to

prompt the agent to consider the possibility of a recession. Initially, after a period of

economic stability, limited representations lead the agent to neglect this unlikely risk. After

observing a piece of bad news (such as a bank failure), the initially unattended-to possibility

of a recession comes to the agent’s mind. The second effect of news it that they may induce

over-reaction. With limited representations, as the possibility of a recession comes to mind,

other, more favourable, states are crowded out of agents’ attention. This crowding out leads


                                                                                                 15
to over-weighting of the probability of recession, which may (but need not) induce a switch

from the initial optimism to pessimism.6

         Although over-reaction leads to stronger effects, the main results of our model rely

merely on the neglect of the possibility of a recession at t = 0. In fact, as we formally show in

Proposition 2, the “false substitute” effect arises even if the agent’s assessment at t = 1 is

rational, much as if agents were to learn the true distribution of states after observing s.7



3.1 Local Thinking Equilibrium and Innovation at t = 0

         We solve the model by assuming that investors and intermediaries are local thinkers

holding the same beliefs. In Section 6 we consider rational expectations intermediaries.

         If the intermediary does not innovate, the equilibrium at t = 0 is very similar to the

rational expectations case in Lemma 1, except that the share price is now equal to pA = ELy =

E(y| y = yg, yd), which is the value for asset A’s cash flow expected by a local thinker. When

the intermediary innovates, then given agents’ representations at t = 0, the change from the

rational expectations case is substantial. When state r is neglected, the number of new riskless

claims that the intermediary can potentially issue is equal to:

                                                         L
                                                     f       yd / R .                                            (6)

         Since at t = 0 agents do not pay attention to the possibility of a recession, riskless

claims can be issued until all cash flow yd in a downturn is pledged to investors. The

6
  After observing s a local thinker estimates an average payoff of E(y|yg,yr,s), which is lower than the rational
agent’s estimate when E(y|yg,yr,s) < yd. If E(y|yg,yr,s) = yd the local and rational thinker’s assessments are
identical (the local thinker is optimistic otherwise). Thus, the switch from optimism to pessimism arises when
the recession is very bad, i.e. yr is low. Pessimism may also arise in our model if the probability of growth is
sufficiently low that after s state yg is disregarded. None of our main results change under these alternative
specifications. We have chosen the structure of A.1 in order to highlight the fact that the basic mechanism of our
model does not require pessimism and may arise even if the local thinker’s t = 1assessments are fully rational.
7
  More generally, although local thinking provides a model of probability distortions and over-reaction, the mere
distortion of probabilities and updating is not sufficient for our results. For example, we would not get them in a
model of under- and over-reaction along the lines of Barberis et al. (1998). The key cognitive problem our
agents suffer from is the neglect of the possibility that yr might happen. This assumption interacts with infinite
risk aversion to cause assets to be priced based only on the worst case scenario that agents contemplate. But
even if risk aversion is finite, the neglect of low payoff states plays an important role by creating the possibility
that security issuance is excessive relative to the available cash flows.

                                                                                                                 16
potential volume of financial innovation with local thinking is higher than with rational

expectations (formally f L > f RE since yd > yr) because cash flows in a downturn rather than a

recession can now be pledged to create a “substitute” for a riskless bond. If investors are

sufficiently wealthy, the price of riskless claims stays at pN = pB = θ∙R and the extra profit

from innovation obtained by the intermediary is equal to:

                                                L
                                            f       (   1) R   yd (     1) ,                                (7)

which is higher than the profit in Equation (5) under rational expectations. The reason for

higher profits is the greater volume of innovation. If instead investors’ wealth is not so high,

innovation can boost the supply of the riskless claim to the point that pB and pN fall below θR,

so the equilibrium lies in the downward portion of investors’ demand curve as in Figure 4.


                     pB
                                                                      new supply
                    θ∙R

            w∙R/(R+yd)

                      R                                                    demand



                                                1              1+yd /R                 b

                                                    Figure 4

Here pB may be so low that an intermediary’s profit from innovation falls below the level in

Equation (7).8 If the price drops to pB = pN = R, intermediaries may be willing to supply fewer

claims than f L. A.2 simplifies the analysis by ruling out this case. In fact, w              w implies that,

when f L is issued, the equilibrium price pB = pN = wR /(R +yd) is above R.




8
 Under rational expectations this case could not occur by virtue of assumption A.2 which implies that investors’
wealth is sufficiently large that they can absorb fRE new claims at their reservation value θ∙R.

                                                                                                             17
                                                                        L
Proposition 1 Under local thinking, the volume of innovation is f           y d / R . We also have at

t = 0 that b = 1 + f L, a = 0, and pA = E(y| yg, yd) – yd. We have two cases: 1) If w w   (R    yd ) ,

then pN =pB = wR /(R +yd) < θR; 2) If w          (R   y d ) , then pN = pB = θ∙R.


        When investors’ wealth w is high relative to the supply of riskless claims, demand for

new claims is high, and so is pB. The reverse is true when investors’ wealth is low relative to

the amount of riskless claims issued. In this case, the boost in the supply of riskless assets

triggered by innovation can reduce the price of all safe assets, including the traditional bond,

below the no-innovation level. Note that that under local thinking the volume of new claims

issued is higher (and the price pB lower) than under rational expectations. This is so because

locally-thinking intermediaries and investors see asset A as having a smaller downside risk

than do their rational expectations counterparts. This encourages the supply of the new claim,

which investors see as a riskless bond. The issuance “glut” created by local thinking has far-

reaching implications for financial fragility.

        As we show next, the intermediary’s wealth at t = 1 also plays a key role in affecting

fragility. To highlight this role, we allow the fraction σ of income carried by intermediaries to

t = 1 to be anywhere in 0,1 . In this model σ is indeterminate, for the intermediary is

indifferent between consuming the income obtained by selling claims at t = 0 or at t = 1.



3.2 Local Thinking Equilibrium and Innovation at t = 1

        We just saw that local thinking boosts the volume of innovation relative to rational

expectations. This profoundly alters the reaction of markets to the signal s at t = 1. These

effects do not play out if the signal is good. In this case, representations do not change and

the effect of news under local thinking is very similar to that under rational expectations. The




                                                                                                  18
price for riskless claims is unaffected by news because after observing s the new claim is

still perceived to be riskless, while share prices rise to pA ( s ) = E(y| y = yg, yd, s ) – yd.

        When the signal is bad, matters are very different because now downside risk is

represented as a recession with a payoff yr rather than as a downturn with a payoff yd.

Investors now realize that the new claims are not riskless! This is so because the volume of

new securities issued is f L= yd /R, so the total repayment promised to investors is equal to yd,

which exceeds the resources available in a recession. In a recession, intermediaries can repay

to each holder of the new claim an amount equal to:

                                                yr
                                                   R      R.                                            (8)
                                                yd

        The large volume f L of new securities issued under local thinking plays a critical role
                         L
here. It is because f        is large that in a recession the new securities become risky in the

aggregate. The arrival of s = s reveals to investors that, contrary to their initial belief, the new

claim is very different from the safe bond it sought to replicate, and drastically reduces their

valuation of that claim. This is true even if the news is not very informative and investors

realize that a recession is still quite unlikely (i.e., πr is small), so that most of the times the

new claim will in fact repay the promised amount R. The possibility of a recession destroys

the very idea that made the new claim appealing to investors at t = 0, namely that it was just

like a riskless bond. The new claims are not true substitutes for the traditional claims; they

are false substitutes, severely affecting financial markets at t = 1.9

        To see this, note that after seeing s investors’ reservation price for the traditional bond

is equal to θ∙R while that for the new claim drops to θ(yr/yd)∙R, the present value of the latter

claim’s payout in a recession. In contrast, the intermediary’s reservation price for traditional

bonds is equal to R and that for the new claim is equal to:

9
  The new claim pays less than the traditional bond in yr no matter what the t = 1 signal is, but investors
recognize this at t = 1 if and only if the signal is s, which is why markets are fragile only in that state.

                                                                                                         19
                       L                 L
                           R where           ( y r / y d ) Pr L ( y r s ) Pr L ( y g s ) .     (9)

Risk neutral intermediaries value the new claim at their perceived expected repayment. Here

  L
      1 reflects the drop in the new claim’s expected payout. Our analysis is general but our

results are best appreciated in the case where s is barely informative about repayment even

for a local thinker, namely   L
                                  1 (once again, this requires πr to be small).

       These reservation prices lead to two important observations. First, after seeing s

investors value the new claim less than the bond, creating a force toward the segmentation of

the previously unified market for safe claims. Second, investors’ reservation price for the new

claim may fall below intermediaries’ reservation price [this occurs when θ(yr/yd) < ωL]. In

this case, investors wish to sell the new claims back to intermediaries, who – depending on

their wealth σ – may or may not have the money to buy them.

       To see how prices are set at t = 1, we focus on the case where the price of safe claims

at t = 0 is below θ∙R and where investors’ valuation of the new claim at t = 1 falls below

intermediaries’ valuation, namely when θ(yr/yd) < ωL. This captures a scenario where

innovation: a) is so extensive as to affect the bond market at t = 0 and b) induces a

misallocation of the new claim at t = 1. The latter condition is crucial for it is precisely when

innovation transfers a claim to the low valuation market participant that a “false substitute”

effect arises. Proposition 2 deals with the other cases also.

       One immediate consequence of our previous discussion is that after observing s the

price of traditional bonds rises from its initial level pB = wR /(R +yd) < θ∙R to investors’

reservation level, namely pB1 = θ∙R. This rise is connected to the drop in investors’ valuation

of the new securities. After realizing that the new claim is risky, investors try to sell it in the

market to increase current consumption and to purchase the truly riskless bonds. This boost in

the demand for bonds encounters a limited supply, which causes bond prices to rise. At the

same time, the price of the new claim must drop, for the maximal valuation ωLR of that claim

                                                                                                20
in the market is lower than its t = 0 price. As a consequence, once investors realize that the

new securities are false substitutes for the old ones, there is a “flight to safety” causing bond

prices to rise and the price of the new claim to fall.

       The extent of the new claim’s price drop crucially depends on the wealth of the

intermediaries. Suppose that the intermediaries carry little or no wealth to t = 1, so that they

do not have the resources to buy all of the new claims, even when the latter are priced at

investors’ valuation θ∙(yr/yd)∙R. Figure 5 depicts the resulting equilibrium at t =1:

                                bond market at t = 1

             pB1 = θ∙R
                                                            market for riskless
        pB = wR/(R+yd)                                      claims at t = 0


                  ωL∙R

      pN1 = θ∙(yr/yd) ∙ R
                      ∙
                                           market for new claims at t = 1

                                    FL 1                 1+fL            b

                                             Figure 5

In equilibrium, the new claim’s price drops to investors’ valuation θ∙(yr/yd)∙R even though

intermediaries are willing to buy it at a higher price. The problem is that intermediaries have

little wealth and thus can absorb only some new claims. This low demand by intermediaries

(the downward sloping curve in the bottom part of Figure 5) leads to a major price drop.

       Intuitively, as the wealth σ of intermediaries increases, their demand also rises,

potentially driving the equilibrium price of the new claim above θ∙(yr/yd)∙R. In the extreme

case of σ = 1, intermediaries carry all of their t = 0 income to t = 1 and thus have enough

funds to buy all of the new claims at the initial equilibrium price pB (after all, they obtained

these resources by selling the new claims at t = 0). But then intermediaries can a fortiori

                                                                  L
afford to buy all of the new claims at their reservation price        R , which is below the initial

                                                                                                 21
price p B . When σ = 1, the equilibrium price must thus settle at pN1 =               L
                                                                                          R to make

intermediaries willing to absorb precisely the amount of new claims held by investors.

       This discussion allows us to decompose the drop in the new claim’s price into two

parts. The first is the difference between the initial price pB = wR /(R +yd) and intermediaries’

                    L
reservation price       R . This price drop represents the elimination of any premium paid for

the new claim over and above its expected payoff. Investors initially paid this premium

because they wrongly believed the new claim to be a substitute for the riskless bond in short

supply. The second part is the drop from          L
                                                      R to θ∙(yr/yd)∙R. Even if the new claim is only

mildly risky, it is not what investors wanted (given their infinite risk aversion). Thus, they

dump it on the market. Since intermediaries cannot absorb this claim in large volumes given

their limited wealth, its equilibrium price settles at investors’ reservation price, which is

below the expected payoff. Here over-issuance exacerbates fragility by boosting the supply

of new claims that must be held by disgruntled investors (shifting out the upward sloping

supply in the bottom part of Figure 5).

       These broad patterns of market segmentation and financial fragility, as well as the role

of intermediaries’ wealth, extend to other parameter constellations.



Proposition 2 After news s, the traditional bond trades at pB1 = θ∙R, the price of the new

claim drops to pN1 < pN. there are two cases:

       1. If    L
                        ( y r / y d ) then pN1 = θ∙(yr/yd)∙R and new claims are not traded.

                L
       2. If            ( y r / y d ) then pN1 = pN1 ( ) , where pN1 ( ) is an increasing function

                                                      L
           with p(0)       ( yr / yd ) R , p(1)           R . When   > 0 some new claims are re-

           traded. For a given      , the price drop (pB – pN1): i) decreases (weakly) in yr and ii)

           increases (weakly) in yd if and only if yd < y d* for some threshold y d* .


                                                                                                  22
         It is a general feature of the model that the bond price at t=1 is equal to its maximum

possible value θ∙R. Bond prices thus rise at t=1 when their initial price pB is below θ∙R, as in

case 1) of Proposition 1. The price of the new claim always falls below its t = 0 level. If

θ(yr/yd) ≥ ωL, this price drops to investors’ reservation level and no re-trading occurs. In this

case, the intermediaries’ wealth does not matter because they are the low valuation market

participants. In the most interesting case where θ(yr/yd) < ωL, intermediaries wish to buy back

some new claims, thus helping to support their price. However, if their wealth σ is

insufficient, they are unable to do so, creating a large price drop.10’11 Given the key role of

intermediaries’ wealth in shaping price fluctuations, in sections 4 and 6 we pin down σ by

introducing production and rational intermediaries, respectively.

         Proposition 2 shows how, for a given σ, parameters yr and yd determine financial

fragility, viewed as the drop in the new claim’s prices after s is observed. A milder recession

(a higher yr) reduces fragility by rendering the new claim less risky, which raises the

reservation prices of investors and intermediaries at t = 1. By boosting the supply of new

claims at t = 0, a milder downturn (a higher yd) exerts two opposite effects on fragility. On

the one hand, the higher supply at t = 0 reduces the price of new claims at t = 1 by increasing

the quantity that intermediaries must absorb and by rendering these claims more risky. These

effects enhance fragility. On the other hand, higher supply of new claims at t = 0 reduces

their equilibrium price at t = 0, which dampens fragility. In this way, financial innovation
10
   We have implicitly assumed that there is no innovation at t=1 after s is observed. In practice, investors (rather
than intermediaries) may repackage new claims, keeping the safe portion (yr/yd)R for themselves and selling off
the risky portion to intermediaries. Such re-tranching might improve risk allocation in the economy but it would
only marginally attenuate financial fragility when intermediaries’ wealth is low. Indeed, low-wealth
intermediaries would be able to pay very little for the risky portion of new claims, keeping their price low
11
   One could consider innovations that, rather than replicating the bond’s cash flow, supply Arrow-Debreu
securities. If intermediaries supply two such securities, one paying 1 dollar if the state is yg, the other if the state
is not yg (i.e. if the economy slows-down), investors could replicate the safe asset by purchasing an equal
amount of them. This form of innovation also leads to over-issuance: all of the cash flow yd available in a
downturn is sold under the security paying out in the slowdown as local thinking investors and intermediaries
identify such slowdown with cash flow yd, not yr. As the economy’s slowdown is revised downward to yr,
however, this security cannot be repaid in full and its price drops. The only difference with our current setup is
that Arrow-Debreu claims automatically allow investors to implement the outcome attained under retranching
by selling the securities that pay out in yg until the investor’s portfolio pays the same in all future states.

                                                                                                                    23
creates an inverted-U shaped relationship between fragility and agents’ optimism (as

measured by yd). When agents are very optimistic, the supply of new assets expands,

reducing these assets’ prices today as well as the price decline after s is observed.

           Having explored the fragility of the new claim, we turn to the impact of innovation

and the neglect of risks on aggregate financial markets, defined as the market value pB∙b + pN

∙f + pA∙a of all claims. Let Vi I , L denote the market value prevailing under local thinking and

innovation in state i = 0, s, s (i = 0 denotes the first period t = 0), and Vi L the market value

prevailing under no innovation. Let Vi I , RE and Vi RE denote the corresponding values under

rational expectations. Focusing for simplicity on the case where σ = 0 we show:


Corollary 1 If θ(yr/yd) < ωL, innovation boosts market volatility under local thinking but not

under rational expectations: V0I , L Vi I , L   V0L   Vi L while V0I , RE   Vi I , RE   V0RE   Vi RE for i


= s, s .


           The combination of local thinking and financial innovation amplifies the market’s

response to news. Without innovation, market fluctuations are entirely due to changes in the

price of claims that everyone understands are risky (the magnitude of such fluctuations

depends on whether agents are rational or not). When expectations are rational, this remains

true also under innovation, for the risky claim still bears all of the fundamental risk. Matters

are very different under local thinking. To see this, consider Figure 6, which is drawn for w >

θ(R+yd) [i.e. Case 2) of Proposition 1]:




                                                                                                       24
             Market Value
                                                           V sI , L

                              I ,L
                                                           VsL
                         V   0

                                                                               Innovation
                         V0L

                                                             VsL               No Innovation


                                                             V sI , L

                                0                      1                   t

                                              Figure 6

       As the upper branches in the figure show, in good times (i.e., at t = 0 and in state s )

financial innovation allows intermediaries to expand financial assets by manufacturing new,

apparently safe claims that risk averse investors are eager to buy. When bad news arrives and

the neglected risk becomes manifest, this innovation entails extreme fragility. While the

revelation of neglected risks also causes the market to drop in the absence of innovation, the

market drop is much larger with innovation because the neglected risk has now been loaded

more heavily onto investors through their holdings of new, supposedly safe, claims. Since

investors are inefficient risk bearers and intermediaries have limited wealth, the market

collapses.   In sum, when some risks are neglected, financial innovation enhances the

volatility of financial markets. This is again due to the “false substitutes” effect, which causes

a market boom in good times and a market collapse after bad news arrives.



3.3 Innovation, Local Thinking and Financial Fragility: Discussion

       Our model places the demand for new claims at the heart of the link between financial

innovation and fragility. Investors’ initial excess demand for safe claims encourages

intermediaries to manufacture new claims out of risky cash flows that are perceived to be

equally safe. As investors realize that the new claims are a false substitute for the old ones,


                                                                                               25
their reluctance to hold on to these claims triggers a sharp price drop even after marginally

bad news. These marked shifts in the demand for the new safe claims are intimately

connected to financial innovation.

       The pressure to create new safe claims is strong precisely when investors disregard

specific risks such as a possible collapse of home prices in light of favourable recent history.

This optimism boosts intermediaries’ ability to sell new claims and thus their incentive to

innovate. The issuance glut renders the new claim vulnerable to the arrival of bad news that

bring to mind previously neglected risks and thus the critical fact that the new claims are not

as safe as the assets they sought to replicate. Because of their preferred habitats, investors try

to rebalance their portfolios in favour of the truly safe traditional claims, triggering massive

sales of the new claims and price drops. Such sales are not driven by leverage or liquidation

demands, as in standard fire sales models, but by the fall in demand that arises as investors

realize that these new securities are false substitutes for the old ones.

       The general message of our model is that when investors neglect certain risks,

financial innovation creates a false substitutability between the new and traditional claims.

This false substitutability explains both the excessive volume of innovation ex-ante and the

ex-post flight to quality occurring as investors come to realize that the new claim exposes

them to previously unattended to risks. Although the motives for financial innovation are the

same in our model as in Allen and Gale (1994), the consequences are very different. In our

model, innovation benefits intermediaries who earn large profits selling securities at t = 0, but

hurts investors, who are lured into an inefficient risk allocation and suffer from ex-post price

drops. Investors’ losses depend on the liquidity of intermediaries and their ability to provide

backstop insurance against price drops at t = 1. As we show in Section 5, in an economy with

production both investors and intermediaries might lose from innovation.




                                                                                               26
4. Innovation and Local Thinking in a Production Economy

       Suppose that instead of owning assets, the intermediaries have exclusive access to

production technologies (or activities) B and A. Activity B yields R at t = 2 for any unit

invested at t = 0. The return of activity A is stochastic, equal to yi with probability πi, where as

before i = g, d, r. The riskless activity is in limited supply, in the sense that investment IB in

activity B cannot exceed 1. Investment IA in activity A is in principle unbounded.

       The intermediary has initial wealth wint < 1 but can raise additional funds from

investors by selling claims on A and B. The traditional claim to finance B is a riskless bond

priced at pB at t = 0 and yields R at t = 2; the traditional claim to finance A has a unit cost pA

and yields yi at t =2. The difference from the pure exchange economy of Sections 2 and 3 is

that now the supply of claims must be consistent with the intermediary’s optimal investment

decisions. For brevity, we study this production economy only under local thinking, but we

later discuss the role of limited representations. In the absence of innovation, the intermediary

chooses investment levels IB and IA, and issues volumes b and a of traditional claims to solve:

                     max                       R(IB-b) + ELy(IA – a) – IB – IA + bpB + apA + wint   (10)
                b , a ,IA ,IB ,iA ,iB



                                        s.t.   IB = bpB + iB,                                       (11)

                                               IA = apA + iA,                                       (12)

                                               iB + iA ≤ wint ,                                     (13)

                                               b ≤ IB ≤ 1, a ≤ IA.                                  (14)

In Equation (10), the intermediary’s payoff is equal to the output generated by A and B net of

investors’ repayment, minus investment costs, plus the revenue from security sales at t = 0.

Constraints (11) and (12) say that investment in A or B is equal to the intermediary’s own

investment in the activity (iA, iB) plus the funds raised from investors. Constraint (13) says

that the intermediary’s own investments cannot exceed his wealth wint; the constraints in (14)

limit total investment and the supply of claims.

                                                                                                     27
       By substituting Equations (11) and (12) into the objective function (10) and in the

constraints in (14) we can rewrite the intermediary’s problem as:

                    max              R[(pB – 1)b+ iB] + ELy[(pA – 1)a+ iA] – iA – iB + wint   (15)
                   b , a ,i A ,i B


                        s.t.          iB + iA ≤ wint,                                         (16)

                                     – (pB – 1)b ≤ iB ≤ 1 – pB b, – (pA – 1)a ≤ iA .          (17)

The objective function (15) shows that the intermediary is willing to issue a claim only if its

price is higher than 1. In this case, the revenue generated by each unit of security issued is

higher than the investment cost of creating the promised return. We assume:


A.4: θ∙yd < 1 and w > w*               R   y d ( wint 1) /(1    yd )


The first part of A.4 says that investors’ reservation price for the risky claim is less than one,

which implies that in equilibrium pA < 1 and thus the risky claim is not issued (a = 0). The

second part of A.4 says that the investors’ wealth is sufficiently high that, even with

innovation, the price of riskless claims is pB = θ∙R. This restriction, which is stronger than the

one in A.2, simplifies the equilibrium analysis but can be relaxed. Under A.4 it is immediate

to see that the equilibrium at t = 0 works as follows:


Lemma 3 In the absence of innovation, no risky claim is issued (a = 0) and pA ≤ 1. The bond

is issued for an amount b = 1 and pB = θ∙R. The intermediary withdraws profits from the sale

of b from activity B by setting iB = – (θ∙R – 1). If ELy ≥ 1 the intermediary invests these

resources in A by setting iA = wint + θ∙R – 1, and pA = 1. If ELy < 1 the intermediary sets iA =

0, consumes wint + θ∙R – 1 before t = 2, and ELy ≤ pA < 1.


       The main features of the pure exchange equilibrium of Lemma 1 also obtain in the

production economy. There is a shortage of riskless bonds, and their entire supply is sold to

investors at their reservation price. No risky claims are issued. The only difference from the



                                                                                               28
pure exchange economy is that now the risky activity is only operated if its expected return is

higher than the cost of investment (i.e., ELy ≥ 1).



4.1 Innovation, Equilibrium and Reaction to News

       As in Section 3, the intermediary creates new riskless claims by pledging the lowest

possible output level generated by A. The maximum quantity of new claims that can be

created in this way is equal to:

                                                     f LP = yd ∙ IA/R.                                      (18)

The ability to create new claims increases in the amount of investment in activity A. Taking

this effect into account, with innovation the intermediary solves:

                      max                     R[(pB – 1)b+ iB] + (pBELy – R)∙f + ELy iA + wint – iB – iA    (19)
                     b , f ,i A ,i B


                                       s.t.      iB + iA ≤ wint ,                                           (20)

                                                f ≤ f LP= iA [yd / (R – pB yd)],                            (21)

                                               – (pB – 1)b ≤ iB ≤ 1 – pB b, 0 ≤ iA.                         (22)

Constraint (21) directly follows from substituting into (18) the definition of investment IA =

fpB + iA, where we have once more imposed pB = pN. One important implication of (21) is that

new claims can only be issued if the intermediary invests some of his wealth in A by setting

iA > 0. This is due to assumption A.4, which implies that yd is sufficiently small that the

intermediary must insure investors against the bad state by committing some of its wealth to

the project. We also assume:

A.5 θ∙ELy > 1.

A.5 implies that, in order to maximize objective (19) at pB = θ∙R, the intermediary always
                                                                                      LP
wants to issue the maximum possible volume of new bonds f                                  because the price the




                                                                                                             29
intermediary obtains for these bonds is higher than the ratio between the promised return R

and A’s average return ELy. We then have:


Proposition 3 Under A.4 and A.5, there are two possible equilibrium configurations:

        1) If ELy + (θ – 1) ∙yd < 1, innovation does not occur and the equilibrium described in

Lemma 3 arises.

        2) If ELy + (θ – 1) ∙yd > 1, innovation occurs. The price of riskless claims is pB = θ∙R,

the intermediary sets IB = b = 1 and iB = – (θ∙R – 1). This allows the intermediary to set iA =

wint + θ∙R – 1, and to sell the new security in volume f LP = [wint + θ∙R – 1] [yd / R (1 – θ∙yd)].


        Compared to Proposition 1, here a cost of financial innovation arises endogenously

when the physical return to capital in A is lower than the investment cost, i.e. ELy <1. In this

case, creating new securities requires the intermediary to invest in the risky technology,

which entails a private cost. If however the unit profit (θ – 1) ∙yd obtained by the intermediary

from each new “riskless” claim is large enough to more than compensate for the cost

[formally if ELy + (θ – 1) ∙yd > 1], then innovation takes place. As we shall see, through this

effect financial innovation can be a source of investment inefficiencies because at t = 0 the

intermediary may decide to invest in A and sell new claims even when he would not invest

absent the possibility of financial innovation.

        The second message of Proposition 3 is that when the creation of new claims requires

investment, an intermediary’s desire to create new claims introduces a strong force for it to

commit all of his initial wealth and income to investment so as to expand the volume of

innovation. As a consequence, when at t = 1 bad news arrives, the intermediary does not have

spare wealth to buy any of the new claims back. The result below formally shows the

consequences of this logic:




                                                                                                  30
Proposition 4 In the equilibrium with innovation of Proposition 3, after the arrival of a bad

signal s = s at t =1, the price of the traditional bond stays constant at pB1 = θ∙R, while the price

of the new claim drops to pN1 = θ∙(yr/yd)∙R and new claims are not traded at t = 1.


        The key difference from the result obtained in the pure exchange economy is that now

the equilibrium price of the new claim drops to investors’ valuation regardless of whether the

intermediary’s reservation price       L
                                           R for the same claim is higher than θ∙(yr/yd)∙R.

Intermediaries have no spare wealth to buy back the new claims at t = 1 because they have

optimally invested the totality of their t = 0 resources to boost the volume of innovation. As a

consequence, the local thinker’s neglect of the possibility of a recession leads to substantial

price drops even when intermediaries barely react to news. The idea that intermediaries tie

up their capital in innovation, and have no spare liquidity in a crisis, is also present in Shleifer

and Vishny (2010). In that model, intermediaries had to co-invest with outsiders to keep

some “skin in the game.” Here the mechanism is different: profit maximizing intermediaries

need to commit their capital at t = 0 to provide insurance to investors, but doing so deprives

them of liquidity in a crisis.

        This analysis reinforces the message of the exchange model with respect to the role

played by the shifting demand for new securities in generating financial fragility. The

issuance “glut” fostered by investors’ demand for riskless claims creates the room for severe

price drops not only by inducing investors to recognize the claim as risky upon the arrival of

bad news, but also by reducing the liquidity of intermediaries and thus their ability to support

the new claim’s price. The initial boost in the issuance of the new securities, and their ex-post

price decline, are just two sides of the same coin.




                                                                                                 31
5. Welfare Analysis

         Section 2 showed that under rational expectations financial innovation is socially

beneficial: it boosts intermediaries’ profits while leaving investors’ welfare unchanged.12

With local thinking, the welfare analysis is more complex. From the viewpoint of agents’

beliefs at t = 0, financial innovation is beneficial, just as under rational expectations. However,

since agents’ initial beliefs are incorrect, this welfare level is illusory because it does not

account for the riskiness of new claims. Behavioural economists have long stressed that this

tension between reality and incorrect beliefs raises important conceptual issues for defining a

normative welfare metric. We do not aim to resolve these issues in this section.

         Instead we consider how the “false substitute” effect created by financial innovation

affects the average payoff realized by market participants, computed using the true

distribution of states (and signals) as of t=0. For brevity, we focus on the most interesting

                 L
case where               ( y r / y d ) . We also assume that in the exchange economy the new claim

receives its maximal price pB = θ∙R at t = 0, which facilitates the comparison between

exchange and production, as in the latter case it is also true that pB = θ∙R.



5.1 Welfare in the Pure Exchange Model

         Without financial innovation, the average welfare of investors as of t = 0 is trivially

equal to E(U) = w, while that of intermediaries to E(Π) = θ∙R + E(y), where U and Π denote

the utility of the investor and intermediary, respectively. To gauge the effect of financial

innovation, suppose for a moment that there is no trading at t = 1. Then the expected welfare

of investors as of t = 0 is equal to E(Uinn) = w – θ∙(yd – yr), that of intermediaries is equal to

E(Πinn) = θ∙R (1 + f L) + E(y) – (πg+ πd)yd – πryr. Relative to the no innovation case, investors


12
  In the model of Section 2 intermediaries obtain the full benefit of innovation because assumption A.2 ensures
that investors buy the new claim at their reservation price. If A.2 does not hold, the price of the new claim drops
below θ∙R, investors also benefit from innovation, and the creation of the new claim makes everybody better off.

                                                                                                                32
lose because they bear the risk of a recession and intermediaries gain because they sell more

overpriced safe claims at t = 0. Of course, the possibility of trading at t = 1 allows investors to

undo at least in part their original portfolio and thus to reduce their losses under innovation.


Lemma 4 With financial innovation, if σ = 0 investors lose θ∙(yd – yr) and intermediaries gain

θ∙yd – (πg+ πd)yd – πryr relative to the no innovation case. If instead σ = 1, investors lose

Pr( s )θ∙(yd – yr) + Pr( s )(θ – ωL)yd and intermediaries gain Pr( s ){θ∙yd –[πg( s )+πd( s )]yd –

πr( s )yr}+ Pr( s )(θ – ωL)yd relative to the no innovation case.


            Innovation benefits the intermediary by allowing it to sell more claims while it hurts

investors by enabling them to buy a claim that is more risky than they think. If intermediaries

do not carry wealth to t = 1 then – given that                      L
                                                                            ( yr / yd ) – the loss to investors is larger

than intermediaries’ gain because investors inefficiently bear risk in equilibrium.13 If in

contrast intermediaries carry wealth to t = 1 there is a net loss from innovation after s but

there is no “net loss” after s : by buying back the new claims, intermediaries allow investors

to increase current consumption, preventing them from bearing any future risk.

            This analysis illustrates that, besides creating market fragility, false substitutability

adds a countervailing cost to the standard “market completing” benefit of financial

innovation. Here the cost of innovation always dominates its benefits due to investors’

infinite risk aversion, but with more moderate preferences the net effect would be ambiguous.



5.2 Welfare in the Model with Production

            One key change in the production model is that because the intermediary does not

carry any wealth to t = 1, there is no trading at t = 1. With innovation, the welfare of


13
     This follows from the fact that (πg+ πd)yd + πryr > θ∙yr if and only if (πg+ πd) + πr( yr/yd) > θ∙( yr/yd), which
                       L                                                                                  L
always holds if            > θ∙( yr/yd) because (πg+ πd) + πr( yr/yd) > [πg(s)+πd(s)] + πr(s)( yr/yd) >       > θ∙( yr/yd).

                                                                                                                              33
investors as of t = 0 is equal to E(Uinn) = w – θ∙R∙ f LP [1 – (yr/yd)], where f LP= [wint + θ∙R – 1]

[yd / R (1 – θ∙yd)] is the volume of innovation occurring with production. Since the

intermediary invests all of its wealth in A, it carries no wealth to t = 1. As a consequence, in

the spirit of Lemma 4, investors lose f LPθ∙R [1 – (yr/yd)] from innovation.

        Consider now the intermediary’s welfare in the production model. Now innovation

and local thinking may induce the intermediary to undertake unprofitable investments.


Proposition 5 When ELy +(θ–1)yd >1, the intermediary innovates and two cases arise:

        1) If ELy < 1, the intermediary gains in the case of innovation if and only if:

                                 E(y) + {θ – [(πg+πd) + πr(yr/yd)]} ∙yd > 1.                    (23)

        2) If ELy ≥ 1, the intermediary gains in the case of innovation if and only if:

                                       θ E(y) > [(πg+πd) + πr(yr/yd)].                          (24)


        In the model with production, not only investors, but also intermediaries might lose

from financial innovation. As Equations (23) and (24) illustrate, intermediaries may lose

from innovation when the true expected return from activity A is sufficiently low that

manufacturing new claims is not profitable to begin with (not even by taking into account the

fact that these claims do not repay in full in a recession). Formally, this means that E(y) must

be sufficiently lower than 1. In this case, optimism about the profitability of the new claim at

t = 0 encourages the intermediary to over-invest in an unproductive activity, eventually

triggering a loss. The most interesting case in this respect occurs when ELy < 1. Now the

return to A is perceived to be sufficiently low that investment in A occurs only if new

securities can be engineered, so financial innovation bears sole responsibility for

unproductive investment.      The expansion in the supply of housing in the decade prior to

2007 might have been an example of such inefficient investment needed to meet the growing

demand for securitization of mortgages (Mian and Sufi 2009, Keys et al. 2010).



                                                                                                  34
       In sum, while under rational expectations financial innovation improves social

welfare by reducing the shortage of riskless claims, under local thinking it can reduce both

investors’ and even intermediaries’ welfare by distorting the allocation of risk and investment

in the economy.



6. Rational Intermediaries

       We have assumed so far that intermediaries and investors share the same incorrect

beliefs. We now show that the “false substitutes” effect holds even if the intermediaries hold

rational expectations. Rationality of the intermediaries introduces two changes into our

previous setting. First, the intermediaries evaluate returns correctly, which influences their

investment and issuance decisions. Second, intermediaries may try to profit from the possible

drop in prices of the new securities by carrying some liquid wealth to t = 1. This second

effect (emphasized by Diamond and Rajan 2010) may offset an intermediary’s incentive to

commit its wealth to the risky project so as to expand the supply of new claims.

       When deciding at t = 0 what volume f of new securities to issue, what amount of own

wealth iA to invest in A, and what amount of own wealth l to leave liquid for t = 1, a forward

looking intermediary solves:

            max                  R[(pB – 1)b+ iB] + [pBEy – (1 – πr)R – πr(yr/yd)R]∙f + Ey iA +
           b, a ,iA ,iB



                                          + wint – iB – iA + l∙Pr( s )(     rational
                                                                                       R   p N 1 )/ p N1     (25)


                          s.t.              iB + iA + l ≤ wint ,                                             (26)

                                            f ≤ iA [yd / (R – pB yd)],                                       (27)

                                            – (pB – 1)b ≤ iB ≤ 1 – pB b, 0 ≤ iA , 0 ≤ l                      (28)


       In the above program,               rational
                                                      denotes the new claim’s repayment expected by the

                                               rational
rational intermediary [formally,                          Pr( y    yd s ) Pr( yr s )( yr / yd ) ], which is always

                                                                                                               35
                                                                                  rational       L
higher than the repayment expected by a local thinker [i.e.                                  >       for all   r       0 ]. The

rational intermediary anticipates, in the second term of the objective function in (25), the

possibility that in a recession the new claim pays only (yr/yd)R. Additionally, the last term in

Equation (25) illustrates that the intermediary expects to obtain a capital gain of

     rational
(               R   p N 1 )/ p N1 by leaving some liquid wealth l for the event that the signal turns out

to be low, which occurs with ex ante probability Pr( s ).14

            As in Section 4, under A.5 the intermediary issues – for a given amount of capital iA

committed to A – the maximum possible amount of new claims at t = 0, implying that

constraint (27) is binding. Since the equilibrium price of riskless claims at t = 0 is still equal

to pB = θ∙R, the intermediary invests up to capacity in B and sets iB = – (θ∙R – 1). The new

choice that the rational intermediary must make is whether to invest his wealth wint + θ∙R – 1

into A so as to expand the supply of new claims at t = 0 or to store liquidity until t = 1 by

setting l > 0.         From objective (25) and constraint (27), it is easy to check that at the

equilibrium price pB = θ∙R the return the intermediary obtains from increasing iA is higher

than that from increasing l, so that it is optimal for the intermediary to set l = 0, provided:

                                                                                             rational
                                                     yd                                                 R   p N1
                      [θ Ey – (1 – πr) – πr(yr/yd)]      + Ey > Pr( s )                                            ,       (29)
                                                    1 yd                                             p N1

which can be rewritten as:

                                                                       rational
                                       g   ( yg        yd )                       R    p N1
                                                              Pr( s)                             .                         (30)
                                           1      yd                          p N1

            Even a rational intermediary invests all of its wealth in A when each unit invested in

the risky project generates a sufficiently large upside (which the intermediary keeps for

himself). The return from investing $1 in A is multiplied by the factor 1 /(1                                  y d ) , which

14
  One implicit restriction in the above problem is that at t = 1 the intermediary cannot issue deposits to investors
to buy the new claims. However, when the intermediary’s own liquidity at t = 1 is zero, the infinitely risk averse
investors are not wiling to lend more that their own valuation of these claims, which undermines the
intermediary’s ability to support the price of the new claim by borrowing ex-post.

                                                                                                                            36
captures the intermediary’s ability to profit by creating new claims from such investment,

realize a profit on them, to reinvest that profit in A to create more new claims and so on.

        Condition (30) is hardest to satisfy when the probability that the new claim defaults is

                                     rational
negligible (in the extreme when                      1 ) and the price of the new claim at t = 1 is the

lowest, namely when pN1 = θ∙(yr/yd)∙R. In this case, the rational intermediary invests all of its

wealth in A at t = 0 provided:

                                    g   ( yg         yd )             yd        yr
                                                            Pr( s )                  ,            (31)
                                        1       yd                         yr

which is satisfied for a broad range of parameter values. If Condition (31) does not hold,

then the intermediary restricts the supply of new claims up to the point where the capital gain

on the new claims is sufficiently small to use some but not all of his wealth to innovate, and

to transfer the rest to t = 1.



7. Discussion

        We have proposed a new approach to modeling financial markets, one that

emphasizes the central role of the neglect of low probability risks in accounting for the nature

of financial innovation and financial fragility. We have motivated the model using several

examples in which the neglect of risks appears important, including the recent financial crisis.

In conclusion, it might be useful to return to the crisis, and to explain some of the ways in

which our model offers a novel perspective on the events.

        We would argue that both the sharp decline in home prices and the sensitivity of the

prices of some AAA-rated securities to home prices and mortgage defaults came as a

substantial surprise to the market in the summer of 2007. Indeed, one can date the beginning

of the financial crisis to July-August 2007, when the markets first recognized these risks.

During this short period, Bear Stearns liquidated two hedge funds investing in mortgage-


                                                                                                    37
backed securities, the French bank BNP-Paribas halted redemptions in three investment funds

supposedly investing in AAA-rated assets, the LIBOR-OIS spread exploded, and, perhaps

most tellingly, the asset-backed commercial paper market effectively collapsed.

Interestingly, bad news from the housing market and increases in risk premia on the risky (as

opposed to AAA) tranches on MBS all arrived months before, with no noticeable market

disruptions. It is only the realization that the debt which investors perceived to be completely

safe was actually risky that created extreme fragility.

       The sudden realization that AAA-rated securities were risky contributed to the freeze

of the asset based commercial paper (ABCP) market in the summer of 2007. In our model,

ABCP can be viewed as a loan collateralized by the senior tranch of the risky asset’s cash

flow. When this senior tranch is revealed to be more risky than originally thought, highly

risk averse investors are no longer willing to hold the ABCP. If the clientele for ABCP

consists largely of such highly risk averse investors, prices and issuance volume would fall

substantially as these investors withdraw from the market.

       We find it difficult to account for the crisis without incorporating the idea of a

substantial surprise. The leading alternative explanation of the events holds that financial

institutions speculated in AAA-rated securities using short term finance such as repo because

they counted on a government bailout (Acharya et al. 2010, Gorton and Metrick 2010). The

main argument in favor of this explanation is that banks and dealer banks themselves held

enormous positions in these securities and sustained huge losses, leading to eventual bailouts.

Since we believe that the banks have themselves neglected the risks of AAA-rated ABS and

CDO’s, we do not find their large exposure to these securities, for inventory reasons, as skin

in the game, or even as a speculative “carry trade”, to be inconsistent with our fundamental

perspective. We would also question the view that the banks were aware of the risks, and just

gambling on a bailout. After all, prior to the events of the summer of 2007, financial markets


                                                                                             38
universally perceived AAA-rated ABS and CDO’s to be safe, the banks’ credit default swaps

traded as if banks were totally safe, and banks provided repo financing to hedge funds using

ABS as collateral with very low haircuts. We would argue that both the banks and the

investors neglected the risks and were shocked by what happened: precisely the assumption

we explore in this paper.

       Our paper offers a distinct normative perspective on the recent financial crisis as well,

which may bear on some emerging policy proposals. Several economists, including Gorton

and Metrick (2010) and Stein (2010) recognize the creation of safe securities, particularly

short term ones, as an important function of the shadow banking system. In their view, the

creation of such “private money” is in itself desirable, but exposes the financial system to the

risks of financial meltdown due to socially excessive leverage. Desirable policies would thus

seek to preserve the creation of liquidity by the banking system, but control leverage or

improve mechanisms of reducing leverage and unwinding security holdings in distress.

       Our model, then, is in agreement with the widely accepted prescription that greater

capital and liquidity of financial intermediaries would lead to more stable markets (French et

al. 2010). However, our model goes further by questioning the idea that all creation of

private money by the banking system is necessarily desirable. We recognize the benefits of

private supply of safe securities, but also note that, at least in some cases, such securities owe

their very existence to neglected risks, and have proved to be false substitutes for the

traditional ones. False substitutes by themselves lead to financial instability, and may reduce

welfare, even without the effects of excessive leverage.

       The financial fragility discussed in our model would interact, perhaps dangerously,

with leverage. When investors or intermediaries perceive some securities to be safe, they

would borrow using them as collateral, often with very low haircuts (Shleifer and Vishny

2010, Stein 2010). The realization that these securities are actually risky would lead to their


                                                                                               39
sales by both investors and intermediaries trying to meet their collateral requirements, leading

to additional fragility from fire sales. The stronger is the ex ante belief that securities are

safe, the higher is the borrowing against them, and the more extreme the fire sales.         Sales

from unwinding levered positions and sales from disappointed expectations thus go in the

same direction. As discussed by Shleifer and Vishny (2010) and Stein (2010), depressed

security prices can have especially adverse welfare consequences ex post because they cut off

lending to new investment. A financial crisis leads to an economic crisis. We do not discuss

these welfare issues here because they have been analyzed elsewhere, but only emphasize the

reinforcing influence of leverage and misunderstood risks on fragility.

       If this perspective is correct, it suggests that recent policy proposals, while desirable

in terms of their intent to control leverage and fire sales, do not go far enough. It is not just

the leverage, but the scale of financial innovation and of creation of new claims itself, that

might require regulatory attention.      Such attention might be especially warranted when

investors buy securities through an intermediary who makes either an explicit or an implicit

guarantee backing them. Regulators may wish to require that intermediaries hold enough

capital to make good on those guarantees or else refrain from making them. This might be a

particularly significant issue when the safety of either securities or intermediaries is illusory.

       For example, the innovation of prime money market funds has arguably created much

instability by giving millions of investors the expectation of getting their money back on

demand at par, even though it is invested in securities that are far from riskless. Our model

suggests that it might be better to help investors form more realistic expectations by

mandating that these funds be marked to market. With more realistic expectations of net

asset value fluctuations, “breaking the buck” would no longer be a dramatic event that sparks

a run on these funds and creates financial fragility.




                                                                                                40
8. Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1. The proof is straightforward but illustrates the basic logic behind several
of our results. Given that Ey > θ∙yd, there exists no price pA ≥ Ey at which intermediaries are
willing to sell that also induces investors to buy. As a result, pA = Ey and each intermediary is
happy to hold its endowment of shares, i.e. a = 0. If pB < θ∙R, investors demand more than 1
unit of bonds [because by A2 w/θR >1] and – provided pB ≥ R – intermediaries are willing to
sell the full supply b =1. As a result, in equilibrium it must be that pB = θ∙R so that is optimal
for investors to buy exactly b = 1.


Proof of Lemma 2. The result directly follows from the proof of lemma 1, with only two
changes. First, the supply of bonds is now equal to b = 1 + yr/R, but A2 implies that investors
can absorb all of it at their reservation price, so in equilibrium pB = θ∙R. Second, pA = Ey-yd
and none of the risky claims are sold to investors (who value them zero).


Proof of Proposition 1. The result directly follows from the proof of lemma 1, with the only
changes of replacing yr with yd. Since the supply of bonds is now b = 1 + yd/R, if investors
can absorb it at their reservation price, namely if w/(θ∙R) ≥ 1 + yd/R, in equilibrium pB = θ∙R.
If this is not the case, i.e. if w < θ∙(R + yd), then investors spend all of their wealth to purchase
the bonds and pB = wR/(R+yd) > R.


Proof of Proposition 2. Consider the market’s reaction to a bad signal s. To begin, note that
the t = 1 equilibrium must have pB1 = θ∙R. To see why, suppose that pB1 < θ∙R (as we have
seen, pB1 > θ∙R is not an equilibrium because at this price investors sell their bonds but
intermediaries are not willing to buy them). At this price, investors want to purchase as many
bonds as possible provided pN1 > (yr /yd) pB1. This cannot be an equilibrium because
investors’ demand for bonds does not encounter any supply. Consider instead the case where
pN1 ≤ (yr /yd) pB1. Now the new claim is priced below investors’ valuation pN1 < (yr /yd)θ∙R.
This cannot however be an equilibrium because all investors demand the new claim (or some
of the bond as well) but nobody supplies it. As a result, it must be that pB1 = θ∙R.
        Consider now the market for the new claim. Given that pB1 = θ∙R, if pN1 < (yr /yd)θ∙R
all investors would demand the new claim at t = 1, which cannot be an equilibrium because
investors hold the total supply of it. As a consequence, in equilibrium it must be that pN1 ≥ (yr
/yd)θ∙R. If pN1 = (yr /yd)θ∙R investors are indifferent between holding and selling the claim; if


                                                                                                  41
pN1 > (yr /yd)θ∙R investors supply their total holdings f L. If ωL < (yr /yd)θ, the intermediary’s
valuation of the new claim is lower than investors’ valuation. As a result, the equilibrium
price is equal to pN1 = (yr /yd)θ∙R. If instead ωL > (yr /yd)θ, intermediaries are willing to buy at
least some of the claims from investors and the equilibrium price pN1 depends on the share σ
of t = 0 income carried by the intermediary to t = 1.
       The intermediary’s t = 0 income can take two values depending on whether the t=0
equilibrium falls in case 1) or 2) of proposition 1. If we are in case 1), namely θ∙(R+yr) < w <
θ∙(R+yd), the intermediary’s t = 0 income is equal to w. As a result, the intermediary’s wealth
at t = 1 (and thus the demand for the new claim) is equal to σ∙w. By equalizing supply and
demand for the new claim, one can easily find that the equilibrium price is equal to:
                                                                                                  L
                                               L                                                   yd
                                                   R            for       1
                                                                                                  w
                                               wR
                        p N ,1 ( )                              for       (           1   ,       1   ) ,                   (32)
                                               yd
                                                                                                  yr
                                       ( yr / yd )R             for           1
                                                                                                  w
Together with A2, equation (32) implies that pN1 ( )                   pB = wR/(R+yd).
       Consider case 2), namely w > θ∙(R+yd). The intermediaries’ t = 0 income is equal to
θ(R+yd). Now the intermediaries wealth at t = 1 is equal to σ∙θ(R+yd). By equalizing supply
and demand for the new claim one can easily find that the equilibrium price is now equal to:

                                           L                                                          L         yd
                                                R                for              2
                                                                                                              (R yd )
                                               (R        yd )
                  p N ,1 ( )           R                         for                          (       2   ,    2   )    ,   (33)
                                                    yd
                                                                                                              yr
                                     ( yr / yd ) R               for                          2
                                                                                                          R        yd

It is obvious that pN1 ( )     pB = θR.
       Consider next the comparative statics of the price drop (pB – pN1) with respect to yr and
yd. A higher yr increases pN1 both in cases 1) and 2), as one can readily see from Equations
(32) and (33). Indeed, a higher yr increases investors’ as well as intermediaries’ reservation
price, boosting pN1. Since pB does not depend on yr, this softens the price drop in both cases.
Consider the role of yd. It is easy to see that in Equations (32) and (33) a higher yd reduces pN1
by reducing both investors’ and intermediaries’ reservation prices. Thus, in case 2), which
prevails when yd < w/θ – R, a higher yd increases the price drop because here the initial price
pB does not change with yd. In case 1), in contrast, the initial price pB also falls in yd,

                                                                                                                             42
potentially allowing the price drop (pB – pN1) to fall with yd. Take the first derivative of (pB –
pN1) with respect to yd in each of the three ranges of σ in Equation (32). After some algebra
one can see that for each of these ranges there is a threshold ŷ d such that (pB – pN1) increases

in yd if an only if yd < ŷ d . Defining y d*                           max yˆ d , w /        R proves the proposition.


Proof of Corollary 1. Under rational expectations, Lemmas 1 and 2 imply that
Vi I , RE          R          yr       E( y      y r i ) and Vi RE        R    E ( y i ) , for i = 0, s, s . These formulas imply

V0I , RE         Vi I , RE         V0RE       Vi RE    E( y t     0) E ( y i ) for i = s, s .

             To consider local thinking, first note that in the absence of innovation we have
Vi I         R         E L ( y i ) , for i = 0, s, s . This implies that V0L                   Vi L       EL (y t    0) E L ( y i ) for i =

s, s . With innovation, consider first case 1) of Proposition 1, where the initial price of riskless
bonds and of new claims is pB = wR/(R+yd). Now Vi I , L                                             w EL (y         y d i ) for i = 0, s . If

instead i = s we have VsI , L                             R       yr     E L max 0, y         y d s . It is immediate to see that

V0I , L VsI , L               V0L VsL             EL (y t       0) E L ( y s) while:

   V0I , L       VsI , L           w      (w      yr ) E L ( y t        0) E L ( y s)         V0L     VsL     EL (y t        0) E L ( y s) .

             Consider case 2) of Proposition 1. Now pB = θR and Vi I , L                                        R       yd     EL (y    y d i)

for i = 0, s . If instead i = s, we have VsI , L                                  R      yr     E L max 0, y           y d s . Once more,

V0I , L VsI , L               V0L VsL             EL (y t       0) E L ( y s) while:

       V0I , L      VsI , L            ( yd     yr ) E L ( y t         0) E L ( y s)      V0L       VsL      EL (y t     0) E L ( y s) .

These inequalities prove Corollary 1.


Proof of Lemma 3. For investors to buy shares it must be that pA ≤ θ∙yd. By A4 this implies
that investors only buy shares if pA < 1. However, in objective (15) the intermediary issues
shares only if pA ≥ 1. As a consequence, in equilibrium the intermediary does not issue any
shares and pA ≤ 1. Since in equilibrium pB =θR ≥ R, the intermediary issues the maximal
amount b = 1 of bonds because these yield at least as much as the intermediary’s own
investment iB in B at the same unit investment cost. Thus, the intermediary withdraws from B
the profits from bond sales by setting iB = – (θR – 1). The intermediary then invests these
resources along with his wealth wint in A if and only if ELy ≥ 1. When ELy ≥ 1 the equilibrium
                                                                                                                                           43
price of shares is pA = 1 (if pA < 1 intermediaries would prefer to buy shares than to invest).
When ELy < 1 the equilibrium price of shares is ELy < pA < 1 (so that no investment occurs,
no shares are issued, and no shares are demanded).


Proof of Proposition 3. Assume for now that pB =θR; we later show that in equilibrium it
must be so. This has two consequences. First, under A5 it follows from objective (19) that
the intermediary issues the maximum volume of new claims so that (21) is binding. Second,
as in the proof of Lemma 3, the intermediary issues b = 1 bonds and sets iB = – (θR – 1). By
substituting pB =θR and constraint (21) into the intermediary’s objective (19), we see that up
to an additive constant the objective becomes:
                                        EL y (      1) y d   1
                                                                 iA .
                                             1     yd

As a result, when ELy + (θ – 1)yd < 1 the intermediary sets iA = 0 and does not create any new
claims. When instead ELy + (θ – 1)yd ≥ 1 the intermediary sets iA at its maximum wint+ (θR –
1) and issues new claims for the volume implied by Equation (21). It is easy to check that
given A4 this volume is sufficiently low (relative to investors’ wealth w) that the equilibrium
price for riskless bonds is effectively equal to pB =θR.


Proof of Proposition 4. The logic of the proof is identical to that of the proof of Proposition
2, except now the production structure pins down the intermediary’s wealth at t = 1 at σ = 0.


Proof of Lemma 4. If the intermediary carries no wealth at t = 1, namely σ = 0, there is no
trading at t=1. Suppose instead that the intermediary carries all of his wealth at t=1, namely σ
= 1. Then, after observing s there is no trading anyway, implying that E(Uinn| s ) = w – θ∙(yd –
yr) and E(Πinn| s ) = θ∙R (1 + f L) + E(y) – (πg+ πd)yd – πryr. After observing s , investors sell all
the new claims at pN1= ωL∙R so that they now obtain E(Uinn| s ) = w – (θ – ωL)R∙f L, while the

welfare of intermediaries (who buy the claims at t=1) is equal to E(Πinn| s ) = θ∙R (1 + f L) –
ωLR∙f L + E(y). If σ = 0 then, innovation allows intermediaries to gain θ∙yd – (πg+ πd)yd – πryr
and investors to lose. θ∙(yd – yr). If instead σ = 1, innovation allows intermediaries to gain on
average Pr( s ){θ∙yd –[πg( s )+πd( s )]yd – πr( s )yr}+ Pr( s )(θ – ωL)yd and investors to lose
Pr( s )θ∙(yd – yr) + Pr( s )(θ – ωL)yd if σ = 1.




                                                                                                   44
Proof of Proposition 5. By Lemma 3, without innovation the intermediary obtains E(Π) =
wint + θ∙R – 1 if ELy < 1 and E(Π) = E(y)∙[wint + θ∙R – 1] if ELy ≥ 1. By Proposition 3, the
intermediary innovates when ELy + (θ – 1) ∙yd > 1. In the latter case, in the allocation of
Proposition 3, the payoff obtained by the intermediary with innovation is on average equal to
                                              wint     R 1
E(Πinn) = {E(y) – [(πg+πd) + πr(yr/yd)]yd }                  . By comparing this expression with
                                                  1   yd
the previous two equations describing the intermediary’s welfare absent innovation, it is
immediate to find the conditions of Proposition 5.




                                                                                             45
                                        References


Acharya, Viral, Thomas Cooley, Matthew Richardson, and Ingo Walter. 2010.

       “Manufacturing Tail Risk: A Perspective on the Financial Crisis 2007-2009,”

       Foundations and Trends in Finance 4, forthcoming.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. 1994. Financial Innovation and Risk Sharing. Cambridge,

       MA: MIT Press.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2002. “Market Timing and Capital Structure.” Journal

       of Finance, 57(1): 1-32.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. “A Model of Investor

       Sentiment.” Journal of Financial Economics, 49(3), 307-343.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2008. “Collective Risk Management in a

       Flight to Quality Episode.” Journal of Finance, 63(5): 2195-2230.

Carroll, Michael, and Alyssa Lappen. 1994. “Mortgage-Backed Mayhem.” Institutional

       Investor, 28(7): 81-96.

Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Eric Stafford. 2009. “The Economics of Structured Finance.”

       Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 3-26.

Dekel, Eddie, Barton Lipman, and Aldo Rustichini. 1998. “Recent Developments in

       Modeling Unforeseen Contingencies.” European Economic Review, 42: 523-542.

Demarzo, Peter, and Darrell Duffie. 1999. “A Liquidity-based Model of Security Design.”

       Econometrica 67(1): 65-99.

Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan. 2009. “Fear of Fire Sales and the Credit Freeze.”

       NBER Working Paper No. 14925.

French, Kenneth et al. 2010. The Squam Lake Report. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. “What Comes to Mind.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, forthcoming.

                                                                                        46
Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane Sherlund, and Paul Willen. 2008. “Making

       Sense of the Subprime Crisis.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 69-145.

Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick. 2010. “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo.”

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15223.

Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi. 1990.            “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity

       Creation.” Journal of Finance 45(1): 49-71.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy Stein. 2010. “A Gap-Filling Theory of

       Corporate Debt Maturity Choice.” Journal of Finance, 65(3): 993-1028.

Henderson, Brian, and Neil Pearson. 2010. “The Dark Side of Financial Innovation.” Journal

       of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Jarrow, Robert, Li Li, Mark Mesler, and Donald van Deventer. 2007. “CDO Valuation: Fact

       and Fiction.” Kamakura Corporation Paper.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Philipp Schnabl. 2010. “When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial

       Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009.” Journal of Economics Perspectives,

       24(1): 29-50.

Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2010. “Did Securitization

       Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 125(1): 307-362.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion:

       Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       124(4): 1449-1498.

Pozsar, Zoltan, Tobias Adrian, and Adam Ashcraft. 2010. “Shadow Banking.” Working

       Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Rajan, Raghuram. 2006. “Has Finance Made the World Riskier?” European Financial

       Management, 12(4): 499-533.


                                                                                         47
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of

       Financial Folly. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Ross, Stephen. 1976. “Options and Efficiency.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(1): 75-

       89.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1992. “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A

       Market Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance, 47, 1343-66.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1997. “The Limits of Arbitrage.” Journal of Finance,

       52(1): 35-55.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 2010. “Unstable Banking.” Journal of Financial

       Economics, 97(3): 306-318.

Stein, Jeremy. 2010. “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation.” Harvard

       University working paper.




                                                                                      48
