NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING THE EFFECTS OF LARGE SCALE HEALTH INTERVENTIONS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
THE ZAMBIAN MALARIA INITIATIVE
Nava Ashraf
Günther Fink
David N. Weil
Working Paper 16069
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16069

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

We are extremely grateful to David Fiocco and Richard Sedlmayr, who did all the field work required
to assemble the data. We are also grateful to Dr. Elizabeth Chizema, Pascalina Chanda, Henry Kansembe,
and Dr. Victor Mukonka of the Ministry of Health, to Busiku Hamainza and the National Malaria
Control Programme as a whole, and to John Miller of Malaria Control and Evaluation Partnership
Africa (MACEPA). Primary funding for this project came from the NBER Project on African Development
Successes. Additional funding for data workshops in Zambia was provided by MACEPA, Malaria
Consortium, World Bank, and the Zambia Ministry of Health. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Nava Ashraf, Günther Fink, and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating the Effects of Large Scale Health Interventions in Developing Countries: The Zambian
Malaria Initiative
Nava Ashraf, Günther Fink, and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 16069
June 2010
JEL No. I18
ABSTRACT
Since 2003, Zambia has been engaged in a large-scale, centrally coordinated national anti-Malaria
campaign which has become a model in sub-Saharan Africa. This paper aims at quantifying the individual
and macro level benefits of this campaign, which involved mass distribution of insecticide treated
mosquito nets, intermittent preventive treatment for pregnant women, indoor residual spraying, rapid
diagnostic tests, and artemisinin-based combination therapy. We discuss the timing and regional coverage
of the program, and critically review the available health and program rollout data. To estimate the
health benefits associated with the program rollout, we use both population based morbidity measures
from the Demographic and Health Surveys and health facility based mortality data as reported in the
national Health Management Information System. While we find rather robust correlations between
the rollout of bed nets and subsequent improvements in our health measures, the link between regional
spraying and individual level health appears rather weak in the data.

Nava Ashraf
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 443
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
nashraf@hbs.edu
Günther Fink
Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Global Health and Population
665 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
gfink@hsph.harvard.edu

David N. Weil
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
david_weil@brown.edu

1.

Introduction

The National Malaria Control Program (NMCP) of Zambia is one of Africa’s largest
malaria prevention and treatment initiatives. In 2005, the NMCP set the goal of achieving a 75%
reduction in malaria incidence and a 20% decrease in under-five mortality within five years
through a combination of insecticide treated nets, indoor residual spraying, and deployment of
rapid diagnostic tests and front-line combination therapy drugs. The total 2008 malaria
prevention and control budget, including in-kind contributions, was estimated at $59.8 million1,
including significant aid from the Global Fund to Fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the World Bank, the World
Health Organization (WHO), and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (through the Malaria
Control and Evaluation Partnership in Africa—MACEPA).
Figure 1 tells the story of the program’s success according to data in Zambia’s national
health statistics system, the Health Management Information System (HMIS), which we discuss
in detail in the next section. The annual number of malaria deaths in the country decreased by at
least half over the period 2000-2008, during which population rose by 30%, implying a reduction
in the death rate of over 60%. As will be seen below, the number of inpatient visits for malaria
declined by a comparable magnitude, implying a reduction in morbidity as well as mortality.
Evidence from the 2001 and 2007 waves of the Demographic and Health Survey
confirms the picture painted by the HMIS. The percentage of children under five reported with a
fever over the two weeks preceding the interview dropped from 44.6% in 2001 to 17.9% in 2007,
a reduction of close to 60%. (As a comparison, the fraction of children suffering from diarrhea
fell by only a quarter, from 41.9% to 31.8%, over the same time period.) The progress made in
all-cause child mortality between the two surveys is remarkable: The under-five mortality rate
fell from 168 per thousand live births in 2001 to 119 in 2007. As discussed below, the latter
figure may not even reflect the full mortality reduction to date. This decline was not solely the
result of the malaria initiative, however, since other health campaigns were taking place at the
same time.
There are different ways to quantify the magnitude of Zambia’s recent success in health
improvement. The reduction in under-five mortality represents approximately 25,000 children’s
lives saved per year. To compare the mortality improvement with more “economic” outcomes,
we can do a back of the envelope calculation using the Human Development Index (HDI), which
weighs economic and non-economic characteristics into an overall measure of quality of life.
Using the formula for the HDI, one can calculate the amount of income growth that would be
equivalent to a particular rise in life expectancy at birth. A conservative estimate, using just the
1

Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2008 National Malaria Control Action Plan: Actions for Scale-up for
Impact on Malaria in Zambia. Lusaka. All money figures are in US dollars.

2

data on under-five mortality, is that life expectancy at birth in Zambia rose by 2.25 years over the
period 2000-2007.2 Plugging this into the HDI formula shows that an equivalent rise in HDI
would be achieved if income per capita grew by 25%.3
In the research program of which this paper is a part, we study the Zambian malaria
initiative with three broad goals. First, we want to systematize and improve the quality of
available data on both inputs to malaria control in Zambia and the outcomes of the malaria
control program. As will be seen below, much of the available data were not easily interpretable
before we began our efforts, so that the review and consolidation of existing data sources became
a substantial part of this research endeavor. The second goal of the project is to use the available
data from Zambia to examine the causal relationship between inputs into malaria control and
health outcomes. Much of the monitoring of the campaign’s progress has focused solely on the
input and implementation side, with outcome measures such as the number of bed nets
distributed or houses sprayed. Jointly analyzing data on inputs and health outcomes allows for
some measurement of how well the program is doing in achieving its stated overall health goal,
and possibly also for inference about cost-effectiveness. Finally, our third goal (which we do not
advance in the current paper) is to use the experience of the current malaria campaign in Zambia
to understand the economic effects of malaria and of its control.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss our data sources
regarding both health outcomes and inputs into malaria control. A good deal of our effort in this
project has gone into improving the quality of the data in the Zambia’s HMIS, an administrative
record system that has the potential to yield richly detailed data, but is also subject to a number
of problems. We discuss the HMIS data, how we have tried to help improve it, and the picture of
changing malaria impact painted in this improved data. Section 3 describes the background to
and scope of the current malaria initiative. Section 4 presents data on how the different
components of the initiative have been rolled out, focusing in variation among different regions.
In Section 5, we attempt to assess the link between data on the rollout – that is, inputs to reduced
malaria – and data on improvements in malaria mortality and morbidity, using both the HMIS
and the Zambian Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). Section 6 concludes by discussing
avenues for future research and also the challenge of sustaining the progress made in Zambia
over time.

2

This is based on multiplying a one in twenty reduction in under five mortality by 2000 life expectancy at birth,
which was approximately 45 years.

3

The HDI is the sum of three terms, two of which are

and

,

, where e0 is life expectancy at

birth and y is real GDP per capita. The change in income that has the same impact on HDI as a particular change in
life expectancy is given by the equation ∆ ln

,

Δe .

3

2.

Data on Malaria and Other Health Outcomes

In this paper we rely on two data sources: first, the 2001 and 2007 waves of the
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), and second, the Zambian Health Management
Information System (HMIS).4
2.1

DHS data

Our first source of data are the 2001 and 2007 waves of the Zambian Demographic and
Health Survey (ZDHS). For our analysis, we use the children recode files, which contain
detailed information on all children under age 5 at the date of the interview as well as a complete
list of household and respondent characteristics. We have 13,219 child observations, 6,877 from
2001, and 6,342 from 2007.
To link the DHS households to the NMCC’s rollout data, we used ArcGIS to map DHS
cluster locations into the respective districts. All 72 districts were covered in the 2001 survey; 70
out of 72 were covered in 2007.
2.2

HMIS data

The national Health Management Information System (HMIS) captures an impressive
amount of routine health data. The database was first introduced in 1995 to collect disease data,
service delivery information, and clinic operations reports. It provides data on health outcomes
in the vast majority of Zambia’s health facilities. These range in size from hospitals (located in
60 of the 72 districts in Zambia) to small health posts staffed by a single nurse or community
health worker.5
The database has recently been subject to major technical revisions, resulting in a system
with a monthly reporting structure and new management software that captures additional
indicators, including separate measures for confirmed and unconfirmed malaria cases. Officially
the new HMIS became the primary reporting system beginning January 2009. Most districts
transitioned into the new system by reporting in both formats for some part of 2008. Using
historical data however, the analysis presented in this paper is based on files from the “old”
HMIS. The following description relates to this original system.
4

A third potential source of data is the Malaria Indicators Survey (MIS) conducted in 2006 and 2008. The MIS
collects data on household uptake of anti malarial measures (such as use of bed nets and IRS) and health outcomes
such as child sickness. However, this data was not available for our use at the time of this writing.

5

Lusaka’s referral hospitals are not included in the HMIS in order to prevent redundancy; theoretically, every
person seen in such a hospital should have already been recorded at another hospital or health center.

4

Traditionally, health data were passed from each of the reporting health facilities to the
respective district office (72), and then passed on from the district to the regional offices (9 in
Zambia). The facilities kept both hard copy patient logs and tally sheets that track clinic
functions. At the end of each quarter, facilities reported their summary data to district offices.
District health information officers were charged with collecting the reports from each health
facility and compiling district reports. They were responsible for ensuring all health facilities had
reported, as well as cleaning each facility’s data.
Provincial data management specialists collected data from the districts and compiled a
provincial data set disaggregated at the facility level. Before forwarding the data on to the
national level, the provincial officers once again cleaned the data and verified it for
completeness. The provincial data sets were compiled into a unified national data set at the
Ministry of Health’s headquarters. This data set remained disaggregated at the facility level.
Given the multi-level reporting system, the potential for error was relatively large in the
original system, and the quality of health facility data was dependent on staff and their
commitment to record keeping. Some health facilities had been meticulous about their record
keeping, plotting their health outcomes manually and discussing them in meetings. Others had
not been able to keep records in conjunction with patient visits, or had delegated reporting
requirements to semi-literate staff. In some cases, tally sheets were only updated on a monthly
basis and figures estimated when regular reporting was limited.
The transfer from health facility paper records to electronic district summaries was also
error-prone. The original HMIS database had no built-in consistency checks for disease data,
and data were entered only once, without systematic data verification6
Quarterly updates from districts to provinces were then processed centrally, with only the
most recent quarter received from the provinces appended to previous data. However, even
after initial submission deadlines, data staff at sub-national levels continued to work on
assembling missing data and auditing reports. As a result, changes subsequently made at the
district or province level were lost in the national data set. When data were cleaned at the district
and provincial levels, revised data sets were not returned to the original sources of the data.
Consequently, major inconsistencies existed between the data sets at different levels of the health
system.

6

The data verification and cleaning exercises by officers at the district and provincial levels did not follow
systematic guidelines, and the quality of these activities depended heavily on their training. In addition, as the task
division followed geographical boundaries, workloads were split very unevenly: some district officers were
responsible for less than ten facilities, others for more than forty.

5

Improvement of the HMIS
Ultimately, the HMIS is the only source of consistent national health data. Selected
surveys (especially the Demographic and Health Surveys and the Malaria Indicator Surveys)
provide more accurate snapshots of malaria levels in select districts at given times, but only the
HMIS allows for detailed, localized analysis of malaria levels over time. With this in mind, a
major goal of this project was to improve and validate the HMIS data as much as possible.
To facilitate this data improvement goal, the project team conceptualized a series of
malaria data verification workshops; in collaboration with the National Malaria Control Centre
one HMIS workshop was organized in each of Zambia’s nine provinces. In preparation for
these workshops, we systematically scanned HMIS data for outliers and suspicious data points
(duplicate figures, significant variance between quarters or years, reporting inconsistencies).
District health officials were asked to find missing reports and justify all irregular data ahead of
the workshops. This data audit served as one of the final updates of health data from 2000 to
2008, ahead of its transition into the new HMIS system.7
The workshops also provided an opportunity to reconcile incomplete or mismatching data
on malaria prevention and treatment campaigns at the district level. Districts were asked to visit
each health facility in an attempt to capture all malaria interventions within the facility’s
catchment area by government and non-government partners. District pharmacists provided
distribution data on treatment courses and diagnostic tests at local health facilities, while
environmental health technicians provided data on IRS activities. During the workshops, these
data were pooled with health outcomes, presented, and discussed by the district staff.
Subsequently, it could be used by the project team to plausibility-check the national data sets.
In total, the nine provincial workshops were conducted at a total cost of approximately
$200,000. Funding was provided by the Malaria Consortium and MACEPA, as well as the
National Malaria Control Centre with support from a World Bank Grant. The workshops brought
together a diverse array of district health personnel, including district information officers,
malaria focal point persons, and district directors of health. Provincial and national health
officers also attended each workshop. In total, over 250 attendees were trained in various aspects
of data collection, cleaning, and analysis.

7

These resulting changes sometimes had major implications for national level trends. For instance, in the
uncorrected HMIS, under-five malaria deaths rose from 3,342 in 2006 to 3,783 in 2007. These figures were
reported in the 2008 World Malaria Report, among other places. The workshops showed that the reported increase
was due to three districts with erroneous figures. In the fully corrected HMIS, under-five malaria deaths fell from
3,235 in 2006 to 2,680 in 2007.

6

The workshops resulted in a more complete, correct, and consistent HMIS database for
the years 2000 through 2008, as outlined in Table 1. In terms of completeness, the original
national-level HMIS files that we received ahead of the workshops had 3,318 records marked as
missing (out of a total of approximately 45,000 facility quarterly reports that should have been
present). Over the course of the malaria data verification workshops, 1,901 missing quarterly
reports could be retrieved. Also, data were added on 28 facilities that had no HMIS records
altogether, bringing the total number of facilities in the system to 1,501. Reviewing apparent
data entry errors ahead of the workshops allowed district staff to conduct major revisions.
Finally, the most recent versions of the district’s HMIS databases were disseminated to the
national level, thereby ensuring consistent insights for both local and central decision-making.
While the workshops resulted in a higher quality HMIS data set, they also built local
capacity through several days of training to on how to compile and analyze integrated health
databases. Participants were encouraged to challenge each other’s presentations, and lively
debates were common. In many cases, these workshops provided the first opportunity for district
medical officers to use data to consider the effects of interventions they had implemented and
create strategic plans for future interventions. Data analysis capabilities empower local staff and
generate decentralized interest in accurate and complete data; thiswas considered a promising
approach by the Ministry of Health and its partners, andfollow-up workshops have since been
initiated in several provinces.
2.2.1

Remaining Issues in the HMIS Data

Diagnosis and Access to Health Facilities
The number of malaria cases that are reported in HMIS is potentially biased by several
factors that cannot be readily uncovered in the data. The first issue is inconsistencies in
diagnostic practices over time. The HMIS is supposed to report all outpatient and inpatient visits,
broken down by diagnosis. The problem is that the way in which malaria is diagnosed has
changed over the period we examine. Because of both lack of diagnostic technology and
differential treatment guidelines, a majority of fevers in Zambia were traditionally classified (and
treated) as malaria. As discussed in further detail below, the rollout of the national anti-malaria
initiative has included the massive deployment of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) to health centers,
in order to economize on malaria treatment and properly treat non-malaria fevers. The
deployment of RDTs would have led to a reduction in diagnosed cases of malaria even if there
was no true change in disease prevalence, as well as an increased diagnosis of other conditions,
such as respiratory tract infections. Since the method of diagnosis is not tracked in the original
HMIS, quantifying the magnitude of this “diagnostic effect” is not straightforward.

7

Another bias from diagnosis concerns HIV/AIDS. With HIV/AIDS highly stigmatized,
anecdotal reports from the clinics suggest that a considerable fraction of HIV deaths were
officially classified as malaria mortality. Given the large inflow of foreign funding for HIV
treatment over the last five years, HIV mortality has fallen substantially, which may have
contributed to the officially recorded declines in malaria mortality.
Another issue is that the accessibility of the health system changed over time. This is
most dramatically shown in outpatient data for adults in rural facilities. A large increase in this
variable is recorded in 2006, which can likely be attributed to the abolition of user fees in rural
health clinics in the same year. Prior to 2006, all public-sector patients were expected to pay
nominal fees for consultations, diagnostic tests and some drugs supplied in government clinics.
In 2006, all consultation and diagnostic fees were removed for patients living in designated rural
areas. It is likely that prior to the elimination of user fees, many would-be outpatients had
resorted to self-treatment.
To minimize the bias from such contextual factors, we focus on severe cases –
specifically, inpatient malaria cases, reported malaria deaths, and reported total deaths. In the
HMIS, diagnostic codes for inpatients are entered only at the time of discharge or death. We
think that even prior to the abolition of user fees or the advent of RDTs, severe cases would have
received inpatient treatment and would have been correctly diagnosed most of the time (prior to
the advent of RDTs, malaria diagnoses could be confirmed using microscopy at many clinics and
hospitals treating severe malaria).
Extent of HMIS Coverage
A potential worry about the HMIS is that it only measures cases that enter the
government’s health system. To the extent that this is a small fraction of total cases, one would
worry both that it is non-representative and, more seriously, that the fraction of cases captured by
the HMIS varies over time. In the latter case, the use of the HMIS to measure trends in disease
prevalence would be seriously compromised.
One way to measure the fraction of cases that the HMIS captures is to focus on deaths,
because in this case there is the possibility to use other data sources as a benchmark. Figure 2
shows the under-five death rate (annual deaths of children under five in the HMIS per 1,000
children; population data are estimates from Ministry of Health). The data for the full sample
show a relatively steady decline from 8.46 in 2000 to 5.05 in 2007, followed by a precipitous
decline to 3.26 in 2008. This last figure may represent incomplete reporting for 2008. In the
high quality sample (where we use only consistently reporting facilities as discussed below), the
trend from 2000-2007 is roughly similar, but the decline in 2008 is smaller, suggesting that
increasing under-reporting might indeed be an issue for the aggregate 2008 data.
8

We can compare the count of deaths in the HMIS to both the DHS and to other mortality
estimates. Most estimates of child mortality are expressed in terms of deaths before age five per
1,000 live births. To convert the HMIS data to this metric, we simply multiply the number of
under 5 deaths per 1000 by five (this is a slight over-estimate because the number of children
declines with age due to population growth and mortality.) Thus in the HMIS data, the child
mortality rate was approximately 42.3 per 1,000 children under 5 in 2000, and 25.3 in 2007;
deaths declined by 40.2%. In the DHS, deaths per thousand live births were calculated at 168 in
2001-2 and 119 in 2007, implying a decline of 29%. 8 Other published estimates of child
mortality show numbers similar to the DHS for 2000, but do not show the same decline as
observed in the HMIS and DHS. For example, WHO World Health Statistics 2009 lists the
under five mortality rate for Zambia as 178 in 2000 and 170 in 2007. It is not clear what the
source for these numbers is, although other WHO publications rely on the DHS estimate for the
year 2000. We suspect that the lack of decline in these published figures reflects non-availability
of data, rather than information from an alternative source.
Using either the DHS or WHO number for 2000 as a benchmark implies that the HMIS in
that year is capturing between a fifth and a quarter of deaths under age five. In terms of the
change between 2000 and 2007, the HMIS shows a larger decline than the DHS, although in both
cases the magnitude is impressive. Further, it is important to note that the DHS measures underfive mortality by looking at the experience of all children born in the last five years. Thus the
number from the 2007 DHS includes children born in 2003, whose early life (when mortality is
highest) was not impacted by the malaria initiative. Thus it is expected that the decline in the
HMIS would be larger. If instead of using the HMIS death rate in 2007, we use the average
death rate from 2003-2007, then the decline in under-five mortality in the HMIS is 29%, exactly
matching the DHS.
The low representation of total deaths in the HMIS suggests several possible biases.
Presumably the fraction of disease episodes and deaths that reach a clinic or hospital is higher in
urban regions than in remote, rural areas.9 Since malaria is higher in rural regions, this suggests
that malaria deaths are understated in the HMIS data. Regarding the change in malaria
prevalence as a result of the anti-malaria initiative, sorting out the bias is more difficult. On the
one hand, the intensity of the program was probably highest in the same areas (places with health
facilities nearby) that are overrepresented in the HMIS. This might suggest that the HMIS data
would overstate the impact of the program. On the other hand, areas that were near clinics,
8

Zambia DHS Final Report, March 2009, http://www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pdf/FR211/FR211[revised-05-122009].pdf

9

In 2005, 36.5% of the population lived in urban areas (though presumably a smaller fraction of the under-five
population).

9

especially cities, were likely relatively better served and had lower malaria impact prior to the
initiative. Thus the HMIS data may be underweighting places where the largest scope for
impacting malaria incidence.
To further investigate the bias from undercounting in the HMIS, Figure 3 compares
under- five mortality by province in the DHS and HMIS. The data from the DHS are the underfive mortality rates for 2007. From the HMIS, we take under-five deaths in 2007, divided by an
estimate of under-five population, then multiplied by five to make a figure consistent with the
DHS measure. The extent to which the ratio of HMIS to DHS deaths differs among provinces is
quite surprising. At the high end, in the Copperbelt province, HMIS deaths are 32% of those
implied by the DHS. At the low end, in Lusaka, deaths in the HMIS are only 6% of those
implied by the DHS. The explanation for the low fraction of deaths recorded in the HMIS in
Lusaka is that the city’s two major hospitals are not included in the HMIS since they are
considered referral hospitals and not primary health facilities. However, most critical patients in
the Lusaka area would end up in one of the referral hospitals. Theoretically, all patients are
supposed to be seen at another health center prior to admission to these hospitals, and the
hospital is supposed to report back to the referring center with the patient’s outcome for entry
into the HMIS. The available data suggests that the final treatment outcomes at the referral
centers do not make it back into the referring center’s HMIS records.
To check whether undercounting in the HMIS might bias conclusions regarding changes
in malaria over time, Figure 4 compares the province-level change in under-five mortality in the
DHS between 2001 and 2007 with the change in deaths in the HMIS per 1,000 children under
five. The fit is relatively good (correlation 0.76). This gives us confidence that changes in the
HMIS reflect actual changes in malaria mortality and morbidity.
Non-reporting facilities
A final concern with the corrected HMIS is the potential confusion between health
facilities that have no cases to report and cases where data are actually missing. Upon
conclusion of the malaria data verification workshops, the HMIS had data on 1,501 health
facilities reporting at some point between 2000 and 2008. Each quarterly record has number of
in- and outpatients under and over age five, as well as the number of deaths for up to 59 diseases
– the total number of diseases recorded in the HMIS is 71. About 20% of reporting health
facilities deal only with outpatients. Many of the remaining facilities have incomplete reporting.
To make sure our results are not affected by differences in reporting, we construct a high quality
sample consisting of 253 large hospitals with at least one patient reported in each quarter
between 2000 and 2008 – a sample of 9108 quarter-year observation at the hospital level. To the
extent that missing entries represent true zeros (no report because there was no malaria), this
10

sample will lead to an underestimate of the true effects, as hospitals with few malaria patients
might discontinue reporting malaria due to the observed declines.
Table 2 shows data on inpatient visits and deaths broken into age groups (under-5 and
5+), separately for malaria and for all non-malaria conditions. We show the data both for all
facilities, and for the set of “always reporting” facilities. The table shows that, as discussed
below, the decline in malaria prevalence has come at the same time as a dramatic improvement
in health more generally, due primarily to massive scale up of HIV treatment and child health
programs.
Another notable feature is that among the group of all facilities, there is an apparently
discontinuous drop in both in-patient visits and mortality, both for malaria and other conditions,
in the year 2008. Among the always-reporting facilities, there is a smaller drop in malaria cases
and deaths as well as in non-malaria conditions. It is possible that this is due to reporting
problems in non-always-reporting facilities. There is a particular drop off in the number of
facilities providing non-zero reports in the last two quarters of 2008. We believe this is due to
both the switch over to the new HMIS and to delays in facility reports reaching Lusaka. For
these reasons, we assign little credence to the all-facilities drop in mortality in 2008.
In Figure 5 we look at an alternative to the always reporting facilities. We construct a
chain index by looking for every pair of adjacent years at the full set of facilities that report in
both years. The overall story told in this data is not very different from the always reporting
facilities. From 2000 to 2008, under-five malaria deaths fall by 66% and deaths of people aged
five and above fall by 59%. The figure also shows a spike in over-five outpatients diagnosed
with malaria in 2006, a phenomenon that may be associated with the abolition of user fees, as
discussed above.
As a final, very conservative way to look at the decline in malaria, we examine the ratio
of malaria deaths to non-malaria deaths in Figure 6. We do this for different age groups and for
both all facilities and the always-reporting facilities. If there were no actual improvement in
non-malaria health outcomes, and the decline in non-malaria mortality in the HMIS reflected
only reporting problems, then this measure would nonetheless correctly measure the decline in
malaria mortality. As the figure shows, the ratio of malaria to non-malaria mortality fell by
between 1/3 and ½ over this period.
2.2.2

Seasonality in the HMIS

As a check on the quality of the data in the HMIS, and also to exploit some of its
richness, we look at seasonal variation in the malaria incidence. Table 3 shows the results of a
basic regression with quarterly under 5 mortality as dependent variable with quarter and year
11

fixed effects.10 Figure 7 plots the coefficients on the quarter dummies for both total mortality
and malaria mortality. The seasonal fluctuations are strong, and are consistent with Zambia’s
climate, as discussed below. With an average under-5 death rate of 1.75 per 1000, a negative
coefficient of -0.7 in quarter three implies that the death burden in the best quarter is only about
60% of the death burden in the worst quarter (quarter 1). These seasonal fluctuations are even
more pronounced for malaria. Overall, about half of the seasonal fluctuation in under-five
mortality is driven by malaria.
In columns 2 and 4 of Table 3, we divide the sample in the middle and estimate quarter
dummies separately for the two halves. Figure 8 shows the interacted quarter dummies for
malaria mortality while Figure 9 shows the quarter dummies for all-cause mortality. What we
find is that the seasonality of both has gone down. Indeed, the coefficients show that the decline
in seasonality in malaria deaths (a change in .227 deaths per thousand in the worst quarter
relative to the best) is more than 2/3 of the decline in the seasonality of total deaths (.317 deaths
per thousand in the worst quarter relative to the best). Malaria accounted for approximately 29%
of under-five deaths over the entire sample period, so the large share of malaria in the decline in
seasonality is not simply a reflection of the overall decline in the death rate.
3.

Origins and Scope of the Zambia Malaria Control Program

Zambia is a land-locked country in Southern Africa with three distinct seasons: a hot, dry
season from late August to October; a warm, rainy season from approximately November to
April; and a cool, dry season stretching from May to early August. In the cool season
temperatures can be as low as 10 degrees Celsius11, with both the lack of rain and the cool
temperatures hindering mosquito reproduction; as such, reported cases of malaria are the lowest
during the third quarter of the year. Traditionally malaria transmission is highest in the first and
fourth quarters, peaking in March towards the end of the warm, rainy season. The swampy
Luapula Province in Zambia’s North remains the region’s hotspot, though malaria is traditionally
endemic throughout the country.
As discussed in Packard (2007), the malaria situation in Zambia prior to the current
campaign was rather critical from a recent history perspective. Annual malaria incidence rose
from 121 per 1,000 in 1976 to 376 per 1,000 in 2000. Among the factors that contributed to this
deterioration were Zambia’s role as a front-line state in the struggle against apartheid,
international constraints on the use of DDT, and the country’s broader economic decline (GDP
10

Note that this is deaths in a quarter divided by the under five population, so its mean is one-quarter of the underfive death rate reported in Table 2/Figure 1.
11

Data provided by the Zambian Meteorological Department.

12

per capita at PPP rose from $954 at independence in 1964 to $1,235 in 1970 and peaked at
$1,474 in 1976. It then declined, reaching a nadir of $829 in 1995 before rising to $946 in
2003.12) Zambia’s malaria control program had relied extensively on Indoor Residual Spraying,
but by 1990 spraying had ceased altogether. In addition, resistance to chloroquine started to
emerge rapidly across the country.
The beginning of the current anti-malaria initiative was a result of a confluence of factors
both in Zambia and elsewhere in the world. In particular, the development of new technologies
and a new alignment of priorities within the development community led to a desire to undertake
a demonstration case showing the possibility of rapidly scaled up malaria control. Resources
would be concentrated on a single country with the goal of producing a tangible success, which
would then serve as a model for neighboring countries. Zambia was chosen as the test case
because it was perceived as having the institutional capacity and political will to successfully
undertake such a program and also because its climate made it all the more likely that success
could be accomplished.
3.1

Elements of program

Zambia’s integrated malaria control program is one of the world’s largest national
treatment and prevention plans. The program is led by the National Malaria Control Centre
(NMCC), a sub-division of the Department of Public Health and Research within Zambia’s
Ministry of Health. The national secretariat is responsible for overall program administration
throughout the country and disburses funds to districts on a programmatic basis. The NMCC
works in partnership with Medical Stores (a quasi-private national distribution program for all
drugs and medical supplies in the public sector) to ensure that each district and referral hospital
receives adequate supplies of drugs and diagnostic tools. Seventy-two District Medical Offices
(previously “District Health Offices”) directly implement most national malaria prevention and
treatment programs. The districts are grouped into nine provinces, each with a Provincial Health
Office responsible for supervising district health programs.
The program is funded by a collaboration between the Government of Zambia and
national as well as international partners. From its own revenues and various support lines, the
Government of Zambia budgeted $25.4 million for the Department of Public Health’s Malaria
Control & Management activities in 2008.13 This amounted to 61% of the department’s budget.
12

Penn World Tables, version 6.2. Variable RGPCH in year 2000 constant international dollars. GDP per capita
rose a further 16 percent in total from 2003 to 2007 (World Development Indicators database), on the back of
soaring copper prices. The price of copper fell by 60% in the year to February 2009, suggesting that Zambia will
be particularly hard hit in the current world slowdown.

13

Government of Zambia. Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure: Activity-Based Budget 2008. Lusaka.

13

The total 2008 malaria prevention and control budget, including in-kind contributions from nongovernmental institutions, was estimated at $59.8 million,14 though actual contributions may not
have always matched pledges or projections.
The largest component of the 2008 budget was the provision of insecticide-treated
mosquito nets (ITNs). The $32.0 million allocated to this activity accounted for 54% of the
NMCP’s overall 2008 budget, although budget allocations did not always match actual
expenditure, sometimes due to donors failing to deliver on their commitments. For example, in
2008, the government budgeted for 3.5 million nets but ended up distributing only about one
million; only 1/6 of the Ministry of Health funds budgeted for nets in Lusaka, Copperbelt, and
Central provinces were actually expended.
Of all the malaria prevention modalities of the program, bed nets suffer from the greatest
problem in terms of a mismatch between distribution and effectiveness. The standard guideline
is that every person living in a household not sprayed with indoor residual spraying should sleep
under a bed net. However, utilization remains well below the 85% target. Some report sleeping
under a bed net to be uncomfortably hot or claustrophobic, while others report irritation to the
chemical treatments. There are also frequent reports of people not using nets at all, sometimes
keeping them packaged as a sign of wealth or using them for other purposes (such as wedding
veils and fishing nets), but there has been no systematic study to measure full utilization levels.
The other primary preventive intervention, indoor residual spraying (IRS), was carried
out in 36 of Zambia’s 72 districts in 200815, targeting primarily urban and peri-urban areas with
relatively high population densities. Its projected cost was $8.6 million in 2008.
Treatment is another major component of the national malaria control program. The
NMCC’s strategic plan targets achieving “Prompt and Effective Case Management” (PECM),
with a goal of ensuring that at least 80% of malaria patients receive effective treatment within 24
hours of the onset of symptoms. After noting decreasing efficacy of Sulphadoxine/
pyrimenthamine (SP) and chloroquine, Zambia became one of the first countries to introduce
artemisinin-based combination therapy (specifically artemether plus lumefantrine, with the brand
name Coartem®). ACTs, free in the public sector, became the first-line treatment for all malaria
cases during the 2002-2003 malaria transmission season, but it wasn’t until the 2005-2006
season that the drug reached all districts in the country. Until 2007 the country faced continuing
challenges to retain national stocks. The national supply stabilized in 2007; since that time there
14

Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2008 National Malaria Control Action Plan: Actions for Scale-up for
Impact on Malaria in Zambia. Lusaka.
15

As described in further detail below, IRS spraying was originally only targeted to a handful of urban areas across
the country and only slowly scaled up over time.

14

have not been complete national stock-out periods, though logistical challenges in distribution to
the provinces, districts and health facilities still remain (Sipilanyambe et al. 2008).
The total allocation for PECM in 2008 was $11.1 million, approximately 19% of the total
program budget. Of this money, $2.6 million was designated for malaria diagnostics, primarily
for the purchase of 2 million rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). The procurement of 3.8 million
courses of Coartem® was the largest component of the case management budget, costing $5.3
million (note that Coartem® is heavily subsidized by its manufacturer, Novartis).
In the public sector, national treatment guidelines dictate Coartem® as the first line of
treatment, with quinine (available in tablets and intravenously) reserved for those who fail to
respond to Coartem®. Chloroquine and Fansidar® (a combination of Pyrimethamine and
Sulphadoxine) are no longer to be used for malaria treatment in the public sector, though
Fansidar® remains the indicated preventive treatment given to pregnant mothers. In practice,
however, Fansidar® is often used as a first or second line treatment for patients, especially for
those who have negative malaria test results.
When ACTs were introduced in 2003, the high initial cost of the drug prompted an effort
to improve diagnostics to control the drug prescriptions. In addition to promoting the increased
availability of microscopes and trained laboratory technicians, rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs)
were first purchased in 2004 for facilities where microscopes were unavailable. RDTs are
simple testing devices allowing malaria diagnosis by a health worker with limited training in just
fifteen minutes. Global production of RDT kits rose from roughly 3 million in the year 2000 to
28 million units in 2005 (Frost and Reich, 2008).
There is an important interaction between availability of RDTs and use of ACTs. When
RDTs are not available, there is a strong tendency for health workers to treat all fevers as malaria
(as it was previously suggested by the WHO), and dispense ACTs accordingly. When RDTs are
present, a significant fraction of fevers are determined not to be malaria. Until 2007, the national
Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) guidelines dictated that all children under
5 with fevers were to be presumptively treated for malaria. National malaria policy guidelines
revised in 2008 state that it is against national policy to dispense Coartem® to any patient
weighing more than 5kg (about 3 months old) without a confirmed malaria diagnosis through
RDT or microscope. However, reaching compliance among clinicians with this remains one of
the biggest challenges in the national program. A 2007 study found that of 58.4% of patients
with a negative blood smear and 35.5% of those with a negative RDT result were prescribed an
antimalarial drug (Hamer et al. 2007). 2008 performance assessments at health facilities reveal
that some centers are still not using RDTs at all. Unlike Coartem®, which is on a “push” system
and comes to the clinic whether they request it or not, RDTs are on a “pull” system and need to
15

be requested. Data compiled at our malaria workshops shows that the availability of RDTs is
associated with greatly lower reported cases of malaria and lower use of ACTs.
The wholesale price of RDT is about $.70, and for ACTs is roughly in the same range
(Frost and Reich, 2008). Even though these prices would seem to say that there is no point in
using RDTs before dispensing ACTs in order to save on costs, the public health benefits of not
overusing ACTs are enormous, since restricting use will prevent the development of resistance.
In addition, ruling out malaria allows for better management of negative cases.
Smaller components of the 2008 budget included: Information, Education,
Communication/ Behavior Change Communication (IEC/BCC), and Advocacy ($2.2 million),
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) ($2.2 million), Operations Research ($986,178), Emergency
and Epidemic Malaria Preparedness Plan ($982,000), and Entomological Activities ($800,400).
$877,507 was allocated for program management at the national secretariat.
A 2008 health facility census recorded 1,554 health facilities, including public, private
and church-run health centers. Two thirds of these facilities are located in Zambia’s rural areas.
There are 98 referral hospitals in the country.16 All districts have an active cadre of lay
community health workers (CHWs) who supplement permanent health centers. However, the
level of care CHWs can provide varies widely by district. A current Home Management of
Malaria initiative (HMM) seeks to train CHWs to administer rapid diagnostic tests and provide
artemisinin-based combination treatment to patients at their homes; the program is currently
being scaled up, but continues to face logistical difficulties in providing drugs and supplies to all
trained volunteers.
3.2

Non-malaria changes in the Zambian Health

As mentioned above, the anti-malaria initiative was not the only change in the Zambian
health environment over the period we examine. During the period 2003-06 there were a series
of other health programs occurring, mostly in HIV, tuberculosis, and child health. In addition,
the reduction in malaria may have led to decreases in other diseases either through reduced comorbidity or through the freeing up of resources within the health care system.
In 2004, funds from the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR)
began arriving in Zambia. According the US Embassy, PEPFAR funds in Zambia were $149
million in 2006, which was spent on prevention, treatment, and care. One targeted area for
spending was prevention of mother-to-child transmission, which has the potential to sharply
reduce child mortality.
16

Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. Health Facilities in Zambia: A Listing of Health Facilities According
to Level and Location for 2008. Lusaka: February 2008.

16

While the efforts to combat child mortality by reducing tuberculosis and the transmission
of HIV to children have undoubtedly contributed to the declines in child mortality observed, the
interactions between these two diseases and malaria are hard to pin down. One of the main
effects of childhood exposure to malaria is anemia, which makes children more vulnerable to
other diseases such as tuberculosis and diarrhea. The same could clearly be said the other way
around: progress made in terms of diarrheal diseases or tuberculosis means healthier children
with better immune systems.
4.

Rollout of the program

4.1

National Data

Table 4 shows the rollout of the three key pieces of the malaria prevention program:
ITNs, IRS, and RDTs.17 The table shows the degree to which the program accelerated in 2006
and 2007. Half a million nets were distributed in 2003, but only 176,082 in 2004 (the low
number has been attributed to foreign donors failing to provide them that year). The number
returned to half a million in 2005, then 1.2 million in 2006 and 2.4 million in 2007.18 As
discussed above, the decline in bed net distribution in 2008 was not planned as of the beginning
of that year. There were to have been 3.5 million nets distributed. Starting in early 2007, all bed
nets distributed were Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLITNs), which according to the
WHO and NMCC can last for multiple washes and several years (beyond their expected lifetime
of three years) without insecticide retreatment.
In the initial design of the malaria initiative, IRS was to be restricted to only areas of very
high population density. The scope of IRS was expanded in discrete jumps through 2008 (see
Figure 10). The number of households increased dramatically (almost ten-fold) between 2004
and 2008. By the latter year, roughly 43% of the population was covered by spraying. IRS is
generally conducted at the end of the calendar year, before the onset of the rainy season when
malaria is high. IRS must be re-applied each year.

17

National Malaria Control and Scaling Up for Impact: The Zambia Experience through 2006

Richard W. Steketee, Naawa Sipilanyambe, John Chimumbwa, James J. Banda, Abdirahman Mohamed, John
Miller, Suprotik Basu, Simon K. Miti, and Carlos C. Campbell
18

NMCC and WHO say any Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Net are effective if distributed in the last 3 years.
Earlier nets given that were not treated lasted for shorter periods of time, but some retreatment kits were distributed
for those nets.

17

The shift in strategy toward increased reliance on IRS was driven by two factors: first, it
is seen as more cost effective. Second, reports of low utilization of bed nets were perceived as a
major problem. IRS, once applied, does not require active uptake by the household.
The last column of Table 4 shows the rapid growth of RDT use, which only happened at
the very end of our sample period.
According to the 2007 DHS, 91% of women in urban areas and 84% rural took some
form of anti-malarial treatment during their last pregnancy and 68% (61% rural ) received IPT
during an ante-natal visit. On average 38% of women used IPT in the 2001 DHS.
4.2

Regional variation in the rollout

The fundamental strategy of the anti-malaria initiative was to push distribution and use of
bed nets in high-malaria, rural areas. Initially, IRS was targeted only at urban areas; later the
scope of IRS was expanded to include half the districts in the country.
4.2.1

ITNs

The NMCC goal is to ensure that 100% of households in non IRS-targeted areas have at
least one mosquito net for every two people, with utilization rates of at least 85%. Insecticidetreated mosquito nets are distributed by the NMCC directly and through a number of partners to
specific populations. Programs target mothers and infants, vulnerable populations (orphans,
economically deprived populations, HIV+/AIDS patients), and the general public through
commercial and subsidized sales, targeted distributions and free mass community distributions.
Table 5 compares the DHS and NMCC database at the provincial level. The first two columns
are based on NMCC data on the number of nets distributed (total and per capita) by province.
The 2001 DHS finished collecting data in May 2002, while the 2007 DHS began collecting data
in April of that year. The number of nets in the table is the total from quarter 3 of 2002 through
quarter 1 of 2007. The next three columns use data from the 2001 and 2007 waves of the DHS
on the fraction of children under five living in a house with at least one bed net. It is not clear
whether one would expect a bigger correlation between bed net distribution and the level of bed
net ownership in 2007 or the change in bed net ownership between 2001 and 2007. In any case,
both correlations are high: .73 and .62, respectively. The last three columns show data on
whether the child slept under a bed net. Overall, bed net use more than doubled over this period,
reaching 43%. Across provinces, the correlation between the change in bed net ownership and
the change in bed net use is .72. The correlation between bed net distribution 2002-07 and the
level of bed net use in 2007 is .63, while the correlation between bed net distribution and the
change in bed net use is .57.

18

4.2.2

Indoor Residual Spraying

Table 6 compares data from the DHS and the NMCC on IRS by district. We use data
spraying in 2006 (before the rainy season), which was the last spraying before the 2007 DHS.
The table also shows urbanization rates from the 2000 census. The nine provinces fall into three
groups. Four provinces, all with very low rates of urbanization, had no official spraying, and
fewer than 5% of households report having received spraying.19 In three provinces, official data
show 9-16% of households sprayed, and DHS data report roughly commensurate coverage.
Finally, the two most highly urbanized provinces were targeted for intensive spraying:
Copperbelt (63% of households) and Lusaka (73%). In both provinces there is a significant
shortfall between official estimates and the DHS. This is particularly severe in Lusaka, where
only 29% of children in the 2007 DHS reportedly lived in sprayed structures. Figure 10 shows
the rollout of spraying at the district level. The initial 5 districts targeted in 2003 were Kabwe,
Kitwe, Livingstone, Lusaka and Ndola. These are urban areas, where little net distribution was
happening at the time, and where spraying was considered a relatively economical option due to
the relatively high population densities. The first scale-up came in 2005, with spraying extended
to Chililabombwe, Chingola, Kalulushi, Luanshya, Mufulira, Chongwe, Kafue, Solwezi,
Kazungula, and Mazabuka. In general, spraying was targeted to urban areas where health
facilities reported high levels of malaria incidence, so that spraying is often concentrated around
the health facilities reporting to the NMCC via the HMIS.
5.

Assessing the Link from Rollout to Incidence

Ideally, we would like to be able to use data on inputs to better health (that is, preventive
measures or disease treatments) and health outcomes in order to learn the efficacy of different
inputs. Such an endeavor faces obvious problems with identification. Clearly, the timing and
spatial distribution of health interventions are not random. Different modalities are used in
different locations because health planners make optimizing choices of what will work best in a
given area. Similarly, the provision of resources may respond to perceived needs. For example,
extra resources may be pushed to areas where health conditions have deteriorated or are forecast
to deteriorate in the future. Finally, the efficiency with which health resources are provided may
be correlated with other factors that directly affect health. For example, a district with an
especially competent public health staff may be able to obtain additional resources, but may also
have had a lower rate of disease incidence even in the absence of these additional resources ( in
the field we noted that that drug supplies, record keeping and quality, take-up of new treatment
guidelines and drugs, and involvement of community health volunteers and neighborhood health
19

There was private sector spraying being done in some districts that did not overlap with government spraying until
potentially 2008. The main private sector spraying without government involvement was in areas where there were
small mines of various minerals (for example, Mumbwa District).

19

committees were all highly dependent on the performance of health staff at all levels of the
system, and that the level of performance varied significantly). Given these program allocation
mechanisms, we are only able to identify the causal effect of health interventions to the extent
that there is some (measureable) randomness to the pattern by which such interventions are
applied.
If there is statistical power to identify the effects of inputs to better health on health
outcomes, it will generally only be in cases where these inputs deviate from the optimal plan or
when inputs respond to conditions in some non-continuous fashion.
Since we do not have a formal model of optimizing choice of treatments, it is not possible
to formally specify deviation from that optimal plan and use these. In this paper, we focus on the
presentation and discussion of observed correlations between the rollout of different malaria
control modalities and available health outcomes.
5.1

Bed Nets

In addition to the other statistical problems discussed above, assessment of the link from
ITN distribution to health outcomes is complicated by the facts that ITNs have limited effective
lifetimes, and that the length of time over which they remain effective has been changing.
5.1.1

ITNs in the DHS

The first measure of malaria we use in the DHS is a binary indicator that equals one if the
child had a fever over the two weeks preceding the interview. The data are pooled from the 2001
and 2007 waves of the DHS; the unit of observation is a child under age five. We include
dummies for individual years of age and a dummy for being in the 2007 wave. In addition, all
specifications control for district fixed effects, sex, mother’s age, mother’s age squared, mother’s
education, mother’s marital status, mother’s employment status, urban, female household head,
number of household members and household assets (electricity, radio, television, refrigerator,
and bicycle).
In the first two columns of Table 7, we use indicators for whether a household owns a
bed net, and for whether the child slept under a bed net the previous night as measures of input to
malaria control, respectively. In both cases, we do not think that the estimated coefficient can be
interpreted structurally, because both ownership and use of the bed net are affected by disease
conditions and other household characteristics related to health outcomes. In the third column,
we use bed net distribution per capita as recorded by the NMCC in the district in the period
between the two DHS surveys as the independent variable. The variable is zero for all 2001
observations. The coefficient is quite significant, and implies that a distribution of one net per
20

person in the district (100% coverage) lowers fever prevalence by about 20 percentage points. In
column 4 we instrument for household ownership with per-capita distribution in the household’s
district (the first stage is reported in Table 8).
In columns 5 and 6 we do a placebo test, using diarrhea in the two weeks preceding the
interview as a dependent variable; we use OLS in column 5 and apply the same IV strategy used
in column 4 in column 6. Diarrhea is an important health outcome, but reductions in prevalence
should not be related to bed net distribution. The bed nets have no significant effect.
One concern with the results in Table 7 is that, as mentioned above, the distribution of
nets is not random. Since all the regressions include district fixed effects, the fact that more nets
are distributed in districts with permanently higher malaria is not a concern. However if nets are
distributed in response to temporary changes in malaria prevalence, our results could be biased.
For example, suppose that nets are targeted to districts experiencing temporarily high malaria
prevalence. In this case, our estimate would be biased to show nets being more effective than
they really are. To attempt to remove this bias, in Table 9 we control for baseline fever
prevalence, that is, regress the change in fever between the two DHS surveys on bed net
coverage as well as the fraction of children with fevers in the two weeks prior to the 2001 DHS
survey. The coefficient on baseline prevalence is slightly less than one, indicating a moderate
degree of convergence over time. The coefficient on bed net distribution per capita falls by
roughly half but remains significant while the coefficient on household bed nets becomes
insignificant.
Finally, in Table 10 we aggregate to the level of districts and do a regression in first
differences. The dependent variable is the change in fever prevalence between the two waves of
the DHS. The measure of malaria control is the change in bed net ownership, in column 1, and
ITN distribution in the five years prior to the survey in the other columns. The results look very
similar to the individual level regressions. In particular the effect of ITN rollout falls by about
half once we control for baseline fever prevalence, but remains significant.
In Table 11 we look at child mortality data in the DHS for evidence of the effects of
ITNs. As in Tables 7 and 9, we report in columns 1 and 2 results in which the independent
variable of interest is whether the household owns a bed net and whether children slept under a
bed net the previous night. (Note that this latter variable applies the household in which the child
was born, not the child him/herself. We cannot use the child specific use variable here since it is
missing for all the deceased children). We do not interpret these estimates structurally, since
there are biases that go in both directions: households that care more (or know more) about their
children’s health are more likely to have their children sleep under a bed net, which would yield
an overestimate of the true effect. On the other hand, one might also expect some learning from
the parents’ side: parents who have lost one child to malaria in the last five years might be more
21

likely to make their remaining children sleep under a net than parents who have not lost a child
which would yield a selection bias going in the opposite direction. In column 3, we use district
ITN coverage as the explanatory variable. The coefficient is borderline significant, but of a large
magnitude (-.044). It implies that a full coverage with bed nets (one net per capita) in the years
prior to the surveys lowers child mortality by 4.4 percentage points from an average baseline
level of 12.7 in the 2001 survey.
One concern with the mortality regressions is that mortality covers the whole 5 years
prior to the survey, while all the household level information we have (ownership and use of bed
nets, assets etc) relates to the time of the survey. When restricting the analysis to the three years
prior to the survey, similar results emerge; with a 1 year restriction, the sample becomes too
small for identification. One last interesting finding is the negative estimate on female. This
matches raw DHS data: under five mortality in 2007 was estimated at 151 for males and 124 for
females.
5.1.2

ITNs in the HMIS

Using the HMIS, we can take advantage of much higher frequency data on disease
impact and more carefully explore time variations in the program rollout relative to the DHS
data. Table 12 presents descriptive statistics for our panel of HMIS data. We match malaria
inpatients, malaria deaths, and non-malaria deaths, all for children under five, with data on net
distribution. Since program rollout data is available only at the district level, we aggregate the
facility-based HMIS data at the same level.
Table 13 shows regressions of health outcomes in a district on net distribution in the
same calendar year as well as the two preceding years. The top part of the table looks at absolute
numbers of cases and nets distributed; in the bottom part, cases are normalized by the under-five
population, and nets are normalized by district population. Because malaria incidence peaks in
the first quarter of the year, while nets are distributed throughout the year, our expectation is that
the greatest impact on disease in a year should be net distribution in the previous year. Table 13
shows that this expectation holds true. The coefficient on net distribution in the previous year is
always negative and significant as a predictor of malaria cases; nets in the current year are not.
Interestingly, nets distributed two years earlier are also often insignificant as a predictor of
malaria cases.
The interpretation of the coefficient on once-lagged nets in columns 2 and 3 of the top
panel is as follows: 100,000 nets distributed lead to a reduction of about 900 under-five malaria
inpatients and to a reduction of 25 child deaths reported at health facilities in the average district.
Recall that the HMIS records only about one fourth of deaths. If we assume that the reduction in
22

HMIS mortality in the regressions is only 25% of the true benefit, 100,000 nets mean
approximately 100 child lives saved.
The lower part of the table, where cases and nets are scaled by population, yields
estimates similar in magnitude. Full coverage of bed nets (one per person) leads lowers malaria
inpatients by 26 cases per 1000, which is a reduction of 35% relative to the mean. Similarly, full
bed net coverage lowers malaria deaths per 1000 by a factor of 0.8, which corresponds to a
reduction of 42% relative to the mean.
5.2

Indoor Residual Spraying

The manner in which IRS was rolled out suggests that it might be a good candidate for
econometrically identifying the effects of the program on disease outcomes. In the initial design
of the malaria initiative, IRS was to be restricted to only areas of very high population density.
The scope of IRS was expanded in discrete jumps in 2008. Further, unlike bed nets, IRS must be
re-applied each year to be effective. IRS is generally conducted at the end of the calendar year,
before the onset of the rainy season when malaria is high.
5.2.1

IRS in the DHS

Table 14 shows regressions of child fever on spraying, similar to the regressions for bed
nets reported in Table 7. When spraying is included alone on the right hand side, the estimated
coefficient is positive, implying that districts that were sprayed in 2007 had a worse time trend
for malaria (i.e. slower decline in malaria over time) than those that were not sprayed in that
year. This result is driven by a strong negative correlation between the initial fever burden and
the rollout of the spraying. By the time of the 2007 DHS, spraying was done in 15 districts,
which on average had a fever prevalence of 37% in 2001, significantly below the national
average of 45% in that year. In 2007, the average fever prevalence in the spraying target areas
was actually slightly above the non-spraying areas. This result looks the same when we run the
regressions at the individual level (households reporting whether or not they have been sprayed
over the 12 months preceding the interview) as shown in column 2.
To minimize the potential convergence bias we focus on the 2007 survey only in columns
3 and 4. In column 3, we use spraying at the household level only; in column 4, we take the
fraction of households sprayed within the cluster (typically 15 households with children per
cluster) as explanatory variable. The coefficient becomes negative, but is not significant. Within
a given district, targeted households and clusters appear to have similar fever prevalence rates to
non-targeted ones.

23

We are not quite sure what to make out of this result; if the numbers are correct, it could
either be that spraying misses its target (people get infected outside, or spraying is done before
the rain and then washed away), or, alternatively, that households that don’t get spraying have
lower risk or more actively engage in other unobserved preventive measures.
5.2.2

IRS in the HMIS

As with the ITN analysis, the use of the HMIS has the main advantage of offering higher
frequency data when it comes to evaluating the disease impact of the IRS spraying. Given that
spraying loses its protective effect within about a year, close to all spraying in Zambia arranged
through the NMCP is done in the last quarter of the each year when the rains start and mosquito
populations rapidly re-emerge after the dry season. Under ideal conditions, IRS spraying is
supposed to protect household members throughout the rainy seasons, and to be repeated at the
end of each year with the new rainfalls.
In Table 15 A, we try to identify the effects of IRS spraying on the levels of malaria
inpatients, malaria deaths and deaths due to other causes with a simple IRS spraying target
dummy. The IRS target dummy variable equals 1 if the district was in the spraying program in a
given year, and is zero otherwise. As Figure 10 shows, the rollout of the IRS implemented by
the NMCP spraying was incremental; any district enrolled in the program since 2003 has been
receiving spraying in all subsequent years. In columns 1-3, we regress health outcomes on
spraying without controlling for the contemporaneous net distribution. The effects of IRS
spraying on malaria inpatients and malaria deaths are negative, but only marginally significant.
The estimated coefficient in column 2 implies that being a target district is associated with 22.5
fewer malaria deaths per year and district. Once we add controls for bed net rollout in columns 46, the estimated effects on the number of under-5 malaria inpatients and deaths become larger
and more significant. A simple comparison of the estimated coefficients in column 5 implies that
the effect of becoming a target for spraying is comparable to the distribution of 100,000 nets in
the preceding year in the average district.
The results become much weaker, however, when we express patients and mortality
numbers in population terms, and regress disease burden per capita on per capita measures of bed
net and spraying rollout in Table 15 B. While the coefficient on bed net distribution remains
highly significant (and similar in magnitude to the ITN regressions where we do not control for
spraying), the spraying coverage does not appear to have any effect on the number of malaria
patients per 1,000 children under 5 in this specification. The estimated effect on under-5 malaria
deaths (column 5) is just shy of significance. The relative magnitude of the coefficients
estimated in column 5 implies that providing full spraying coverage has about half the effect of
providing full net coverage.
24

Overall, the estimated effects of the IRS campaign in the HMIS are surprisingly weak
given the design of the spraying rollout. As Figure 11 illustrates, the IRS campaign is generally
directly focused around health facilities. Trying to maximize the impact of the campaign,
programs generally concentrate their efforts to the (catchment) areas directly surrounding
facilities reporting a high malaria caseload in the given period. Given the stochasticity of local
malaria incidence, particularly high incidence years in a particular area are likely to be followed
by more moderate years, so that the simple difference-in-difference model estimated above
should lead to an overestimation of the true effect. The fact that the effects are weak even in the
HMIS is thus rather puzzling, but in our view consistent with the rather weak evidence on
spraying emerging from the DHS analysis.
6.

Conclusions

6.1

Future directions for research

As mentioned in the Introduction, the current paper is part of a larger project in which the
authors hope to use the Zambia malaria initiative to better understand the economic effects of
malaria. It is worth stepping back for a moment to see why the Zambian experience is
particularly useful in this regard. Discussion in the policy community regarding the relative
priority of improving health in developing countries often points to the economic benefits
accruing from better health as an important secondary justification complementary to the direct
humanitarian and health benefits associated with related programs. The question of how disease
affects economic growth is well established in the literature. Much of the discussion of the
economic effects of malaria among policy makers, for example, cites estimates from the work of
Gallup and Sachs (2001). Trying to estimate the effect of health on economic outcomes runs
into serious identification problems, however. Omitted factors that affect health may affect
income directly, or health may respond directly to improvements in income. The standard
solution for such an identification problem is to find instrumental variables that directly affect
health. These instruments could be some purely exogenous factor or possibly the result of some
discontinuous response of health inputs to local conditions. For example, Acemoglu and
Johnson (2007) use variations in technological progress in controlling different diseases during
the post World War II period to instrument for health changes at the national level. Even though
malaria is viewed as one of the most economically important diseases, most recent studies of its
economic effects have had to rely on data from episodes of malaria eradication in South Asia and
Latin America that took place half a century ago (see Lucas (2010), and Bleakley (2007)). As
discussed above, the large scaling up of resources devoted to malaria control in Zambia was not
primarily the result of factors on the ground in the country itself. Rather, developments on the
world stage, including the development of new technology and a new alignment of priorities
within the development community, led to Zambia being chosen as a test case for the possibility
of rapidly scaled up malaria control. Thus, at the aggregate level, the timing of the reduction in
25

malaria in Zambia may be viewed as largely exogenous. Of course, Zambia was chosen as the
first country to receive such intensive support and treatment because it was viewed as having the
institutional capacity to succeed, and the same factors that were expected to lead to success
against malaria might have been expected to have independent economic effects, so the
identification is not perfect. Nonetheless, the suddenness with which resources were applied
suggests that reasonable identification may be possible. Beyond the inferences that can be drawn
from developments at the national level, our hope is that additional identification can be
achieved by looking at the manner in which the campaign against malaria was rolled out within
Zambia.
Some of the issues that we hope to investigate in later work include:
Fertility
A substantial literature discusses the link between changes in mortality and changes in
fertility. In particular, it is often argued that declining infant and child mortality initially leads to
a rise in the net rate of reproduction, as actual deaths fall short of expectations, but that in the
long run the total fertility rate (TFR) and net rate of reproduction decline because of reduced
uncertainty. In the case of malaria, there is an additional set of considerations, because the
disease works to lower fecundity directly (Lucas, 2010). Figures from the DHS early release
show that TFR in Zambia rose from 5.9 to 6.2 over the period 2002-2007 (6.9 to 7.5 in rural
areas, while urban TFR was flat at 4.0). The period between DHS surveys corresponds well to
the period of rollout of the malaria program.
Productivity
One way in which malaria affects economic outcomes is by directly lowering the labor
input of workers, both through absenteeism and reduced physical capacity due to anemia. There
are some cases where we hope to observe directly the productivity effects of malaria control.
We are working on obtaining data from Zambia Sugar, the country’s largest producer, which is
located in the Mazabuka district. Zambia Sugar undertook a private eradication effort that
predated the national effort by several years. Malaria morbidity has traditionally been quite high
among cane cutters, who must work in swampy conditions. We hope to obtain data on changes
in absenteeism over time (this data was actually collected once already, but was subsequently
lost).

26

Education
Many economists have stressed malaria’s effect on educational attainment as an
important channel through which the disease affects economic outcomes. By matching data
from Zambia’s educational statistics system on grade progress, and dropout rates to data on the
rollout of the anti-malaria initiative, we hope to investigate how much health improvements have
lead to an increase in educational attainment.
6.2

Sustainability and Further Progress

One issue raised by progress so far is whether it will be possible to finish the job, and
reduce malaria incidence to near zero. The history of anti-malaria campaigns in the years after
World War II contains several episodes in which malaria was substantially eliminated.
Eradication is also the NMCC's eventual goal, even if it isn't possible in the short term. There are
currently some discussions on pilot projects in a few districts to do a massive test and treat
campaign to reduce parasitemia to near zero. Zambia was chosen as a test country for scale-up
for multiple reasons: reason—one important reason was that the institutional capacity, good
governance, and political will existed to make use of the resources. However, it is also the case
that the climate is favorable to eventual complete eradication because of the cold winters that
ensure mosquito populations are reduced to near-zero for at least some period annually.
Until malaria is completely eliminated in the country, however, a serious concern remains
regardingthe sustainability of gains achieved so far. As discussed above, Zambia has already
been through an episode in which significant progress against malaria was followed by a
resurgence of the disease. Similarly, in Zambia’s neighbor Zimbabwe, malaria was almost
completely eradicated, but the political environment led to the end of an effective malaria control
regime and the disease has subsequently returned to epidemic levels. In the current Zambian
environment, disease vectors remain present and a significant number of humans continue to host
the disease. This means that unlike places where eradication has been complete, there is always
the potential for a rapid resurgence, which could be all the more devastating as cohorts with
lower acquired immunity age through the population. Maintaining the low current level of
malaria mortality and morbidity will thus require continued application of inputs at near the
current level. The life-span of a bed net averages three years if properly treated, so maintaining
a ratio of one net for every two persons will require the distribution of approximately 2 million
nets per year. Indoor spraying must be repeated annually. Thus there will be only limited scope
for a reduction in spending and effort devoted to malaria control.

27

References
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010. Malaria eradication in the Americas: A retrospective analysis of childhood
exposure. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2 (2) : 1-45.
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. Disease and development: Evidence from hookworm eradication in the
American South. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1) : 73-117.
Chanda, Pascalina, Felix Masiye, Bona M. Chitah, Naawa Sipilanyambe, Moonga Hawela,
Patrick Banda and Tuoyo Okorosobo. 2007. A cost-effectiveness analysis of artemetherlumefantrine for treatment of uncomplicated malaria in Zambia. Malaria Journal, 6 (21).
Gallup, John L. and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 2001. The economic burden of malaria. American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 64(1, 2)S: 85–96.
Government of Zambia, Central Statistical Office, et al. Zambia Demographic and Health
Survey 2001-2002 Lusaka: February 2003.
Government of Zambia, Central Statistical Office, et al. 2009. Zambia Demographic and Health
Survey
2007.
Lusaka.
Available
online:
http://www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pdf/FR211/FR211[revised-05-12-2009].pdf.
Government of Zambia, Central Statistical office. 2003. 2000 Census of Population and
Housing. Lusaka. Available online: http://www.zamstats.gov.zm/media/sum_rpt.pdf .
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2008 National Malaria Control Action Plan:
Actions for Scale-up for Impact on Malaria in Zambia. Lusaka. Available online:
http://nmcc.org.zm/files/2008ZambiaNMCPActionPlan-5-20.pdf .
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2007 National Malaria Control Action Plan:
Actions for Scale-up for Impact on Malaria in Zambia. Lusaka.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2006 National Malaria Control Action Plan:
Actions for Scale-up for Impact on Malaria in Zambia. Lusaka.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2007. A Guide on Performance Assessment and
Technical Support. Lusaka. Available online: http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADR331.pdf .
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. A Roadmap for Impact on Malaria in Zambia: A 5
Year Strategic Plan, 2006-2010. Lusaka.

28

Government of Zambia. Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure: Activity-Based Budget 2008.
Lusaka.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. Guidelines on the Distribution and Utilization of
Insecticide-Treated Nets for Malaria Prevention and Control. Lusaka: November 2008.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2008. Health Facilities in Zambia: A Listing of
Health Facilities According to Level and Location for 2008. Lusaka..
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. Health Management Information System. Lusaka.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2005. National Health Strategic Plan 2006-2010.
Lusaka.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health, et al. 2006. Zambia National Malaria Indicator
Survey 2006. Lusaka.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health. 2009. Zambia National Malaria Indicator Survey
2008. Lusaka.
Hamer, Davidson H., Micky Ndhlovu, Dejan Zurovac, Matthew Fox, Kojo Yeboah-Antwi,
Pascalina Chanda, Naawa Sipilinyambe, Jonathan L. Simon, and Robert W. Snow. 2007.
Improved diagnostic testing and malaria treatment practices in Zambia. The Journal of the
American Medical Association, 297 (20): 2227-2231.
Lubell, Yoel, Hugh Reyburn, Hilda Mbakilwa, Rose Mwangi, Semkini Chonya, Christopher
J.M. Whitty, and Anne Mills. 2008. The impact of response to the results of diagnostic tests for
malaria: Cost-benefit analysis. British Medical Journal, 336(7637): 202-205.
Lucas, Adrienne M. 2010. Malaria eradication and educational attainment: Evidence from
Paraguay and Sri Lanka. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 46-71.
Lucas, Adrienne. 2010. The impact of malaria eradication on fertility. Wellesley College
Working Paper.
Packard, Randall M. 2007. The Making of a Tropical Disease: A Short History of Malaria.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rolland Estelle., Francesco Checchi, Loretxu Pinoges, Suna Balkan, Jean-Paul Guthmann, and
Philippe J. Guerin. 2006. "Operational Response to Malaria Epidemics: Are Rapid Diagnostic
Tests Cost-effective? Tropical Medicine and International Health, 11(4): 398-408.
29

Sipilanyambe, Naawa., Jonathan L. Simon, Pascalina Chanda, Peter Olumese, Robert W. Snow,
and Davidson H. Hamer. 2008. “From Chloroquine to Artemether-Lumefantrine: The Process of
Drug Policy Change in Zambia.” Malaria Journal, 7(25).
Steketee, Richard W., Naawa Sipilanyambe, John Chimumbwa, James J. Banda, Abdirahuman
Mohamed, John Miller, Surprotik Basu, Simon K. Miti, and Carlos C. Campbell. 2008. National
malaria control and scaling up for impact: The Zambia experience through 2006.” American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 79(1): 45-52.
World Health Organization. 2007. Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Tests: Assessing Cost-Effectiveness
of
Diagnosis.
Available
online:
http://www.wpro.who.int/sites/rdt/using_rdts/assessing_cost_effectiveness.htm.
Zurovac, Dejan, Mickey Ndhlovu, Nawa Sipilanyambe, Pascalina Chanda, Davidson H. Hamer,
Jon L. Simon, and Robert W. Snow. 2007. “Paediatric Malaria Case-Management With
Artemether-Lumefantrine in Zambia: A Repeat Cross-Sectional Study.” Malaria Journal, 6
(31). Available online: http://www.malariajournal.com/content/6/1/31.

30

Table 1: National Level HMIS Data Sets, Before and After Malaria Data Review
Workshops

Health facilities
Quarterly reports
Outpatient
observations
Inpatient observations
Death observations

Pre-workshop
data set(1)

Additions(2)

1,473
43,455

28
1,901

2,066,964
743,650
365,589

76,036
23,041
9,132

Edits(3)

Post-workshop
data set(4)
1,501
45,356

32,510
8,638
2,142

2,143,000
766,691
374,721

(1) As of 16 Apr 2009; data from previous workshops had not yet been received at national level
(2) Previously missing data entered
(3) Previously nonmissing data modified
(4) As of 31 Dec 2009

31

Table 2: Inpatient and Mortality Data from the HMIS

Malaria
inpatients
under age
5
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

134,516
167,814
162,760
167,919
136,623
139,808
141,312
119,618
69,637

NonMalaria
inpatients
under age
5

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

148,116
183,368
169,333
172,021
137,414
156,309
152,304
157,118
124,813

All Facilities
Malaria Malaria ininpatients
patient
age 5 and
deaths
over
under
age 5
5,039
96,569
5,598
117,214
4,937
114,759
4,808
124,665
4,056
99,938
3,489
96,014
3,235
96,977
2,684
83,599
1,680
56,693
All Facilities
NonNonMalaria malaria ininpatients
patient
age 5 and
deaths
over
under
age 5
11,684
12,103
12,090
11,224
9,810
9,641
9,315
9,816
6,423

225,018
248,121
287,986
286,737
280,107
298,237
291,504
297,832
231,925

Malaria
inpatient
deaths
age 5
and over
3,882
4,352
4,530
4,727
4,352
3,979
3,096
2,356
1,566

Nonmalaria
inpatient
deaths
age 5
and over
15,713
16,699
18,913
19,758
20,967
20,709
20,052
17,652
12,887

Always Reporting Facilities
Malaria Malaria Malaria Malaria
ininininpatients patient
patients patient
under
deaths
age 5
deaths
age 5
under
and
age 5
age 5
over
and over
65,457
2,223
47,818
1,745
75,308
2,619
51,158
1,885
71,440
2,117
48,857
1,740
72,718
1,919
51,079
1,895
56,524
1,626
40,159
1,572
56,557
1,357
38,952
1,629
56,251
1,295
40,056
1,383
50,092
1,160
34,703
1,070
32,004
861
26,972
807
Always Reporting Facilities
NonNonNonNonMalaria Malaria malaria malaria
ininininpatients patient
patients patient
under
deaths
age 5
deaths
age 5
under
and
age 5
age 5
over
and over
70,757
5,644
105,645
7,507
75,893
5,380
109,316
7,426
67,356
4,872
116,814
7,538
70,220
4,618
117,027
8,401
57,332
3,906
111,896
8,033
68,430
3,842
120,392
8,064
65,545
3,568
117,190
7,708
69,290
4,477
119,387
6,939
68,627
3,269
112,440
6,193

32

Table 3: Seasonality and Changes over Time
Under 5 Deaths per 1000 – All Causes
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

(1)
-0.326***
(0.0486)
-0.726***
(0.0488)
-0.431***
(0.0488)

Pre 2004
Second Q. * pre
Third Q. * pre
Fourth Q. * pre
Year 2001
Year 2002
Year 2003
Year 2004
Year 2005
Year 2006
Year 2007
Year 2008
Constant

Observations
R-squared

0.0697
(0.0728)
-0.148**
(0.0728)
-0.346***
(0.0728)
-0.733***
(0.0728)
-0.808***
(0.0728)
-0.931***
(0.0728)
-1.008***
(0.0730)
-1.344***
(0.0746)
2.584***
(0.0595)
2562
0.550

(2)
-0.324***
(0.0652)
-0.584***
(0.0656)
-0.318***
(0.0657)
1.186***
(0.0869)
-0.00536
(0.0976)
-0.317***
(0.0978)
-0.251**
(0.0978)
0.0697
(0.0726)
-0.149**
(0.0726)
-0.346***
(0.0726)
0.608***
(0.0744)
0.534***
(0.0744)
0.411***
(0.0745)
0.334***
(0.0746)

Under 5 Deaths per 1000 – Malaria
(3)
-0.136***
(0.0202)
-0.360***
(0.0203)
-0.235***
(0.0203)

1.178***
(0.0668)

0.0438
(0.0302)
-0.0830***
(0.0303)
-0.121***
(0.0302)
-0.255***
(0.0302)
-0.294***
(0.0302)
-0.330***
(0.0303)
-0.384***
(0.0303)
-0.505***
(0.0310)
0.872***
(0.0247)

2562
0.554

2562
0.417

(4)
-0.111***
(0.0270)
-0.258***
(0.0271)
-0.152***
(0.0272)
0.522***
(0.0359)
-0.0563
(0.0404)
-0.227***
(0.0405)
-0.185***
(0.0405)
0.0438
(0.0300)
-0.0832***
(0.0300)
-0.121***
(0.0300)
0.249***
(0.0308)
0.209***
(0.0308)
0.174***
(0.0308)
0.120***
(0.0308)

0.316***
(0.0276)
2562
0.426

Standard errors in parentheses. All estimates include district fixed effects.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Data source: HMIS
33

Table 4: Rollout Data at the National Level
Number of bed nets
distributed

Population covered by
spraying

RDTs Distributed

112,020
557,071
176,082
516,999
1,163,113
2,446,102
964,748

324,137
679,582
1,163,802
2,836,778
3,286,514
5,558,822

0
0
0
172,257
25,700
243,600
2,015,500

2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Source: NMCC.

34

0.15
0.12
0.12
0.43
0.16
0.15
0.39
0.22
0.64
0.26

188,405
224,425
206,439
417,351
264,591
244,078

290,202
342,484
598,199
2,776,174

Nets
distributed
per person
between 2001
and 2007
DHSa),c)

0.36
0.18
0.32
0.28

0.23
0.31
0.25
0.36
0.31
0.21
0.73
0.60
0.87
0.72

0.68
0.74
0.71
0.86
0.68
0.57
0.38
0.42
0.55
0.43

0.45
0.43
0.46
0.50
0.37
0.36
0.27
0.10
0.22
0.20

0.13
0.20
0.20
0.31
0.20
0.17

0.43
0.25
0.55
0.43

0.37
0.43
0.37
0.74
0.30
0.41

Percentage of Percentage of Change in
Percentage Percentage
children in
children in
ownership
of children of children
household
households
DHS
sleeping
sleeping
owning at
owning at
2001 under net
under net
least one net least one net
DHS
b)
2001
2007b)
b)
b)
b)
2001
2007
2007

Source: a) NMCC b) Zambia DHS (2001,2007) c) Central Statistical Office for population estimates.

Central
Copperbelt
Eastern
Luapula
Lusaka
Northern
NorthWestern
Southern
Western
Total

Total nets
distributed
between
2001 and
2007 DHSa)

Table 5: ITN Distribution, Ownership, and Use

0.16
0.16
0.33
0.23

Change
in child
net use
DHS
2001 to
DHS
2007b)
0.25
0.23
0.17
0.42
0.10
0.24

35

0.12
0.41
0.02
0.01
0.29
0.04
0.14
0.13
0.02

0.12
0.63
0.00
0.00
0.73
0.00
0.09
0.16
0.00

Percentage of children in
2007 DHS living in
sprayed households

Sources: Central Statistical Office, NMCC, DHS (2007)

Central
Copperbelt
Eastern
Luapula
Lusaka
Northern
NorthWestern
Southern
Western

Province

Fraction of population
officially covered by
spraying in 2006

Table 6: IRS Coverage 2007 and Self-Reported Coverage

0.21
0.12

(2000)
0.24
0.78
0.09
0.13
0.82
0.14
0.12

Urbanization

36

Table 7: Bed Nets, Child Fever and Child Diarrhea, DHS
Dependent variable

Child had fever over last two weeks
(1)

Household owns net

(2)

-.0213*
(0.0111)

Child slept under net

Child age 2
Child age 3
Child age 4
2nd wave dummy

Constant

(4)

(5)

-0.921***
(0.267)

(6)
-0.124
(0.255)

-0.0106
(0.0110)

Bed net distribution pc
Child age 1

(3)

Diarrhea

0.0639***
(0.0122)
0.0142
(0.0132)
-0.0728***
(0.0125)
-0.121***
(0.0127)
-0.243***
(0.0115)

0.0641***
(0.0122)
0.0150
(0.0134)
-0.0730***
(0.0127)
-0.120***
(0.0129)
-0.250***
(0.0109)

-0.209***
(0.0487)
0.0648***
(0.0122)
0.0150
(0.0132)
-0.0713***
(0.0125)
-0.121***
(0.0127)
-0.197***
(0.0169)

0.546***
(0.0752)

0.548***
(0.0759)

0.548***
(0.0749)

0.0672***
(0.0154)
0.00604
(0.0150)
-0.0798***
(0.0154)
-0.122***
(0.0159)
0.101
(0.107)

-0.0286
(0.0703)
0.181***
(0.0252)
-0.0307
(0.0252)
-0.195***
(0.0247)
-0.275***
(0.0216)
-0.0736***
(0.0257)

0.181***
(0.0315)
-0.0319
(0.0297)
-0.196***
(0.0262)
-0.275***
(0.0236)
-0.0335
(0.0967)

0.406***
(0.117)

0.735***
(0.138)

0.773***
(0.196)

Observations
11193
11027
11193
11193
11187
11187
R-squared
0.129
0.128
0.131
-0.513
0.065
0.063
Notes: All specifications control for district fixed effects, sex, mother’s age, mother’s age
squared, mother’s education, mother’s marital status, mother’s employment status, urban, female
household head, number of household members and household assets (electricity, radio, TV,
refrigerator and bicycle). Robust standard errors in parentheses . *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1

37

Table 8: First Stage Results for Column 4 (and 6) in Table 7

Dependent variable

HH owns bed net
(1)

ITN per capita
Child age 1
Child age 2
Child age 3
Child age 4
2nd wave dummy
Constant

0.230***
(0.0662)
0.00210
(0.0104)
-0.0106
(0.00925)
-0.0107
(0.0104)
-0.00518
(0.00934)
0.322***
(0.0231)
-0.146*
(0.0804)

Observations
11193
R-squared
0.317
Kleibergen-Paap F-Stat
11.65
Kleibergen-Paap weak
0.0014
identification p-value
Notes: Includes control for district fixed effects, sex, mother’s age, mother’s age squared,
mother’s education, mother’s marital status, mother’s employment status, urban, female
household head, number of household members and household assets (electricity, radio, tv,
fridge and bike).
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

38

Table 9: Control for baseline level in micro-level regression, DHS
Dependent
variable
Household owns
net

Child had fever over last two weeks
(1)
-0.0141

(2)

(3)

(0.0105)
Child slept under
net

(4)
-0.695

Diarrhea
(5)

(0.496)

(6)
-0.0429
(0.597)

-0.00428
(0.00895)

Bed net distribution
Child age 1
Child age 2
Child age 3
Child age 4
Baseline fever
preval.

0.0640***
(0.0121)
0.0119
(0.0130)
-0.0706***
(0.0109)
-0.122***
(0.0115)

0.0644***
(0.0121)
0.0129
(0.0130)
-0.0704***
(0.0109)
-0.120***
(0.0118)

-0.104***
(0.0364)
0.0645***
(0.0121)
0.0124
(0.0130)
-0.0700***
(0.0110)
-0.122***
(0.0116)

0.867***
(0.0944)

0.888***
(0.0933)

0.806***
(0.0973)

0.0665***
(0.0148)
0.00701
(0.0131)
-0.0770***
(0.0121)
-0.122***
(0.0126)

-0.00656
(0.0922)
0.181***
(0.0328)
-0.0312
(0.0323)
-0.194***
(0.0281)
-0.276***
(0.0263)

0.181***
(0.0326)
-0.0315
(0.0312)
-0.195***
(0.0265)
-0.276***
(0.0260)

0.393
(0.400)

0.168
(0.227)

0.143
(0.495)

Constant
Observations
11193
11027
11193
11193
11187
11187
R-squared
0.136
0.135
0.136
-0.229
0.065
0.065
Notes: All specifications control for district fixed effects, sex, mother’s age, mother’s age
squared, mother’s education, mother’s marital status, mother’s employment status, urban, female
household head, number of household members and household assets (electricity, radio, tv,
fridge and bike).
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

Table 10: District-level Differences, DHS
Dependent variable: Change in fever prevalence
(1)
Change in ownership

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.188**

0.0778*
*
(0.0357)
0.977**
*
(0.0983)

0.0778*
*
(0.0367)
0.976**
*
(0.0981)
-0.0452

-0.0711*

-0.0761*

(0.0399)
1.045***
(0.124)
-0.0427

(0.0402)
1.048**
*
(0.125)
-0.0346

(0.0416)
-0.0341

(0.0407)
-0.0392

(0.0340)

(0.0328)
-0.0545
(0.0558)
0.222**
*

-0.136
(0.0935)

ITN rollout per capita

(0.0739)
Baseline fever

Change in mother
education

(0.0430)
Change in mother
working
Change in average age
Constant

Observations
R-squared

0.214**
*
(0.0446)

0.222**
*
(0.0253)

0.191**
*

0.193**
*

0.220***

(0.0428)

(0.0424)

(0.0510)

(0.0515)

70
0.044

70
0.107

70
0.617

70
0.622

70
0.627

70
0.637

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

Table 11: Bed nets and Child Mortality
Dependent variable
HH owns bed net

(1)
-0.00968
(0.00690)

Kids in HH slept with
bed net

(2)

Death of child
(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.0361*
(0.0216)

0.0116
(0.00808)

0.0486***
(0.00608)

ITN district coverage

-0.0443*
(0.0255)

Female

0.0199*** 0.0199*** 0.0199***
(0.00538) (0.00535) (0.00539)

0.0185***
(0.00489)

0.00540**
(0.00214)

2nd wave

0.0364*** 0.0307*** 0.0289***
(0.00629) (0.00587) (0.00926)

0.0265***
(0.00805)

0.0107***
(0.00361)
Last 3
years
Older 2
0.0171
(0.0176)

Sample restrictions

Constant

none

none

none

Last 3
years

0.270***
(0.0478)

0.254***
(0.0474)

0.271***
(0.0479)

0.232***
(0.0426)

Observations
13201
13201
13201
12835
11941
R-squared
0.032
0.036
0.032
0.034
0.022
Notes: All specifications control for age and district fixed effects, mother’s age, mother’s age
squared, mother’s education, mother’s marital status, mother’s employment status, urban, female
household head, number of household members and household assets (electricity, radio, tv,
fridge and bike).
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

Table 12: Descriptive statistics of district level panel HMIS

Malaria inpatients under 5
Malaria deaths under 5
Other deaths under 5
Nets (‘000)
District population (‘000)
Malaria inpatients per 1000 children under 5
Malaria deaths per 1000 children under 5
Other deaths per 1000 children under 5
Nets per capita

Obs
645
645
645
648
648
645
645
645
648

Mean
1922
55
142
9
157
72.01
1.91
4.67
0.06

Std.Dev
1531
55
181
20
153
46.54
1.37
3.59
0.12

Min
0
0
0
0
19
0
0
0
0

Max
8169
325
1770
182
1341
343.87
8.81
21.57
0.71

42

Table 13 B: ITN Distribution and Malaria
Malaria
inpatients
under 5

Malaria
deaths
under 5

Other
deaths
under 5

Malaria
inpatients
under 5

Malaria
deaths
under 5

Other
deaths
under 5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.680
(1.875)
-9.422***

-0.0913
(0.0767)
-0.342***

-0.101
(0.169)
-0.210

(2.643)
-4.856

(0.0813)
-0.315***

(0.165)
-0.488*

(3.881)

(0.0972)

(0.260)

Nets current year
Nets previous
year

-8.888***

-0.255***

-0.143

(2.307)

(0.0651)

(0.156)

Nets two years
ago

Constant

Observations
R-squared

2263***
(53.05)

68.53***
(2.744)

166.9***
(4.921)

2264***
(60.00)

68.70***
(3.014)

167.0***
(5.257)

573
0.872

573
0.741

573
0.904

501
0.881

501
0.774

501
0.904

Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level. All specifications include
year and district fixed effects. Nets are in thousands.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

43

Table 13 B: ITN Distribution and Malaria Relative to Population
Malaria
inpatients
per 1000
children
under 5

Malaria
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

Other
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

Malaria
inpatients
per 1000
children
under 5

Malaria
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

Other
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

6.088
(9.872)
-30.14**

-0.121
(0.309)
-0.852**

-1.543
(1.102)
-1.797*

(12.74)
-33.50

(0.382)
-0.0370

(1.077)
-3.839**

(36.40)

(0.817)

(1.557)

Nets per capita
L1 nets per
capita

-26.25***

-0.778***

-0.709

(9.279)

(0.271)

(0.769)

L2 nets per
capita

Constant

Observations
R-squared

59.75***
(2.751)

1.316***
(0.0930)

3.673***
(0.191)

89.62***
(2.836)

2.295***
(0.0940)

5.334***
(0.185)

573
0.811

573
0.634

573
0.744

501
0.824

501
0.637

501
0.771

Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level. All specifications include
year and district fixed effects.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

44

Table 14: IRS Results, DHS
Dependent variable
Percentage of district population
sprayed

Child had fever over last two weeks
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.102***
(0.0192)

Household sprayed (self-report)

0.0482**
(0.0195)

-0.0162
(0.0199)

Fraction of households sprayed in
cluster

-0.00778
(0.0394)

Age child

0.0367***
(0.00277)

0.0367***
(0.00277)

2nd wave dummy

-0.283***
(0.0122)

-0.257***
(0.0108)

Constant

0.614***
(0.0733)
11524
0.123

Observations
R-squared

0.0206***
(0.00330)

0.0207***
(0.00331)

0.622***
(0.0733)

0.361***
(0.0919)

0.357***
(0.0921)

11523
0.121

5671
0.047

5672
0.046

All specifications control for district fixed effects, sex, mother’s age, mother’s age squared,
mother’s education, mother’s marital status, mother’s employment status, urban, female
household head, number of household members and household assets (electricity, radio, tv,
fridge and bike).
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

45

Table 15 A: Spraying only vs. spraying and ITN

Spraying target
dummy

Malaria
inpatients
under 5

Malaria
deaths
under 5

Other
deaths
under 5

Malaria
inpatients
under 5

Malaria
deaths
under 5

Other
deaths
under 5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-241.5

-22.57*

0.539

-308.9*

-24.72**

-0.278

(189.1)

(12.15)

(17.62)

(176.4)

(12.12)

(17.28)

-9.351***

-0.298***

-0.113

(2.324)

(0.0702)

(0.147)

Lag 1 Bed nets in
‘000

Constant

Observations
R-squared

1713***
(70.43)

42.18***
(2.690)

129.7***
(11.44)

2262***
(51.98)

68.51***
(2.513)

166.9***
(4.905)

573
0.866

573
0.760

573
0.905

573
0.873

573
0.766

573
0.905

Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level. All specifications include
year and district fixed effects.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

46

Table 15 B: Spraying only vs. spraying and ITN

Fraction sprayed

Malaria
inpatients
per 1000
children
under 5

Malaria
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

Other
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

Malaria
inpatients
per 1000
children
under 5

Malaria
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

Other
deaths
per 1000
children
under 5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

6.199
(9.660)

-0.416
(0.370)

0.792
(0.559)

2.526
(9.760)

-0.558
(0.372)

0.722
(0.543)

-25.38***
(9.548)

-0.984***
(0.257)

-0.484
(0.704)

Nets per capita

Constant

Observations
R-squared

55.53***
(3.029)

1.273***
(0.0892)

3.421***
(0.208)

59.29***
(3.555)

1.419***
(0.0968)

3.492***
(0.190)

573
0.809

573
0.656

573
0.787

573
0.811

573
0.661

573
0.787

Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level. All specifications include
year and district fixed effects. Net distribution and spraying numbers reflect program activities in
the preceding year.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

47

Figure 1: Malaria Deaths in HMIS

Number of malaria deaths reported at health facilities

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

Malaria deaths under age 5

2,000

Malaria death age 5 and older

1,000

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Year

48

10

5

9

4

8

4

7

3

6
3
5
2
4
Under-5 deaths per 1000
3

2

Under-5 deaths per 1000 high quality sample
1

2
1

1

0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Deaths per 1000 under age 5 - always reporting facilities

Deaths per 1000 under age 5 - all facilities

Figure 2: Deaths per 1,000 Children Under 5 in HMIS

2008

Year

49

Figure 3: Deaths by Province in DHS vs. HMIS
180

50

160

45

DHS under-5 mortality

35

120

30
100
25
80
20
60

15

40

HMIS under-5 mortality

40

140

10

20

5

0

0

DHS under-5 mortality

HMIS under-5 mortality

50

Figure 4: Mortality Changes: HMIS vs. DHS
-0.45

-0.4

-0.35

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0
Lusaka

Change in under-5 mortality HMIS 2001-2007

-0.1

-0.2
Eastern
-0.3
Copperbelt

Southern
-0.4
Northwestern
-0.5

Northern

Luapula
Western
-0.6

-0.7

Central

Change in under-5 mortality DHS 2001-2007

Note: Horzontal axis is change in the under five mortality rate divided by the 2001 level.
Vertical axis is change in HMIS deaths per 1,000 children divided by the 2001 level.

51

Figure 5: Malaria Cases and Deaths, Chained Index
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

Outpatients under 5

Outpatients 5 and over

Inpatients under 5

Inpatients 5 and over

Deaths under 5

Deaths 5 and over

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: HMIS

52

Figure 6: Ratio of Malaria to Non-Malaria Mortality
0.6

Ratio malaria to non-malaria cases

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

Under-5, all facilities
Under-5, always reporting only
Age 5 and older, all facilities
Age 5 and older, always reporting only

0.1

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: HMIS

53

Figure 7: Seasonality of Mortality in the HMIS
0

-0.1

Deaths per 1000 children under 5

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6

All under-5 deaths
Malaria under-5 deaths

-0.7

-0.8
1

2

Quarter

3

4

Source: See Table 3.

54

Figure 8: Change in Seasonality of Malaria Mortality
0

Deaths per 1000 children under 5

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
Pre

Post

-0.5

-0.6
1

2

Quarter

3

4

Source: See Table 3.

55

Figure 9: Change in the Seasonality of All-Cause Mortality
0
-0.1

Deaths per 1000 children under 5

-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
-0.7
Pre

Post

-0.8
-0.9
-1
1

2

Quarter

3

4

Source: See Table 3.

56

Figure 10: IRS Distribution byy rregion

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

57

Figure 11: Health Facilities and
dS
Spraying in the Chingola District 2008

Source: NMCC. Green crosses rep
epresent health facilities, black dots sprayed structu
ctures. Grey
lines are district boundaries.

58

