NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GED
James J. Heckman
John Eric Humphries
Nicholas S. Mader
Working Paper 16064
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16064

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

This research was supported by NIH R01-HD054702, the American Bar Foundation, The California
Endowment, The Commonwealth Foundation, The Nemours Foundation, the Buffett Early Childhood
Fund, the Spencer Foundation, an Anonymous funder, and the J.B. and M.K. Pritzker Foundation.
We are grateful for the helpful comments of the Handbook authors present at the CESIfo Munich conference.
We also received helpful research assistance from Pana Alvarez and Joel Han. We would like to personally
thank Lois M. Quinn, who provided valuable comments. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the funders or other parties listed here. A more complete
description of the GED program is presented in our two books, Heckman, Humphries, and Mader
[2010a,b]. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
funders, other parties listed here, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
Â© 2010 by James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, and Nicholas S. Mader. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including Â© notice, is given to the source.

The GED
James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, and Nicholas S. Mader
NBER Working Paper No. 16064
June 2010, Revised September 2010
JEL No. I21,J24,J31
ABSTRACT
The General Educational Development (GED) credential is issued on the basis of an eight hour subject-based
test. The test claims to establish equivalence between dropouts and traditional high school graduates,
opening the door to college and positions in the labor market. In 2008 alone, almost 500,000 dropouts
passed the test, amounting to 12% of all high school credentials issued in that year. This chapter reviews
the academic literature on the GED, which finds minimal value of the certificate in terms of labor
market outcomes and that only a few individuals successfully use it as a path to obtain post-secondary
credentials. Although the GED establishes cognitive equivalence on one measure of scholastic aptitude,
recipients still face limited opportunity due to deficits in noncognitive skills such as persistence, motivation
and reliability. The literature finds that the GED testing program distorts social statistics on high school
completion rates, minority graduation gaps, and sources of wage growth. Recent work demonstrates
that, through its availability and low cost, the GED also induces some students to drop out of school.
The GED program is unique to the United States and Canada, but provides policy insight relevant
to any nation's educational context.
James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
John Eric Humphries
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
johnerichumphries@gmail.com

Nicholas S. Mader
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
nmader@uchicago.edu

Contents
1 Introduction

4

2 Institutional Background and Functions of the GED

6

2.1

The GED Test

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 The Eects of GED Certication
3.1

3.2

6

13

The Direct Benet of GED Certication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

3.1.1

Average Labor Market Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

3.1.2

Heterogeneous Labor Market Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

3.1.3

Cognitive and Noncognitive Ability

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

Educational Attainment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35

4 Changes and Growth in the GED Test Taking Population

41

4.1

Government Education and Training Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

42

4.2

Changes in the Costs and Benets to Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43

4.3

Growth in High School-Age Test Takers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48

4.4

Summing up the Sources of Growth of GEDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52

5 Adverse Consequences of the GED

54

5.1

The GED Induces Would-Be High School Graduates to Drop Out

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

54

5.2

The GED Inates High School Graduation Statistics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55

5.3

The GED Obscures the Actual Returns to Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

58

6 Conclusion

59

3

1 Introduction
1

The General Educational Development (GED) program has become a major factor in American education.

Dropouts from high school can take a seven hour battery of tests to obtain a GED credential. GEDs are widely
held to be equivalent to individuals who receive a traditional high school diploma by taking courses and acquiring
credit hours. Indeed, capturing this sentiment, many erroneously term the GED certicate as a General Equivalency Degree.

The GED program is quantitatively signicant.

Figure 1 shows that currently 12% of all high

2 and that there has been substantial growth overtime in the number of GED

school credentials issued are GEDs,
certicates issued.

This chapter reviews a body of literature, starting with Cameron and Heckman [1993], that shows that GEDs are
not equivalent to ordinary high school graduates.

GEDs have higher achievement test scores than dropouts in

part because they complete more years of high school. Controlling for their greater scholastic ability, GEDs are
equivalent to uncredentialed dropouts in terms of their labor market outcomes and their general performance in
society. On average, obtaining a GED does not increase the wages of dropouts. While GEDs go to college at higher
rates than dropouts, few nish more than one semester. The same traits that lead them to drop out of school also

3

lead them to leave from jobs early, to divorce more frequently, and to fail in the military.

Given the preponderance of evidence against benecial eects of GED certication for the average GED recipient,
it is surprising that the GED program has grown so dramatically in the past 50 years. We examine explanations
for its growth. A primary cause is the growth of government programs that promote the GED as a quick x for
addressing the high school dropout problem. Adult Education programs and programs designed to promote convict
rehabilitation are major contributors, the latter being especially important for African-American males. We present
evidence that high schools are increasingly promoting the use of the GED.

None of this would matter if the GED were harmless, like wearing a broken watch and knowing that it is broken. But
the GED is not harmless. Treating it as equivalent to a high school degree distorts social statistics and gives false
signals that America is making progress when it is not. A substantial part of the measured convergence of black and
white high school attainment is fueled by prison-issued GEDs. Counting GEDs as dropouts, the African-American

1 The

GED program is unique to the United States and Canada, but analysis of this program provides general insights into the

limitations of using achievement exams to certify preparedness for schools and the workplace.

2 Henceforth,

GED refers either to the certicate itself or to an individual who has received a GED certicate, depending on the

context. GEDs refer to individuals who choose to certify by the GED, GED program is used to refer to the entire program, and
GED test refers to the test itself.

3 See

Heckman and Rubinstein [2001] and Laurence [forthcoming].

4

Figure 1: Growth in the GED - Percent of High School Credentials and Number of Takers

Sources: National Center for Education Statistics [Various Years], and GED Testing Service [1958-2008]. Notes: The spike
and fall in 2001-2002 is from a change in test series combined with an increase in passing standards. The percent of high
school credentials statistic is calculated by dividing the number of GEDs issued divided by the sum of diplomas and GEDs
issued that year.

male high school graduation rate in 2000 is at the same level as it was in 1960.

Improperly counting GEDs as

high school graduates also overestimates the returns to college. We document how American social statistics are
distorted by assuming that GEDs are equivalent to ordinary high school graduates. We also show how the GED
creates problems. It induces students to drop out of school and lose the benets of a high school degree.

There are larger lessons from a study of the GED program. GEDs are as smart as ordinary high school graduates,
as measured by a scholastic achievement test. Yet, as a group, GEDs fail to perform at the level of high school
graduates. We show that noncognitive decits  such as lack of persistence, low self-esteem, low self-ecacy, and
high propensity for risky behavior  explain the lack of success for many GEDs. Decits of what are sometimes
called soft skills are often not taken into account in public policy discussions involving economic opportunity. A
study of the GED shows the inuence of personality traits on success in life and the need for public policies that
address both cognitive and personality decits.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a short introduction to the GED, its structure, and a brief
history. Section 3 looks at dierences among dropouts, GEDs, and high school graduates, and discusses the evidence
on labor market performance and educational attainment of GEDs. Section 4 presents evidence on the sources of
growth of the GED program, and the changes over time in demographic groups it serves. Section 5 reviews the

5

adverse consequences of the GED. Section 6 concludes.

2 Institutional Background and Functions of the GED
There are substantial consequences of being a high school dropout.

Wage premia for education have increased

over the last three decades. Using Census PUMs data, Goldin and Katz [2008] report that the wage dierential
between high school graduates and dropouts grew from 16.7% in 1970, to 21% in 1990, to 25.5% in 2000. Figure 2,
reproduced from Autor, Katz, and Kearney [2008], shows that real wages by educational level have diverged across
time for both males and females. At the same time that real wages for those with college are steadily increasing,
real wages for male dropouts are currently below their 1963 levels, and real wages for female dropouts are eectively
unchanged since 1970.

4 The rate of

Figure 3 shows that across cohorts, college attendance and college completion have both increased.

college attendance conditional on nishing high school, and the rate of college graduation conditional on attendance
have both trended upward. The outlier is the high school graduation rate, which has trended downward starting
with the 1950 birth cohort.

The growth in people seeking alternative certication through the GED is a major

contributor to this trend. Figure 4 shows that dropout rates since 1970 have decreased if GEDs are counted as high
school graduates, but have increased if they are counted as dropouts.

2.1 The GED Test
The GED was introduced by the American Council on Education (ACE) in 1942 as a credential for returning World

5 The test was originally used as

War II veterans who entered the armed services before completing high school.

a tool for placing returning veterans in college and high school. It was quickly expanded as a method for earning
high school diplomas or equivalency credentials.
States began to oer the test to civilians in the late 1940s and, by 1959, civilian GED test takers outnumbered
veteran GED recipients [GED Testing Service 1958-2008, Quinn 2002]. Relative to its very targeted beginning, the
GED program has expanded to serve dropouts across a wide population. The GED currently targets a large and

6

diverse population, including many who are unqualied to join the military [Laurence, forthcoming].

4 Figure 3 does not count GEDs as high school graduates.
5 See Quinn [2002] for a detailed exposition of the GED's history.
6 Section 3 demonstrates that the value of the GED depends on characteristics

6

of the test taker, and Section 4 demonstrates that

Figure 2: Log Wage Levels By Education

Source: Reproduced from Autor, Katz, and Kearney [2008], Figure 5.

7

Figure 3: Trends in Educational Attainment

90%
80%
70%

Percentage
e

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1900

1907

1914

1921

Graduate High School
Graduate College

1928

1935

1942

1949

Year of Birth
Attend College
Graduate College Given Attended

1956

1963

1970

1977

Attend College Given Graduate HS

Source: Reproduced from Heckman and LaFontaine [2010], Figure XIII. Notes: 3-year moving averages based on Current
Population Survey (CPS) October, Census, CPS March and National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) data.

HS

graduates are those who obtained a regular public HS diploma (excluding GEDs) from the NCES. "Graduate HS" is the
fraction of 8th grade enrollments for a given cohort who report a regular HS diploma. "Attend Given HS" is the fraction
of recent HS graduates who report being enrolled the fall of the year following graduation.

"Attend College" is college

enrollments of recent HS graduates as a fraction of 18 year old cohort size. College graduates are those who report a BA or
higher by age 25. "Graduate Given Attend" is those who obtained a four year degree as a fraction of the college enrollment
total for that cohort. Two-year degrees are not included. "Graduate College" is the number of college graduates as a fraction
of the 18 year old cohort size.

Population estimates are from the Census P-20 reports.

estimated from CPS October data after 1982.

8

HS diplomas issued by sex are

Figure 4: The eect of including/excluding GEDs in the calculation of the dropout rate
12%

26%

11%

22%

10%

18%

9%

14%
8%

10%

7%

6%

6%
1970

1980

Dropouts (Excluding GEDs)

Sources:

1990

1970

2000

1980

1990

2000

GEDs as % of All Dropouts

Dropouts (Including GEDs)

GED Testing Service (1958-2008), and U.S. Decennial Census 1970-2000.

In the left-hand panel, all

percentages are status dropout rates for 20-to-24-year-olds, except for 1970 which reects status dropout rates for
20-to-23-year-olds.

In the right-hand panel, the data series shows GEDs as a percentage of all credentialed and

uncredentialed dropouts.

Figure 5: GED Sample Questions

Source: Reproduced from Bobrow [2002]. Notes: The source is a preparation guide for the most recent 2002 series
of the GED test.

9

The GED Test:

The GED exam has been a battery of ve tests since its introduction. Its content has been

updated three times with the introduction of new series designed to keep the test relevant to job skills and
educational requirements [GED Testing Service, 2009]. The current version of the GED test takes just over seven
hours to complete and focuses on interpretation and analysis of information rather than on factual recall.

The

reading section has changed from being a general reading comprehension test to a test of reading real life work
materials or newspaper articles.

The math content demands more analysis and synthesis than factual recall.

Examples of an easy and hard math problem are shown in Figure 5. The GED test introduced a short essay or
writing sample starting in 1988, and the use of a calculator for part of the math subsection was introduced on the
2002 test series [GED Testing Service, 1958-2008].

It was initially decided that the pass score should be set so that 80% of graduation-bound high school seniors could
pass [Boesel et al. 1998, Quinn 2002].

An analysis of the 1943 norming study suggests that the 80% pass rate

overstates the actual diculty of the original test [Quinn, 2002]. Quinn [2002] also highlights that the original test
included a high probability of passing due to chance.

After three increases in the diculty of the test, only 60% of current graduation-bound high school seniors are now
estimated to be able to pass the entire test on their rst try [GED Testing Service, 2009].

Key changes to the GED test are displayed in Table 1, which also documents the expansion of the test. In 1947,
New York was the rst state to oer the test to civilian dropouts [Quinn, 2002]. In 1974, California was the last
state to oer a recognized GED certicate for passing the GED test. The table covers the three changes in test series
as well as the three changes in test diculty. For more details on the GED's history, content, standards, norming,
and scoring procedures see Section A of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/).

GED Preparation and Means of Benet:

The data on preparation times suggest that study for the GED is

likely to lead to little or no human capital formation. In 1980, the median test-taker had studied for 20 hours and,

7 However, a sizable

in 1989, had invested 30 hours of preparation [Quinn 2002, GED Testing Service 1958-2008].

number of individuals study more than 100 hours, growing from 11.8% to 24.2% of takers in that same period. This
indicates that certain populations may benet somewhat from their preparation for the GED. To put this statistic
into perspective, an average high school student spends approximately 1,080 hours in class a year [Carroll, 1990].
changes in the demographic groups served by the GED have led to dierences in composition away from the motivated, disciplined
group of individuals to whom it was initially targeted.

7 This

amount applies only to test takers not qualifying as exceptions to the minimum age requirement.

10

Table 1: Key Changes to the GED

Year
1942
1947
1959
1974
1978

Changes to the GED Testing Program
GED test introduced for veterans. 80% of graduation bound high
school seniors said to be able to pass all five batteries
New York offers GED test to civilian high school dropouts
More civilians taking the GED test than veterans
California becomes last state to introduce GED test for dropouts
Second series of the GED test introduced. Test time of 6 hours.

1981

Time limit extended to 6.75 hours. National Minimum age for testing
abolished

1982

Standards made more difficult, 75% of graduate bound high school
seniors said to be able to pass the entire test

1988

Third series of GED test introduced. First series to include a writing
sample. Time extended to 7.5 hours for taking the test

1992

National minimum age for GED test taking of 16 implemented

1997

Passing standards made more difficult, 67% of graduate bound high
school seniors said to be able to pass the entire test

2002

Fourth series of the GED test introduced. Calculator allowed for first
time on parts of the math test. Passing standards made more difficult,
60% of graduate bound high school seniors said to be able to pass the
entire test. Test time of approximately 7 hours.

Sources: GED Testing Service [2009], Quinn [2002], and GED Testing Service [1958-2008].

11

More recently, Zhang et al. [2009] nd that, in 2006, the median study time for those who reported studying for
the GED was 25 hours.

At the same time, the availability of the GED may induce a decrease in the eort spent on schooling.

The

academic literature often compares outcomes for GEDs to those for dropouts. However, for many individuals, the
relevant counterfactual comparison is between the GED and high school graduation. As passing the GED requires
substantially less eort than completing high school, its availability induces many students who would otherwise
complete school to leave [Heckman et al. 2008, Humphries 2010]. This evidence is corroborated by a 2002 survey
by the National Center for Education Statistics [2006] which found that 40.5% of surveyed high school dropouts
listed would be easier to get the GED as among their reasons for leaving school. Behind Missed too many school
days, this was the second most frequently cited reason for leaving.

With the possible exception of individuals in the right-hand tail of the preparation time distribution, it seems unlikely
that GED test takers are producing valuable human capital that will directly increase their wages. However, as a
widely-recognized credential that tests for certain types of ability, it may serve as a signal to employers, the military,

8 A

and post-secondary institutions that the individual is more capable than the average uncredentialed dropout.

key caveat to the signaling argument is that the signaling value of a GED will reect all associations due to sorting,
such as through disproportionate receipt by the incarcerated or unmotivated takers who are able to complete high
school but choose not to. The quality of the signal has changed over time due to shifts in the attributes of the
GED-certied population.

GED Acceptance:

The extent to which employers and colleges treat the GED as equivalent to a high school

diploma is uncertain. A poll reported by the Society for Human Resource Management [2002] nds that 96% of
U.S. employers and training programs respond armatively to the question Does your company accept applications
with a GED credential for jobs requiring a high school degree? [GED Testing Service, 2009]. A positive response
suggests that a GED is an acceptable prerequisite for consideration, but does not indicate what relative weight
employers give to the GED.

The GED's wide acceptance as a valid prerequisite for admission to post-secondary institutions suggests that the
GED might facilitate human capital development. A poll by the The College Board [2007] nds that 98% of colleges
respond positively to the prompt that High school diploma is required and GED is accepted. Again, it is unclear

8 Spence

[1973] is the classic reference on signaling.

12

if GEDs get equal consideration for admission relative to high school graduates.

3 The Eects of GED Certication
Section 3.1 reviews the literature on the value of the GED credential in labor markets. Section 3.2 focuses on the
question of whether, and for whom, the GED leads to enrollment and completion of post-secondary education.

3.1 The Direct Benet of GED Certication
This section demonstrates that pre-existing dierences in traits causally unrelated to the eect of the GED are
responsible for the dierent labor market outcomes experienced by dropouts and GEDs. The early literature on
the topic found that GED certication has little or no eect on labor market outcomes for the average test taker.
Subsequent work has attempted to identify dierent populations and margins for which it might hold more value.

3.1.1 Average Labor Market Outcomes
Raw comparisons of earnings, wages, and hours worked based on the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979

9 This gure shows the gap in wage income, hourly wages, and hours

(NLSY79) data are displayed in Figure 6.

worked for terminal GEDs and terminal high school graduates over uncredentialed dropouts.

There is a clear

ordering among dropouts, GEDs, and traditional high school graduates in each measure. These dierences persist
across the life cycle, with the wage and hours premia for higher credentials increasing from their late 20s to their
late 30s.

Background Dierences Among Dropouts, GEDs, and High School Graduates:

The dierences in

labor market outcomes among these three groups can be largely explained by pre-existing characteristics that may
generate economic returns, creating a non-causal association among education levels and wages. Tables 2 and 3
show comparisons of early life characteristics by nal level of education for white males in the NLSY79 and in the

9 The

NLSY79 is a survey starting in 1979 following a nationally representative cohort of individuals age 14 to 21 with follow up

interviews at least every two years on a wide range of social, educational, and economic variables. For more details on the NLSY79, see
Section B.1 of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/).

13

Figure 6: Economic gaps relative to dropouts: GEDs and high school graduates for males (A) and females (B)

(A) Male Economic Gaps Relative to Dropouts: GEDs and High School Graduates

(B) Female Economic Gaps Relative to Dropouts: GEDs and High School Graduates

Source:

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79).

Notes:

Regressions control for age, mother's

highest grade completed, and dummies for urban residence at age 14, Southern residence at age 14, and race.
The regressions use the cross-sectional subsample and minority oversamples of the NLSY79 data. The estimation
sample is restricted to individuals who never attend college and who have not yet been incarcerated. Regressions
for hourly wage and hours worked are restricted to those reporting more than $1/hour and less than $100/hour,
and individuals working less than 4,000 hours in a given year. Wage income regressions are restricted to individuals
reporting wage incomes between $1,000/year and $100,000/year. All monetary values are in 2005 dollars. Standard
errors are clustered by individual. 95% condence bands are displayed for each bar chart.

14

Table 2: Comparison of Key Characteristics by Educational Level - White Males - NLSY79

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79). Notes: All results are from 1979 using nationally
representative weights. Notes: Family size includes both parents and children. Net family income in 1979 dollars. Standard
errors in parenthesis.

10 , 11

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) data sets.

These tables show a clear ordering across nal levels of educationnotably highest grade completed, magazine
subscriptions and home environment indices, family income, and poverty rates. Terminal GEDs (i.e. those that
do not continue to college) generally fall between dropouts and terminal high school graduates. There are some
exceptions. In the NLSY97, the parents of GED recipients are more educated than parents of high school graduates,

12 The dierences in

and GEDs are as likely or more likely to come from a broken household than are dropouts.

these measures demonstrate the potential importance of controlling for pre-existing heterogeneity among educational
groups.

10 The

NLSY97 is a survey starting in 1997 following a nationally representative cohort of individuals age 12 to 16 with follow up

interviews every year on a wide range of social, educational, and economic variables. For more details on the NLSY97, see Section B.2
of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/).

11 These

statistics

are

reported

for

other

races

and

gender

groups

in

Section

C.1

of

the

Web

Appendix

(http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/). A similar pattern characterizes the other groups.

12 In

Section C.1 of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) we show that minority GEDs have higher

delinquency rates and higher home risk indices than dropouts.

15

Table 3: Comparison of Key Characteristics by Educational Level - White Males - NLSY97

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97). Notes: All results are from 1997 using nationally
representative weights. All index scores are standardized mean zero, standard deviation one. See Section B.2.2 of the Web
Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for detail on the construction of the family routine,

home risk, physical environment, enriching environment, and delinquency indices. Standard errors in parenthesis.

16

Dropouts, terminal GEDs, and terminal high school graduates also dier in their performance on academic tests,
which are predictive of earnings. The Armed Forces Qualication Test (AFQT) was administered in the NLSY79

13 , 14 When the AFQT

and in the NLSY97, and is a commonly used measure of academic, or cognitive, ability.

was administered, the surveyed individuals were of dierent ages and had acquired dierent levels of schooling.
These dierences aect their measured performance. In order to make comparisons of academic ability, we adjust
individual scores to account for the level of schooling at the time of the test. This adjustment controls for nal
educational attainment using a structural model as laid out in Hansen et al. [2004] and implemented in Heckman,
Urzua, and Veramendi [2010]. This allows comparisons of latent cognitive ability between dropouts, GED recipients,
and high school graduates prior to schooling decisions.

The comparisons in Figure 7 show that, before entry into high school, individuals who eventually GED certify
have higher cognitive ability than dropouts, and are very similar to terminal high school graduates. The cognitive
ability distribution for GEDs is nearly identical to that of high school graduates and is strongly right shifted from
uncredentialed dropouts for both males and females.

Accounting for Cognitive Ability:

Cameron and Heckman [1993] nd that the GED provides on average no

benet to male test takers after controlling for either years of completed schooling or AFQT scores. While their
study follows the NLSY79 sample through age 28, subsequent analysis replicates this nding through later ages.
Heckman and LaFontaine [2006] use later waves of the NLSY79 and nd that the GED has no benet on average log
hourly wages after controlling for AFQT. They nd that high school graduation is still associated with a positive
wage premium.

Once Heckman and LaFontaine correct for selection and control for AFQT scores, male GEDs

earn on average 1% less per hour than dropouts while terminal high school graduates make 3.6% more per hour on
average than dropouts. Similarly they nd that female GEDs earn 1.7% more per hour than dropouts while high
school graduates with no college earn 10.6% more per hour. They also show that the GED has little or no benet
after controlling for reported test scores using the National Adult Literacy Survey (NALS) data.

Figure 8 shows that, relative to the dierences shown in Figure 6, the economic benets associated with the GED are

15 When

greatly reduced and become statistically insignicant once pre-existing cognitive ability is controlled for.

13 The

Armed Forces Qualication Test is an achievement test measuring numerical operations, arithmetic reasoning, paragraph

completion, and word knowledge.

The AFQT was administered to individuals in the NLSY79 in 1979 when they were aged

14 to 22, and to individuals in the NLSY97 in 1999 when they were age 14 to 18.
sample represented the same content, but diered in format and scoring procedure.

The AFQT tests administered to each
See Section B.1.1 of the Web Appendix

(http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for more details.

14 Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and Humphries [2010] show that
15 To obtain the baseline standardized mean test score adjusted to

17

the AFQT is predicted by both cognitive and noncognitive traits.
the seventh grade level, we remove the estimated mean impact of

Figure 7: Cognitive ability by educational status (no college sample, all ethnic groups)

Source: Reproduced from Heckman, Urzua, and Veramendi [2010]. National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979.
Notes: The distributions above represent cognitive ability factors estimated using a subset of the Armed Services
Vocational Aptitude Battery and educational attainment as laid out in Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004).
Sample restricted to the cross-sectional subsample for both males and females. Distributions show only those with
no post-secondary educational attainment. The cognitive ability factors are separately normalized to be mean zero
standard deviation one.

18

including estimated post-high school AFQT scores, the benet of the GED is further reduced for all three economic
outcomes. For terminal high school graduates, however, economic benets persist after controlling for pre-existing
cognitive ability.

This suggests a causal eect of high school graduation.

That high school still has value after

controlling for pre-existing cognitive ability suggests high school graduates possess a valued trait not captured by
an achievement test. Section 3.1.3 extends this discussion to encompass both cognitive and noncognitive ability.
The next section follows the development of the literature in trying to identify specic populations that benet
from the GED.

3.1.2 Heterogeneous Labor Market Returns
Recent work on the GED has sought to identify groups of test takers for which individual traits or circumstances
contribute to a stronger signal or increased human capital development. This section focuses on several dierent
potential margins of benet, discusses hypotheses and reviews the related literature.

Wage Growth for GEDs with Experience:

It is argued that, similar to the pattern of returns to college, the

benets to a GED would increase with time in the labor market. Clark and Jaeger [2006] present evidence from the
Current Population Survey (CPS) that is apparently consistent with the hypothesis that the wage premium to GED
certication for males is increasing with age. Given the cross-sectional nature of the CPS data, this nding may
be attributed to either experience eects or cohort eects. Using white males and females in the NLSY79 sample,
Heckman and LaFontaine [2006] show that this higher premium to older cohorts is explained by their greater ability.
When not controlling for ability, the NLSY79 sample shows a wage premium for GED recipients that is comparable
to that found in samples of individuals from the CPS data for the same birth cohorts. Once one controls for AFQT
scores for the NLSY79 sample, there is no statistically signicant eect of certication on wages.

Using longitudinal data on earnings in the NLSY79, Murnane et al. [1995] argue that the value of the GED increases
with experience as recipients use the degree's signal for promotion, better job placement in the future, and on-theschooling attained over the seventh grade level using the procedure of Hansen et al. (2004) as implemented in Carneiro, Heckman, and

St be the random variable denoting schooling attained at year t (the date of the survey) and let st be its realized
SF be the random variable denoting the nal level of schooling attained and sF its realized value. Let T (st , sF ) be the test
score at time t for a person whose schooling at the time of the test is St = st and whose nal schooling level is SF = sF . The assumption
of the procedure is that the unobservables generating T (st , sF ) are mean independent of St given SF = sF . For each SF = sF , we can
Masterov [2005]. Let

value. Let

identify the causal eect of a year of schooling on the test score for each level of completed nal schooling. Then we can adjust the
mean test score to baseline levels

St = sb

by subtracting the term

E (T (st , sF ) âˆ£ St = st , SF = sF )âˆ’E (T (sb , sF ) âˆ£ St = sb , SF = sF ). Both
SF = sF , there are some persons at schooling level

terms are identied, assuming in addition that at the time of the test for each level of

St = sb .

Post schooling mean test scores are obtained in a similar fashion, but now adjusting to years of nal schooling. See Section D

of the Web Appendix for a detailed discussion of this procedure. See Hansen et al. (2004) for a more general procedure.

19

Figure 8: Ability-adjusted economic gaps relative to dropouts: GEDs and high school graduates for males (A) and
females (B)

(A) Male ability-adjusted economic gaps relative to dropouts: GEDs and high school graduates

(B) Female ability-adjusted economic gaps relative to dropouts: GEDs and high school graduates

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79).

Notes: Regressions control for baseline AFQT

scores, age, mother's highest grade completed, and dummies for urban residence at age 14, Southern residence at
age 14, and race.

Baseline test scores are estimated using the procedure of Hansen et al.

2004 as implemented

in Carneiro, Heckman, and Masterov [2005]. The regressions use the cross-sectional subsample and minority oversamples of the NLSY79 data. The estimation sample is restricted to individuals who never attend college and who
have not yet been incarcerated. Regressions for hourly wage and hours worked are restricted to those reporting
more than $1/hour and less than $100/hour, and individuals working less than 4,000 hours in a given year. Wage
income regressions are restricted to individuals reporting wage incomes between $1,000/year and $100,000/year.
All monetary values are in 2005 dollars. Standard errors are clustered by individual. 95% condence bands are
displayed for each bar chart.

20

job training. Consistent with Cameron and Heckman [1993], they nd no treatment eect of the GED on mean
wage levels at age 28, but they report a statistically signicant 2.4% wage increase for every year of experience after
receiving a GED. Murnane, Willett, and Boudett [1999] control for cognitive ability or individual xed eects in
dierent models specications. They nd that the complementarity of GED and years of experience is statistically
signicant only for individuals with low ability.

Murnane, Willett and Boudett pool person-year observations in their regressions. They infer increasing returns to
the GED from variables interacting GED receipt with years of experience. In contrast to this approach, Heckman
and LaFontaine [2006] estimate separate regressions for earnings at dierent ages, allowing separate estimates of
returns to ability and experience by age. They nd that there is no statistically signicant eect to GED certication
at any age for both white males and white females.

Males vs. Females:

Males and females might derive dierent value from the GED through having dierent

motivations for dropping out of school. Using data from the NLSY79 Market Experience survey, Rumberger [1983]

16 Males were 65% more likely

presents dierences in self-reported reasons for dropping out for males and females.

than females to report school related issues, indicating dislike of school, being expelled, and poor performance as
their primary reason for leaving school. Among other explanations, males were more likely to leave school due to
economic reasons while a third of all women left due to pregnancy or marriage. If there are gender dierences in
later-life motivations to work and seek higher education, there could be dierential value of the GED for men and
women.

Cao, Stromsdorfer, and Weeks [1996] test for the GED's direct eect on economic outcomes for women using data
from the NLSY79 and from Washington State. Given their focus on women who may have custody of children and
be eligible for public transfer programs, they attempt to eliminate selection bias related to both the decision to
participate in the labor force and to not enroll in welfare. They nd no statistically signicant dierences between
the labor supplies of women of dierent education levels. The positive association of GED certication with hourly
wage is eliminated by controlling for the number of years of schooling completed at the time people drop out.

Table 4 presents a comparison of qualitative ndings for males and females from selected papers in the literature
and information on which data sets and cohorts are studied. In addition, both Murnane et al. [2000] and Tyler et al.
[2003] use the High School and Beyond (HSB) data set and nd, respectively, positive eects of GED certication

16 This

table is reproduced in Section C.2 of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/).

21

Table 4: Literature Summary - Labor Market Eects - Males vs. Females
Data

Study
Cameron and Heckman (1993)

NLSY79 (1979-1987)

Population
White males

Method/Identification
Control for cognitive ability,
correction for self-selection into
working status

GED Effect

Findings

1/0 GED

Income: no effect
Wage: no effect
Income: no effect
Wage: (+,**)

1

Murnane, Willett and Boudett (1995)

NLSY79 (1979-1991)

Males

1/0 if ever got GED

(1/0 GED) x (work
experience)

Cao, Stromsdorfer and Weeks (1996)

NLSY79 ((1979-1991),
),
Washington State Family
Income Study

Females

Correction for self
self-selection
selection into
working status

1/0 GED

Hours worked: no effect
Wage: no Effect

Control for cognitive ability,
correction for self-selection into
1/0 GED
Wage: no effect
working status
Notes: [1] "1/0" refers to a binary indicator of the associated variable. For example, under GED Effect "1/0 GED" refers to 1 = receives GED, 0 = does not, indicating a simple binary
treatment effect.
The study samples are statistically representative of the US unless otherwise indicated in the "Population" field. The "Findings" field codes no statistically signficant effect
as "No effect", and otherwise shows (<indicator of a positive or negative finding>, <level of significance>) where * = p < .10, ** = p < .05, and *** = p < .01.
See the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for tables with more detail on each paper's outcomes examined, lists of regressors, and point estimates for each
regression specification.
Heckman and LaFontaine (2006)

NLSY79 (1979-2001)

Males and females

17 Because neither study can

on the earnings of low-ability males and on the hours worked by low-ability females.

identify the sources of selection of each gender into drop out statusor selection into educational status and work
in generalit is dicult to interpret these ndings.

Using evidence from the NLSY79, CPS, and NALS, Heckman and LaFontaine [2006] establish that both male and
female GEDs have higher wages than dropouts and that, for both genders, the explanation is sorting by ability and
not a causal eect of the GED. They consistently nd a small but statistically signicant benet for females of 1-2%
on hourly wage which is not present or slightly negative for males. This nding is consistent with the hypothesis
that females are more likely to drop out of high school for reasons unrelated to intrinsic labor market motivation,
for example, due to pregnancy. Similarly, they nd much larger benets from high school graduation for females
than for males.

Native vs. Foreign Born:

While much has been written about the education and labor market performance of

18 little attention has been paid to the value they receive from earning a GED. Clark and Jaeger [2006]

immigrants,

argue that the GED might provide a signal of ability that is more familiar to employers than educational credentials
earned outside the country, or may signal language ability and cultural assimilation. Clark and Jaeger use earnings
data in the CPS and nd that only foreign-born GEDs with no domestic credentials have a statistically signicantly
higher wage than native-born dropouts.

Heckman and LaFontaine [2006] examine the Clark and Jaeger [2006] analysis and nd that their results are
produced by data artifacts and limitations.

17 See

One source of bias in the Clark and Jaeger [2006] analysis is that

Section B.5 of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for more details on the High School and

Beyond data set.

18 See

the edited volume Borjas [2000] and Betts and Lofstrom [2000] in particular.

22

Table 5: Literature Summary - Labor Market Eects - Native vs. Foreign Born
Study

Data

Clark and Jaeger (2006)

CPS

Heckman and LaFontaine (2006)

CPS, excluding wage
imputation

Population
Foreign born, males
and females

Method/Identification

Males and females

Individual fixed effects

OLS

GED Effect
Findings
(1/0 GED1) x (foreign
Wage: (+, ***)
born)
1/0 GED

Wage: no effect

Control for cognitive ability,
(1/0 GED) x (foreign
correction for self-selection
NALS (1992)
self selection into
Wage: no effect
born))
b
working status
Notes: [1] "1/0" refers to a binary indicator of the associated variable. For example, under GED Effect "1/0 GED" refers to 1 = receives GED, 0 = does not, indicating a simple binary
treatment effect.
The study samples are statistically representative of the US unless otherwise indicated in the "Population" field. The "Findings" field codes no statistically signficant effect
as "No effect", and otherwise shows (<indicator of a positive or negative finding>, <level of significance>) where * = p < .10, ** = p < .05, and *** = p < .01.
See the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for tables with more detail on each paper's outcomes examined, lists of regressors, and point estimates for each
regression specification.
Foreign born, males
and
d females
f
l

the CPS imputes values of missing wages for GEDs by sampling earnings of high school graduates, a process that
contaminates comparisons of the outcome dierences between those two groups and dropouts. A second source of
bias is the reliance on cross-sectional variation of wages. By making longitudinal comparisons with the CPS data,
Heckman and LaFontaine [2006] nd that receipt of a GED has no eect on earnings and explain Clark and Jaeger's
ndings as due to sorting along characteristics unmeasured in the CPS. Heckman and LaFontaine also analyze the
NALS which also identies the foreign born. They demonstrate no earnings premium to GED receipt for any group
once selection and cognitive ability are controlled for. Table 5 shows a comparison of qualitative ndings for nativeand foreign-born individuals from selected papers in the literature and information on which data sets and cohorts
are studied.

Signaling:

Tyler et al. [2000] use a dierence-in-dierences approach to examine the returns to the GED for

individuals at the cusp of passing the test.

Using variation in test score thresholds across states, they contend

that focusing on individuals who would pass the GED under one regime but not under the other will identify
the signaling eect of the GED for people at that margin. Using data from the GED Testing Service and Social
Security Administration, they separate individuals into groups by performance on the GED exam and state of
residence. Variation in the passing standards enforced by dierent states arguably creates a natural experiment
where individuals with the same score do or do not pass the GED based on their state of residence. To understand
their paper we use the notation in Table 6. Let - over a variable denote its mean.
The dierence-in-dierences estimator (DID) used by Tyler et al. [2000] is:

DID = (YÌ„LS,LP âˆ’ YÌ„LS,HP ) âˆ’ (YÌ„HS,LP âˆ’ YÌ„HS,HP ) .

In the notation of Table 6,

YÌ„A,B

represents the mean wage of individuals with score

23

(1)

A

in a state with passing

Table 6: Treatment Classications of Individuals in Tyler et al. [2000]

Low GED Score ("LS")
Y LS,LP
State of Residence has Low Passing Standard ("LP")
(GED)
Y LS,HP
State of Residence has High Passing Standard ("HP")
(no GED)

standard

B , where A is either low score (LS ) or high score (HS ), and B

High GED Score ("HS")
Y HS,LP
(GED)
Y HS,HP
(GED)

is either low passing standard (LP ) or high

passing standard (HP ). Because their analysis only includes individuals measured in the neighborhood of GED
passing standards, none of the individuals studied are high scoring in an absolute sense.

The rst term in equation (1) takes the dierence in average earnings between individuals who have the same ability
but dierent credential status. The second term is used to adjust for the possibility that wages in the two states
in the rst dierence are unequal. The second dierence is an estimate of the baseline wage dierence across those

19

states for individuals with the GED credential at the same low ability margin (in absolute terms).

20 They argue

Tyler et al. [2000] report a 10-19% earnings benet to GED certication at the margin for whites.

that these estimates are consistent with earlier studies whose ndings of no eect of certication only apply to the
average test taker. They claim that for the particular margin they investigatethat of low-skilled takersthere are
high signaling benets to certication that are absent for the general population of test takers.

To defend the assumption of exogeneity of state passing standards with respect to individual earnings, they perform
robustness checks considering selective mobility, dierential access to post-secondary training, dierences in state
labor markets, selective taking of the GED, and selective eort in studying across states. Rubinstein [2003] discusses
their paper, claiming that the endogeneity of studying eort would lead to upwardly-biased estimates. His model
predicts that, at the margin, low-ability individuals will exert more eort than high-ability individuals when passing

21 both

thresholds are higher. If these eorts have little or no eect on long-term productivity,
will include individuals whose true productivity is overstated, but abilities in
degree relative to

19 Tyler

YÌ„LS,LP

than for

YÌ„HS,HP

relative to

YÌ„HS,LP .

YÌ„LS,HP

YÌ„LS,HP

and

YÌ„HS,HP

will be overstated to a greater

Greater downward bias in

YÌ„LS,HP

than in

YÌ„HS,HP

et al. [2000] implement this estimation in a linear regression to pool all states together and control for mean gender dierences

in earnings. See their paper for details.

20 They

suggest that their lack of a signicant nding for non-whites may be due to an institutional eect where both disproportionate

representation of minorities in prison and the growth of GED programs for the incarcerated lead to negative associations with the test,
thus decreasing its signaling value. See Section 4 below for evidence of these demographic trends in prison-based GED receipt. The
separate estimation of the GED eect by race is rare in the literature, which typically includes regression controls for race but does not
treat it as a separate conditioning variable. See Section E.1 of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/)
for a full account of study samples, treatment of race, and separate estimates by race.

21 Rubinstein

assumes that these studying eorts represent cramming, and do not represent durable investments in human capital.

24

leads to upward bias in the DID estimate. He presents no direct empirical evidence on this bias. It is also possible
that the higher passing standard discourages low ability persons from taking the test so that his conclusion is
reversed.

Jepsen et al. [2010] show evidence of endogeneity of test taking eort in a single state with one passing standard.
GED policy in Missouri permits individuals to pass the GED if their maximum scores on individual tests across

22 Figure 9 shows the distribution of scores from the rst

retakes of the GED exam meet the passing standard.

administration of the test in its rst panel, and the distribution of maximum scores across all administrations of
the GED exam that each individual opted to take in its second panel, where a clear discontinuity arises at the
passing standard of 2,250. This behavior introduces several possible sources of bias in the comparisons between
GED certiers and dropouts. Selective retaking will lead to low ability individuals being improperly counted in
higher score groups.

If changes in scores across retakes are due to unproductive cramming (as conjectured by

Rubinstein, 2003) coupled with luck, this misclassication will lead to over-representation of low ability persons
among GEDs producing a downward bias in comparisons of successful GED test takers with those who fail. On
the other hand, if the choice to retake the test is associated with a trait of persistence that is productive in the
workplace, these persons who become GEDs have high noncognitive skills that will moderate the downward bias
due to their low ability. Jepsen et al. [2010] use Missouri administrative data on rst test scores and nal GED

23 They nd

outcomes to implement a Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity (FRD) estimation of the eects of the GED.

no eects of GED receipt on earnings or employment for individuals at the margin of passing on their rst attempt,
but nd a statistically signicant increase in post-secondary schooling attendance of 10%.

22 Thus top scores
23 See Imbens and

on the various subtests across retakes of the test are aggregated.
Lemieux [2008] for discussion of the FRD method. See Hahn, Todd, and Van der Klaauw [2001] for the original

paper.

25

Figure 9: Distribution of First Test Scores and Final Test Scores After Retakes Missouri

0.0016
0.0014

Frequency

0.0012
0.0010
0.0008
0.0006
0.0004
0.0002
3,700

3,200

2,700

2,200

1,700

1,200

700

200

0.0000

GED test score: First attempt

0.0016
0.0014

Frequency

0.0012
0.0010
0.0008
0.0006
0.0004
0 0002
0.0002
3,700

3,200

2,700

2,200

1,700

1,200

700

200

0.0000

GED test score: Maximum score across attempts
Local Linear Regression

Observed

Source: Reproduced from Jepsen et al. [2010] using Missouri administrative records from 1995-2006. Notes: The rst gure
is the distribution of individual GED scores on the rst test. The second gure represents the distribution of GED test score
outcomes reecting the maximum scores across all attempts of the GED that each individual elected to take. Passing the
GED in Missouri requires a minimum score requirement on each subtest and a total score of 2,250.

26

Table 7: Literature Summary - Labor Market Eects by Ability
GED Effect
Findings
(Post-GED work
Income: no effect
experience) x
Males, includes lowWage: (+, ***) if low cognitive
Murnane, Willett and Boudett (1999)
NLSY79 (1979-1991)
Individual fixed effects
(1/0 low cognitive
income sample
ability
ability)1
(1/0 GED) x
Control for cognitive ability
Murnane, Willett and Tyler (2000)
HSB (1980
(1980-1991)
1991)
Males
(1/0 low cognitive Income: (+,
(+,**))
quartile,
til OLS
ability)
Control for highest grade
(1/0 GED) x
Income: no effect
Tyler, Murnane and Willett (2003)
HSB (1980-1991)
Females
completed,
(1/0 low cognitive Probability of working: (+,**)
OLS and logit
ability)
Work experience: (+,***)
(1/0 GED) x
Dynamic discrete choice
Wage: (+)2 if high cognitive
(cognitive ability,
Heckman, Urzua and Veramendi (2010)
NLSY79 (1979-2006)
White males
framework,
and noncognitive ability
latent factor analysis
noncognitive ability)
Notes: [1] "1/0" refers to a binary indicator of the associated variable. For example, under GED Mechanism "1/0 GED" refers to 1 = receives GED, 0 = does not, indicating a simple binary
treatment effect.
[2] Heckman, Urzua and Veramendi (2010) is a working paper that uses simulations to identify heterogeneous treatment effects. The most recent draft has distributions of treatments but
has not yet bootstrapped the relevant standard errors.
The study samples are statistically representative of the US unless otherwise indicated in the "Population" field. The "Findings" field codes no statistically signficant effect
as "No Effect", and otherwise shows (<indicator of a positive or negative finding>, <level of significance>) where * = p < .10, ** = p < .05, and *** = p < .01.
See the Web Appendix (http://jenni
(http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/)
uchicago edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for tables with more detail on each paper's
paper s outcomes examined
examined, lists of regressors
regressors, and point estimates for each
regression specification.
Study

Data

Dropouts with Low Initial Endowments:

Population

Method/Identification

Tyler et al. [2000] focus on a low ability margin, and argue that low

ability GEDs command higher wages relative to dropouts of comparable ability than high ability GEDs command
relative to their non-GED counterparts. Murnane et al. [1999], Murnane et al. [2000], and Tyler et al. [2003] suggest
a human capital explanation for large eects at a low ability margin where, in order to meet a uniform passing
bar, GED recipients with the lowest academic ability when leaving school must have made the largest human
capital investments in order to pass. That is, individuals with low initial ability may disproportionately comprise
the sizable right tail in the distribution of preparation hours discussed in Section 2.1, and may thus generate a
nontrivial amount of human capital. While no data sets combine information on GED preparation times, schooling
at the time of dropping out, cognitive ability, and wages, the ndings of these three papers are consistent with the
hypothesis that low ability GEDs study more. As previously noted, the low ability GEDs who try repeatedly to
pass and do so may have higher noncognitive traits than their low ability non-GED counterparts and this might
explain their ndings. The samples and qualitative ndings of each paper are summarized in Table 7.

All of these papers nd positive returns to the GED associated with low levels of academic ability.

Murnane

et al. [1999] control for individual heterogeneity using a long panel of earnings data from the NLSY79 sample to
control for individual xed eects. The wage returns are limited, with Murnane et al. [1999]'s analysis suggesting
a statistically signicant 6% hourly wage premium ve years after GED certication. It would be instructive to
compare the noncognitive skills of the low ability GEDs with those of dropouts who do not certify. To the best of
our knowledge, this has not been done.

Murnane et al. [2000] use the High School and Beyond (HSB) data to examine growth in scores on subject tests

27

that are administered with the initial wave when participants are in 10th grade, and tests that are administered
in the next wave that is sampled two years later. Controlling for completion of 10th and 11th grade and baseline
test scores, GEDs make larger test score gains than do dropouts. They note that while this nding may be due to
dierential returns to education or other unobserved heterogeneity, this pattern is consistent with the hypothesis
that studying for the GED examination did increase the math skills of dropouts.

3.1.3 Cognitive and Noncognitive Ability
Just as cognitive ability is commonly a confounding factor in explaining the labor market returns to education,
Heckman and Rubinstein [2001] demonstrate that dropping out is associated with negative social traits such as
criminal behavior, divorce, risky social behaviors, and job turnover that are not controlled for in statistical studies.
As a test of cognitive ability, the GED does not directly measure these negative social traits or induce sorting along
the lines of positive traits.

Heckman and Rubinstein introduce the idea that this association of the GED with

negative social traits makes it a mixed signal.

While Section 3.1.1 demonstrates that GEDs lie between dropouts and high school graduates in academic outcomes
and home background, Figures 10 and 11 show that GEDs are similar to, or worse than, dropouts in terms of social

24 This suggests that underlying behavioral characteristics can explain in part why GED recipients do

outcomes.

not receive the benet that high school graduates do from their credentials.

Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua [2006] test for the inuence of cognitive and noncognitive skills on choices of schooling
and the wage returns to schooling.

25 ,

They use the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale and Rotter Locus of Control

26 Heckman, Urzua, and Veramendi

both administered early in the NLSY79 panel to measure noncognitive skill.

[2010] similarly account for both cognitive and noncognitive ability, but anchor noncognitive ability in crime and
risky behavior choices early in life. Figure 12 plots the noncognitive ability distributions from Heckman, Urzua,
and Veramendi [2010] for males and females. Terminal GEDs and uncredentialed dropouts have nearly identical
distributions of noncognitive ability while high school graduates are substantially right shifted.

27 skills

Table 8, reproduced from Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua [2006], shows that both cognitive and noncognitive

24 These gures display dierent social
25 The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale is

outcomes due to the fact that the same measures are not surveyed in the NLSY79 and NLSY97.
a series of 10 yes or no questions to evaluate self-esteem. The Rotter Locus of Control is a set

of four paired statements used to measure self-ecacy. The taker must indicate which she believes to be more true, then indicates if
they believe this to be somewhat true or very true.

26 See Section B of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for detailed descriptions of each measure.
27 Cognitive skill is measured by the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) which is used to construct the AFQT.

Noncognitive skill is measured by the Rosenberg and Rotter scales.

28

Figure 10:

Gaps in the Probability of Various Social Outcomes Compared to High School Dropouts with and

without controlling for scholastic ability (NLSY79). All demographic groups pooled unless otherwise noted.

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79).

Notes: This analysis is restricted to the cross-sectional

sample of NLSY79 reporting no completed years of college, having never been incarcerated, and having valid AFQT scores.
Single With Child at Age 18 includes only females. All regressions control for race, gender, Southern residence at age 14,
and urban status at age 14. Regressions with controls for ability use pre-8th grade estimates of AFQT scores. Marginal
eects reported. 95% condence intervals are displayed.

29

Figure 11:

Gaps in the Probability of Various Social Outcomes Compared to High School Dropouts with and

without controlling for scholastic ability (NLSY97). All demographic groups pooled unless otherwise noted.

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997.

Notes: This analysis is restricted to the cross-sectional sample of

NLSY97 reporting no completed years of college at age 22, having valid AFQT scores. Separated by 22 indicates that the
individual is divorced or separated from one's spouse by age 22. All regressions include highest grade completed at 22, urban
and rural status at age 12, and race and gender dummies. Regressions with controls for ability use pre-8th grade estimates
of AFQT scores. Marginal eects reported. 95% condence intervals are displayed.

30

Figure 12: Noncognitive ability by educational status (no college sample, all ethnic groups)

Source: Reproduced from Heckman, Urzua, and Veramendi [2010]. National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979.
Notes:

The distributions above represent noncognitive ability factors estimated using measures of early violent

crime, minor crime, marijuana use, regular smoking, drinking, early sexual intercourse, and educational attainment
as laid out in Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen [2004]. Sample restricted to the cross-sectional subsample for both
males and females. Distributions show only those with no post-secondary educational attainment. The noncognitive
ability factors are separately normalized to be mean zero standard deviation one.

31

Table 8: Coecients from Log Wage Regression on Cognitive and Noncognitive Measures

Source:

Reproduced from Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua [2006], Table 4.

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979

(NLSY79). Notes: Sample from NLSY79 males and females at age 30. Individuals are pooled across race/ethnic groups. The
analysis uses the cross-sectional subsample of NLSY79, restricted to those not currently enrolled in college. The cognitive
measure represents the standardized average over the raw ASVAB scores (arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, math knowledge, and coding speed).

The noncognitive measure is computed as a (standardized) average

of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale and Rotter Internal-External Locus of Control Scale. The model also includes a set of
cohort dummies, local labor market conditions (unemployment rate), region of residence, and dummies for race/ethnicity
dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses.

are valued in the labor market for individuals of all educational levels. The table reports the coecients for the
cognitive and noncognitive measures (which are standardized to mean zero, standard deviation 1) on log hourly
wages by educational attainment. While the value of cognitive and noncognitive ability varies by education status
and sex, noncognitive skills are of equal or greater importance at many educational levels as measured in eects on
outcomes of unit changes in standard deviations.

Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua [2006] and Heckman, Urzua, and Veramendi [2010] study the eect of education
and noncognitive skills on earnings and other outcomes. Both papers use factor models to generate estimates of
cognitive and noncognitive ability from multiple measures of those traits, and both choices of education levels and
earnings outcomes as functions of those skills. Both papers use a generalized Roy model to control for selection
into schooling and to estimate labor market returns to educational attainment that vary by levels of cognitive and
noncognitive skill. While both papers measure cognitive ability from AFQT scores, Heckman et al. [2006] measure
noncognitive factors using Rosenberg and Rotter scales in conjunction with educational choices. Heckman et al.
[2010] construct noncognitive factors from measures of teenage behavior, specically participation in minor and
major illegal activity, smoking, drinking, drug use, involvement in after-school clubs, and sexual intercourse by the
age of 15.

32

Figure 13: Distribution of noncognitive factor for GEDs and dropouts (white males)

Source: Reproduced from Heckman and Urzua [2010]. Notes: GED after age 21 are those that GED certify at
age 22 or later. GED by age 18 are those that GED certify before the age of 19.

33

L
ogwa
gec
ompa
r
edt
o
unc
er
t
ieddr
opout
s

Figure 14: Log wage eects of GED recipient as a function of cognitive and noncognitive skills (white males)

De
ci
l
eo
fN
on
cog
ni
t
i
ve
Ab
i
l
i
t
y

y
t
i
l
eAbi
v
i
t
i
eofCogn
l
i
Dec

L
ogwa
gec
ompa
r
edt
o
unc
er
t
ieddr
opout
s

L
ogwa
gec
ompa
r
edt
o
unc
er
t
ieddr
opout
s

T
r
ea
t
mentE
ï¬€ec
t
:
GE
DL
ogWa
geCompa
r
edt
oUnc
er
t
iedDr
opout
s

Dec
i
l
eofCogni
t
i
v
eAbi
l
i
t
y
Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al.

(2010).

Dec
i
l
eofNonc
ogni
t
i
v
eAbi
l
i
t
y
Notes: The top panel represents the log wage eect of GED

receipt by joint distribution of cognitive and noncognitive ability. The lower panels show the log wage eect of GED
receipt by marginal distributions of cognitive and noncognitive ability.

Figure 13 shows the estimated distributions of noncognitive ability for dropouts and dierent types of GED recipients
from Heckman and Urzua [2010]. Consistent with dierences displayed in Figures 10 and 11, it shows that all GEDs,
except those with some college, are below uncredentialed dropouts in noncognitive ability. Figure 14, reproduced
from Heckman et al. [2010], shows how the eect of GED certication on wages varies by levels of individual skill
type. It shows that the marginal benet of increasing a decile of noncognitive ability for GEDs, especially in the
bottom two deciles, is greater than the marginal benet of increasing a decile of cognitive ability. This analysis
conrms the ndings of Heckman et al. [2006] that there are positive returns to both noncognitive and cognitive
ability in low skill labor markets.

A key observation is that GEDs are typically far down in the distribution of noncognitive ability. As discussed in

34

Figure 15: Returns to College and GED Test Takers Seeking Further Education

Source: GED Testing Service [1958-2008] and Current Population Survey Data.

the next section, noncognitive ability is also a key characteristic for predicting which individuals will successfully
use the GED to obtain post-secondary training.

3.2 Educational Attainment
Patterns of Post-Secondary Enrollment and Persistence:

As noted above, the GED is widely accepted as

a prerequisite for admission to post-secondary education. Thus it serves as an intermediate step to obtaining more
valuable credentials. In 2008, 60% of GED test takers self-reported further education as a reason for taking the
test. Of this 60%, 20% planned on enrolling in four year college, 28% in two year college, and 22% in a technical
or trade program [GED Testing Service, 1958-2008]. Figure 15 presents time trends in the motivation to use the
GED for post-secondary education, showing an awareness of the increasing returns to college. As the college-high
school wage gap has grown, so has the percentage of GED recipients planning further education.

Few GEDs follow through with these plans. A recent study by the GED Testing Service [Patterson et al., 2009]
followed 1,000 randomly selected individuals who passed the GED test after the increase in test diculty in 2002.
It found that 31% ever enrolled in a post-secondary institution of any kind, and that 77% of those who ever enrolled
did so for only a single semester.

35

Table 9: Literature Summary - Outcomes Pertaining to Post-Secondary Education through the GED
Study
Cameron and Heckman (1993)

Data

Population

NLSY79 (1979-1987)

White males

Method/Identification
Correction for self-selection into
working status

GED Effect

Findings

1/0 GED1 x college Wage: no effect

Probability of acquiring
training: (+,***) if female
Probability of acquiring
training: no effect if male
Murnane, Willett and Boudett (1997)
NLSY79 (1979-1991)
Males and females
Probit
Probability of attending
college: (+,***) for females and
males
Dynamic discrete choice
(1/0 GED) x
Educational option value:
Heckman and Urzua (2010)
NLSY79 (1979-2006)
White males
framework,
(cognitive ability, increasing in cognitive and
latent factor analysis
noncognitive ability) noncognitive ability
Notes: [1] "1/0" refers to a binary indicator of the associated variable. For example, under GED Effect "1/0 GED" refers to 1 = receives GED, 0 = does not, indicating a simple binary
treatment effect.
The study samples are statistically representative of the US unless otherwise indicated in the "Population" field. The "Findings" field codes no statistically signficant effect
as "No effect", and otherwise shows (<indicator of a positive or negative finding>, <level of significance>) where * = p < .10, ** = p < .05, and *** = p < .01.
See the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for tables with more detail on each paper's outcomes examined, lists of regressors, and point estimates for each
regression specification.
1/0 GED,
(1/0 GED) x (postGED work
experience)

Figure 16 shows rates of enrollment and completion of various types of post-secondary education, comparing GEDs

28 , 29 As documented in the Patterson

with high school graduates among the NLSY79 with NLSY97 cohorts at age 22.

et al. [2009] report, many GEDs enrolled in college by age 22 but very few went on to ever earn degrees or complete
a meaningful amount of post-secondary education.

In contrast to the trend of self-reported plans in Figure 15,

30 Figure 17 demonstrates that by 2006,

fewer GED recipients had enrolled by age 22 in NLSY97 than in NLSY79.

when the NLSY79 sample is in their 40s, very few GEDs managed to earn four year credentials although more earn
associates degrees. As we discuss below, this trend may also be due to changes in the composition of GED test
takers which is increasingly younger and more likely to attempt the GED through institutional requirements.

Causal analysis of outcomes pertaining to post-secondary education through the GED:

GED recipients

receive tangible improvements in their labor market outcomes when they complete post-secondary education. A
summary of the qualitative ndings and approaches of selected papers in this literature is presented in table 9.

Cameron and Heckman [1993] calculate the option value or expected benet of GED receipt through a wide array of
types of post-secondary trainingon- and o-the-job training, military service, and two and four year collegeas the

31 They nd that the wage benet

benet to each type of training times the expected amount of training obtained.

28 We

compare NLSY79 and NLSY97 at age 22 as it is the oldest age reached by the entire NLSY97 sample. The low rates of earned

bachelor's/four year college degrees is explained by the fact that many students in this young sample are still working towards their
degrees, given their relatively young age and the number of individuals reporting current enrollment in four year college in the NLSY97
survey.

29 Murnane

et al. [1997] contains a table that displays participation rates by degrees of participation in post-secondary activities

including on-the-job training, o-the-job training, college and military. These gures are divided by level of nal educational attainment
and by gender. Their table is reproduced in Section C.3 of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/).

30 Sampling

variation may explain this trend across NLSY79 and NLSY97 samples given that relatively few GEDs attempt post-

secondary training. Another possible factor, discussed below, is that the composition of GED test takers has changed for the worse.

31 Grubb

[2002] surveys work that compares the wage and earnings returns to study in two year and four year colleges in terms of

both completed degrees and individual credits earned at each type of institution. Whereas the value of a completed four year (bachelor)

36

Figure 16:

Post-secondary educational attainment at age 22 by high school certication type (all demographic

groups)

Postâ€Secondary Outcomes Age 22 (NLSY79)
Percent in eaach postâ€secondary outcome

35%

31.8%

30%
25%
20%
15%

11.9%
9.1%

10%

5.8%
5%
1.4%

1.4%

0%

Currently Enrolled In College

Two Year Degree

High School Graduates Age 22

Four Year Degree

GED Recipients Age 22

Postâ€Secondary Outcomes Age 22 (NLSY97)
Percent in eaach postâ€secondary outcome

35%

32.3%

30%
25%
20%
15%

10.7%
10%
5%

8.4%

7.6%
4.8%
2.4%

0.8%

0.0%

0%

Currently Enrolled in Currently Enrolled in
Two Year
Four Year
High School Graduates Age 22

Two Year Degree

Four Year Degree

GED Recipients Age 22

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NSLY79) and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
1997 (NLSY97). Notes: Calculations are based on the cross-sectional subsample of each survey which are drawn
to be representative of the full population. Currently Enrolled in variables are those who reported no two or four
year degrees but reported being enrolled in college at age 22. Four Year Degree and Two Year Degree represent
individuals who have earned such a degree by age 22.

37

Figure 17: Post-secondary educational attainment in 2006 for the NLSY79 sample by high school certication type
(all demographic groups)

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NSLY79). Notes: Calculations are based on the cross-sectional

Figure 1:

Post-secondary educational attainment in 2006 for the NLSY79 sample by high school

subsample of the NLSY79. Ever Enrolled in College is dened for the case that individuals ever report enrolling

certication
type.
Source:
National
Longitudinal
Survey of Youth 1979 (NSLY79). Notes: Calculations
in college and
is not
conditional
on completing
any college.
are based on the cross-sectional subsample of the NLSY79. Ever Enrolled in College is dened for the
case that individuals ever report enrolling in college and is not conditional on completing any college.

38

associated with further education is much larger than the direct eect of GED receipt. Murnane et al. [1999] nd
strongly signicant hourly wage and income premiums conditional on receiving these types of training, but note
that few GEDs receive them. Murnane et al. [1997] use the same NLSY79 data as both of these studies and conrm
that, net of controls, GEDs pursue more of these types of post-secondary education than dropouts, but that the
predicted rates of completion are very low.

Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua [2006], Heckman, Urzua, and Veramendi [2010], and Heckman and Urzua [2010]
study the probability of selecting higher levels of educational attainment as a function of cognitive and noncognitive

32 They nd that both cognitive and noncognitive skills predict which individuals will drop out and use the

skills.

GED for higher levels of education. Each approach studies the net present value (NPV) of income for individuals of
a given skill set and choice of education level. Heckman and Urzua [2010] use a dynamic discrete choice framework
where individuals make a sequence of decisions based on their expected income returns and psychological costs and
payos (i.e. non-pecuniary factors that inuence individual decisions beyond just income returns). Heckman and
Urzua [2010] estimate option values, which are the benets conferred by completing one stage of education in
terms of access to the returns of later stages of education. The option value associated with an educational choice
at a given level of education is dened as the NPV of future educational decisions that choice opens up, net of the
NPV of staying at the same level of education. For an individual with a given set of cognitive and noncognitive
skills, the option value of the GED equals the returns that individual would receive from post-secondary education
multiplied by the probability that they would choose and successfully complete that education.

Figure 18 shows for white males the respective probabilities of being a terminal dropout and of obtaining a GED
based on population deciles of cognitive and noncognitive ability. 1 represents the lowest decile and 10 represents
the highest. The rst panel (A) shows that the probability of being a terminal dropout is primarily associated with
low cognitive ability. The second panel (B) shows that, relative to the probability of dropping out, the probability
of obtaining a GED is higher for higher levels of cognitive ability, and is higher for lower levels of noncognitive
ability.

Figure 19 shows the estimated option values of the GED as a function of cognitive and noncognitive ability. The
option value increases sharply in both cognitive and noncognitive ability. The axes of this graph represent population
deciles. Very few dropouts are in the upper deciles of cognitive or noncognitive ability. As is evident from Figure
degree is decisively higher than that for a complete two year (associate) degree, there is no consensus on which type of college is
associated with higher returns to earned credits that are not associated with degree completion.

32 Like

Heckman et al. [2006], Heckman and Urzua [2010] use the Rosenberg and Rotter scores to measure noncognitive ability.

39

Figure 18: Distribution of Probability of Dropping Out (A) and GED Receipt (B) by Cognitive and Noncognitive
Ability (white males)

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
Pr

(A)

No
nc
og
ni
t
i
ve

ve
i
t
Cogni

Pr
o
b
a
b
i
l
i
t
y

(B)

No
nc
og
ni
t
i
ve

ve
i
t
i
n
g
Co

Source: Reproduced from Heckman and Urzua [2010]. Notes: x and y axes represent deciles of cognitive and noncognitive
factors as dened in this section. 1 represents the lowest decile and 10 represents the highest decile.

40

Figure 19: Distribution of GED Option Values by Cognitive and Noncognitive Ability Deciles for white males

Source: Reproduced from Heckman and Urzua [2010]. Notes: Option value of GED certication for 17-year-old high school
dropouts. x and y axes represent deciles of cognitive and noncognitive factors as dened in this section. 1 represents the
lowest decile and 10 represents the highest decile.

18(B), few individuals have the skills that produce a high option value for GED certication.

4 Changes and Growth in the GED Test Taking Population
Given the low returns to GED certication for the majority of GED test takers, the question remains why GED
certication has reached such a large scale and continues to grow. As shown in Figure 1, the GED program grew
from 50,000 takers in 1960 to over one million in 2001. A recent increase in the test's diculty paired with the
introduction of a new test series led to a decrease in takers in 2002, but growth resumed afterward with 700,000
people taking the test in 2008. In this section we review several explanations for the growth of the GED testing

41

Figure 20: Route to GED Certication Taken by NLSY97 GED Recipients

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97). Notes: Statistics include all individuals who earn a GED
by 2007.

program over time. We show the signicant role of government programs which both directly and indirectly subsidize
the cost of GED certication. Much of the recent growth has occurred in populations such as younger teenagers
and the incarcerated, populations that the literature shows have low expected benet to GED certication.

4.1 Government Education and Training Programs
Many government educational and job training programs have adopted the GED as a second chance program. These

33 and Adult Education programs.

include government programs such as Job Corps, state anti-poverty programs,

The GED test is used as a standardized, external measure of success for programs providing education. Figure 20
shows that 50% of individuals in the NLSY97 report obtaining the GED through either Adult Education programs
or another job training program, demonstrating the role these government programs play in promoting the GED.

Adult Education is the largest government program promoting and subsidizing GED preparation and certication.
The Adult Basic Education Act was signed into law in 1964. It was intended to provide funding for educating people
aged 18 and older who lacked basic skills such as reading and basic arithmetic [National Advisory Council on Adult
Education, 1980]. The program expanded in 1970 to include Adult Secondary Education (ASE), which focused on

34 The GED was quickly adopted by ASE programs as both a goal and a

high school-level learning [Rose, 1991].

33 One

example, documented in Quinn [2002], is of welfare reform initiatives in Ohio which paid mothers for sending their teenagers

to attend GED classes.

34 With

the introduction of ASE, the age requirement was decreased to 16. Adult Education was extended to incarcerated populations

42

Figure 21: Adult Education Funding and GED Test Taking

Source: GED Testing Service [1958-2008], U.S. Department of Education [Various Years], and National Advisory Council
on Adult Education [Various Years].

metric of program success. Adult Education programs are not homogeneous. They range from stand-alone GED
classes to programs bundling job and vocational training with GED preparation.

Adult Education is a signicant producer of GED certicates. In 1975, 26% of GED credentials were issued through
Adult Education, increasing to 40% by 1980 and 50% in 1990 [U.S. Department of Education, Various Years].
In 1995, six times as many people achieved a GED rather than a traditional high school diploma through Adult
Education [National Advisory Council on Adult Education, Various Years]. McLaughlin et al. [2009] examine the
preparation methods for 90,000 GED test takers, and nd that 46% of the sample took the GED through an Adult

35 Figure 21 shows Adult Education funding (both state and Federal, in year 2000 dollars)

Education program.

graphed against the number of GED test takers. Expansion of Adult Basic Education promoted the growth of the
GED. Figure 22 shows the proportions of individuals taking dierent routes of preparation for the GED test.

4.2 Changes in the Costs and Benets to Education
The costs and benets of being a dropout, of GED certication, and of college completion have changed over time.
These shifts play key roles in determining who selects into GED certication. As discussed in Section 2, the wage
in 1981, though total expenditures on incarcerated education programs was capped at 20% of total Adult Education funding.

35 These

90,000 were chosen from a larger sample, removing individuals facing institutional inuences on testing such as those in states

requiring a practice test or being in prison.

43

Figure 22: GED Test Takers by Study Type

Source: Constructed from McLaughlin et al. [2009]. Notes: Of 90,000 test takers tting into these categories without
other restrictions on test taking such as being required to take a pre-test in one's state of residence or being incarcerated.

premium associated with getting any level of education above that of dropping out has been stable or increasing
for both males and females in the last 25 years.

At the same time, both the nancial and eort costs to education have changed.

The diculty of high school

36 ) and through

completion has increased in terms of class hours needed to graduate (measured in Carnegie Units

implementation of exit exams that must be passed in order to graduate. The late 1980s saw growth in the number
of Carnegie Units required for graduation increasing from an average of 13.5 in 1985 to 17.4 in 1990. Only one state
required an exit exam to earn a high school diploma in 1980, increasing to twenty-two states by 2008. Warren et al.
[2006] show that completion rates decrease, and 16-to-19-year-old GED testing rates increase when high school exit
exams are introduced. The increasing diculty of high school may induce more students to dropout or to GED
certify thinking that they can then go straight to college.

The monetary costs of college have also grown in the last three decades.

From 1985 to 2005 the real cost of

public and private four year colleges grew, respectively, by 95% and 83% [National Center for Education Statistics,
Various Years].

37

On the other hand, Federal assistance may have lowered the cost for some individuals.

The

establishment of Pell grants in 1972 decreased the costs of post-secondary education for individuals with high

36 Carnegie Units are standard measures of class hours. One Carnegie Unit is equivalent to one year long high school class.
37 See Section C of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for the full trends of Carnegie Units,
school exit exams, and tuition costs of college.

44

high

Figure 23: Federal Aid For Post-Secondary Education and GED Test Takers

Source: 2000 Status Report on the Pell Grant Program , Federal Campus-Based Programs Data Book [1998, 1999, 2000,
2001], U.S. Census Bureau, and GED Testing Service [1958-2008].

school-level credentials, including the GED. Figure 23 displays Pell grant funding and GED test-taking rates across
time. The spike in the average age of GED test takers in 1972, shown in Figure 26, is due to a number of older
dropouts seeking the GED to become eligible for Pell grants when they rst became available. This demonstrates
the responsiveness of GED test taking to incentives to participate in complementary programs.

Monetary costs of GED certication have always been nominal. Testing fees for taking the GED range from $0 to
$100, and enrollment in programs such as Adult Education often leads to reduced-fee or free testing [GED Testing
Service, 1958-2008]. On the other hand, the diculty of passing the GED test has increased over time. National
minimum diculty has increased three times, but many states have consistently required higher passing standards.
Figure 24 displays the population-weighted average GED diculty, measured by the percentage of graduation-bound
high school seniors estimated to be able to pass the GED in a single try. The eect of an increase in the diculty
of the test is seen in the dramatic decline in 2001 shown in Figure 23.

Incarceration and Prison Education

The number of incarcerated individuals in the United States has grown

rapidly since the mid 1970s. Figure 25 plots the total incarceration rate from 1926 to 2005, adding racial breakdowns
starting in 1981. Growth occurs across all race groups, with a disproportionate amount coming from blacks. Faced

45

Figure 24: Estimated Percent of Graduation Bound High School Seniors Able to Pass the GED In First Try

Source: GED Testing Service [2009], GED Testing Service [1958-2008], and GED Testing Service [Various Years]. Notes:
Numbers are population weighted averages of State Requirements. Only years with 40 or more states reporting the passing
requirement are displayed. Gaps are due to missing data.

Figure 25: Growth in Incarcerated Populations by Race

Reproduced from Heckman and LaFontaine [2010]. Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics and the U.S. Census Bureau. Based
on the U.S. Census Bureau estimated resident population, as of December 31 of each given year. Includes all persons under
jurisdiction of federal and state authorities rather than those in the custody of such authorities. Represents inmates sentenced
to minimum term of more than a year.

46

Table S.2
GED 10:
Credentials
Issued of
in Correctional
Institutions
as A Percentage
Total Issued
Table
Percentage
GEDs Obtained
in Prison
Across of
Time
Year

Coverage

State Prisons

Federal Prisons

Total

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998

57.1%
71.9%
72.5%
73.1%
76.2%

6.7%
8.6%
9.2%
9.4%
9.6%

1.4%
1.2%
1.2%
1.4%
1.4%

8.1%
9.8%
10.4%
10.8%
11.0%

1999
2000

75.4%
79.5%

9.8%
9.8%

1.5%
1.6%

11.3%
11.4%

2001
2002

55.9%
58.0%

7.9%
11.3%

1.6%
1.7%

9.5%
13.0%

2003
2004

58.4%
67.3%

10.2%
11.0%

1.6%
1.8%

11.8%
12.8%

2005

60.5%

11.8%

1.8%

13.6%

Reproduced from Heckman and LaFontaine [2010]. Sources: Various state Departments of Corrections and GED oces.
Sources: Various state Department of Corrections and GED offices. Data for federal prisoners from GED Testing Service "Who took the GED?" various years.
Data for federal
prisoners
GED
Testing
Service Who took the GED? [1958-2008]. Notes: State coverage represents the
See appendix
for data forfrom
each state
considered
in the estimation.
Notes:of
State
coveragere
represents theissued
total number
GED credentials
issued ininformation
those states with information
available
a percentage of total
total number
GED
credentials
in of
those
states with
available
as aaspercentage
of GEDcredentials
total GED credentials
issued int he US.Total percentage of GED credentials issued in state prisons represent credentials issued in correctional institutions of those states that have prison
in the US.information
Total percentage
of
GED
credentials
issued
in
state
prisons
represent
credentials
issued
in
correctional
institutions
for a given year as a percentage of total GED credentials issued in those states. The percentage of GED credentials issued in federal
prisons is
calculated
on total
credentials
issued
in the US (including
federal
prisons).year
Credentials
in insular areas,freely
associated
states,
Canada, overseas
locations
of those states
that
have
prison
information
for
a given
as aissued
percentage
of total
GED
credentials
issued
inand
those states.
military bases are excluded.
The percentage of GED credentials issued in federal prisons is calculated on total credentials issued in the US (including

federal prisons). Credentials issued in insular areas, freely associated states, Canada, overseas locations and military bases
are excluded.

with a growing population of the incarcerated, prison educational programs have been promoted on the basis of the
belief that education will decrease recidivism. The GED has quickly become a key ingredient in prison education
programs [United States Sentencing Commission, 2009]. In Federal prisons, inmates without a secondary degree
are required to complete 240 hours of class work, or to GED certify [United States Sentencing Commission, 2009].
Incarcerated individuals can qualify for monetary compensation for earning a GED as well as earning credits towards
early release [Ekstrand 2001, U.S. Department of Justice 2008]. Furthermore, in 1995, the incarcerated made up
9% of all Adult Education participants [National Advisory Council on Adult Education, Various Years]. A Bureau
of Justice Statistics (BJS) special report states that in 1997, 26% of all prison inmates earned a GED in prison

38 Figure 10 shows the percent of GEDs produced in prison which has grown consistently from 1994

[Harlow, 2003].

to 2005. Overall, the GED has become a near-mandatory component of the prison education system. The growth
of prison GEDs weakens its overall signaling value by its association with criminality.

Tyler and Kling [2007] study the post-release earnings of individuals who studied for the GED in prison.

They

use longitudinal data from the Florida Department of Corrections and other Florida state agencies to compare preand post-incarceration earnings for those who study for and receive GEDs. They nd that GED preparation and
receipt are associated with an increase in earnings for the rst three years after release, but fade thereafter. The

38 The

BJS brief does not explain their methodology and there may be survey bias (people in prison longer are more likely to get GED

and surveyed) or other statistical concerns.

47

positive initial impact might be explained by non-random institutional sorting of individuals and by self-selection.
To net out self-selection, the authors also compare earnings of those obtaining a GED with those that take GED
preparation classes but do not earn a credential. They nd no eect. Because both of these populations undertook
some amount of study, this nding rules out a signaling eect of the GED.
There is a substantial literature that studies the impact of prison-based educational systems with a focus on
recidivism, but this work faces signicant challenges in addressing the endogeneity of educational attainment and
the lack of baseline data on prior to imprisonment.

Gaes [2009] surveys this literature and highlights the eect

of GED receipt, as well as vocational training and Adult Basic Education training, on post-release wages and
recidivism. Results from studies that he identies as methodologically sound are generally mixed with eects that
are either very modest or statistically insignicant.

4.3 Growth in High School-Age Test Takers
In 1955, as more states began oering the GED to civilians, the American Council of Education implemented a
minimum age of 20 for taking the GED test to prevent teen-aged students from seeking the GED as a replacement
for high school [Quinn, 2002]. In 1970, the national age requirement was lowered to 18. Following a period between
1981 and 1992 where there was no national age requirement, the national minimum has been set at 16. Many states
set age requirements above the national minimum. Figure 26 shows the population-weighted average national age
requirement for taking the GED and the average age of GED test takers over time.

The sharp fall in both age

requirement and average age in the early 1970s represents the expansion of the population eligible to take the GED.
Originally, states granted exceptions to age requirements in specic cases, such as teenage pregnancy. The number of
exceptions to age restrictions has greatly increased over time, leading to growth in the number of 16-to-17-year-olds
attempting the GED. The two relevant age restrictions for taking the GED are the statutory age requirement and,
indirectly, the minimum age that students can drop out of high school. Figure 27 plots the percentage of GED test
takers qualifying as age exceptions to the minimum testing age, and the percentage of GED test takers qualifying as
both an exception to the minimum testing age and the minimum age for compulsory high school attendance. Both
series are increasing with GED age exceptions growing from 6% in 1980 to nearly 14% in 2007, and dual exceptions
growing from 1% in 1990 to over 6% in 2007 Humphries [2010].
Trends in the age composition of GED takers reect these changes in eligibility and institutional allowances. Figure
28 shows the number of test takers by age.

The rst panel shows that growth since the early 1980s is almost

48

Figure 26: Minimum Age Requirement and Average GED Testing Age

Source: GED Testing Service [1958-2008]. Notes: The population-weighted average minimum age is calculated by weighting
the states' age requirements by the state's total population. The national age requirement is assigned to states with
requirements below the national age requirement.

Figure 27: GED Test Takers Qualifying as Exceptions to Age Requirements

Reproduced from Humphries [2010]. Source: GED Testing Service [1958-2008]. Notes: National Center for Educational
Statistics Data.

GED Age Exceptions are individuals taking the GED at ages below the minimum GED testing age.

GED & Mand. High School Age Exceptions are individuals from GED Age Exceptions that are also below the compulsory
schooling age in their state, making them double exceptions.

49

completely attributable to growth in 16-to-19-year-old takers. Test taking rates were distinguished between 16-to17-year-old and 18-to-19-year-old takers in 1980. The second panel shows that 16-to-17-year-olds are responsible
for virtually all growth in GED test taking within the 16-to-19 age group. Because these individuals are still of
high school age, their growth as a group raises the question of whether the GED is serving as a true second chance
opportunity or as a substitute for a more valuable high school degree. Of particular concern is the possibility that
teenagers with the lowest levels of noncognitive skills are the most likely to opt out of high school in order to receive
the GED and least likely to benet from doing so.

The decision-making process of teens may lead them to make choices that restrict their educational paths and

39 Given questionable teen decision-making, several institutional practices

earnings in a way that they later regret.

may increase the rate of ill-advised dropping out. Many state-issued GED certicates have names such as Kansas
State High School Diploma or Maryland High School Diploma which mislead students into false expectations of
equivalence with traditional high school [GED Testing Service, 1958-2008].

The GED Option Programs represent another institutional path to GED certication for high school students. In
some states, the American Council on Education has approved programs which directly target at-risk students in
high school and guide them toward GED certication. While states set their own determination of at-risk, this

40 Each state has its own set of requirements

commonly means students at risk of not graduating with their class.

on what structure the GED Option Program takes and who is eligible.
of preparation across the 11 participating states.

This introduces a range in the rigor

States vary in the hours of preparation required per week,

requirements of complementary career-based training, practice-test policies, and in the study hours elicited from

41 These programs have not been evaluated for their eect on labor market outcomes, but represent

participants.

an institutional shift toward younger populations.

39 The

literature in psychology formally recognizes this as time-inconsistent preferences, where teens may discount future outcomes at

a higher rate than they would at full maturity. Recent work in neuroscience gives concrete support to the common notion that teens
in late adolescencethe period when the decision to drop out is mademake decisions that are inconsistent with their adult preferences.
See Steinberg [2007] and Steinberg [2008].

40 See the GED Option Statistical Report [GED Testing Service, 2008] for more detail on these programs.
41 Virginia for example has a demanding Option Program requiring 15 hours of academic preparation per week,

work- or career-based

training for 10 hours a week, and scores of 450 on each subsection of the ocial practice test (higher than the 410 minimum 450 average
state passing requirement for the GED) before GED certication is allowed. On the other hand, Oregon allows the requirements to be
set to a much higher degree by the institution allowing much more exibility including self-study, and technology-assisted study as a
means of GED preparation. Similarly, the hours of studying and days enrolled in the option program also vary greatly. For example,
Oregon's GED Option participants reported studying for a median of 20 hours with few explicit requirements. Louisiana, on the other
hand, reported a mean of 150 hours and require 15 hours of academic preparation per week and 10 hours a week of job training.

50

Figure 28: Test Taking Populations By Age

Source: GED Testing Service [1958-2008]. 1974 is the year that test taking rates by age were rst reported. Starting in
1980 the 16-to-19 age category is divided into 16-to-17 and 18-to-19-year-olds.

51

Figure 29: Decomposing Growth in GED Credentials.

Sources: GED Testing Service [1958-2008], National Advisory Council on Adult Education [Various Years], National Center
for Education Statistics [Various Years], U.S. Department of Education [Various Years], and Heckman and LaFontaine [2010].
Notes: The categories of GED credentials are not mutually exclusive; an individual may be counted in multiple categories.
Years missing specic categories are due to missing data. Specic years have been excluded from the graph due to highly
incomplete data. Prior to 1990, the age categories are imputed from the percent of GED test takers in the specic age category
times the number of credentials. Adult Education statistics did not separate between GEDs and high school diplomas after
1996. From 1997 to 2006 the numbers are imputed by multiplying the total number of GEDs and high school diplomas issued
by the average ratio of GEDs to GEDs plus high school diplomas from 1991 to 1996.

4.4 Summing up the Sources of Growth of GEDs
Since its introduction, the GED has grown rapidly.

This rapid growth occurs despite the GED's low economic

returns. The growth of the GED can be credited to the adoption of the GED by government and non-prot entities,
as well as the expansion of the GED into new populations. Figure 29 shows the number of total credentials issued
each year, as well as the number of credentials contributed by Adult Education, prison populations, 16-to-17-year-old
GED test takers and 18-to-19-year-old GED test takers. These four categories each account for a large percentage
of the credentials issued. Unfortunately, the promotion of the GED has pushed it further from subpopulations that
might potentially benet from it. The test has expanded to younger populations which provides adverse incentives
to high school-age individuals discussed in more detail below. Figure 30 and 31 provide a time line of key events in
the growth of the GED.

52

Figure 30: Key Dates and the Number of GED Test Takers

Sources: GED Testing Service [1958-2008], Quinn [2002], Rose [1991], GED Testing Service [2008], Heckman and

LaFontaine [2010], and Boesel et al. [1998]

Figure 31: The Average Age of GED Test Takers and Key Changes in Age Policies

Sources: GED Testing Service [1958-2008], Quinn [2002], Rose [1991], GED Testing Service [2008], Heckman and
LaFontaine [2010], and Boesel et al. [1998]

53

5 Adverse Consequences of the GED
The GED's low returns may be unfortunate, but one might argue that its low costs and low returns balance and
may not do much harm. In this section we show that its availability and scale does cause harm. One concern is that
the availability of the GED as an easier-to-obtain secondary credential induces many individuals to drop out of high
school. The alternative to GED receipt for these individuals is high school completion and not dropping out. An
additional harm arises from counting GEDs in graduation statistics. This practice hides declines in traditional high
school graduation rates and thus has disguised educational problems. Finally, the practice of improperly counting
the GED as a high school diploma generates biased estimates of the returns to education.

5.1 The GED Induces Would-Be High School Graduates to Drop Out
The availability of the test induces some students to drop out and seek a GED rather than persist in high school.
Several papers in the literature demonstrate that changes in the relative costs of the GED certication and high
school completion induce substitutions of one degree for the other at dierent margins. Lillard and DeCicca [2001]
demonstrates that the number of students who drop out of high school (including GEDs) increases when the number
of credits needed to graduate increases. They estimate that a standard deviation increase in the course graduation
requirements in the US would cause 26,000 to 65,000 individuals to drop out of high school. Chaplin [1999] provides
descriptive evidence that high school-aged students are dropping out to take the GED and that requiring parental
consent helps curb this practice.

Humphries [2010] demonstrate that 16-to-17-year-old GED test taking rates

respond to high school credit requirements, minimum high school dropout age, and the diculty of the GED test.
He estimates that a minimum dropout age of 18 policy would decrease state-wide GED test taking by 0.22% of the
entire population of 16-to-17-year-olds. He also nds that an increase the diculty of the GED so that 10% fewer
graduation-bound high school seniors could pass the test would decrease state-wide GED test taking by 0.14% of

42 Warren et al. [2006] demonstrate that 16-to-19-year-old GED test-taking

the entire 16-to-17-year-old population.

rates respond to the presence of high school exit exams and other state high school policies. They report that a
high school exit exam leads to a state-wide increase in GED test taking of 0.12% of the entire 16-to-19-year-old
population.
Heckman et al. [2008] analyze two large natural experiments to study the eect of introducing the GED on inducing
dropouts. The national minimum diculty for passing the GED increased in 1997 which forced only a subset of

42 Median

16-to-17-year-old state population was 112,000 in year 2000.

54

states to increase their passing standards to be compliant.

The increase raised the diculty of the test so that

only 60% rather than 66% of graduation bound high school seniors would be able to pass the test on a single try.
The study also looks at the eect of California's introduction of a GED credential in 1974. Dierence-in-dierences
estimates show that these two policy changes resulted in a 1.3% decrease in dropout rates for states where the

43

passing standard increased, and 3.1% fall in high school graduation rates when the GED became available.

Humphries [2010] examines the eect of introducing GED Option Programs at the school district level using data

44 Using school district-level panel data from Oregon with year and district xed eects, Humphries

from Oregon.

nds that introduction of these programs at the district level or in traditional high schools led to a fall of approximately 5% in four year high school completion rates. Interestingly, in districts where the Option Program was only
introduced in alternative institutions, such as community colleges or charter schools, the eect was a decrease of

45

only 1.8%.

Heckman et al. [2008] and Humphries [2010] demonstrate that the GED induces some would-be high school graduates
into dropping out, but we do not know which individuals drop out or how successful they would have been if they had
stayed in high school. The dynamic model of Heckman and Urzua [2010] can be used to simulate counterfactuals.
Table 11 contrasts the actual patterns of educational attainment of white males in the NLSY79 sample with predicted
values if the GED were abolished. Not all GEDs persist as dropouts. Of the 3.7% of the sample that obtains a
terminal GED or some college through the GED, only 2.3% remain as dropouts in the counterfactual state, whereas
the rest either nish high school or complete higher levels of post-secondary education. While this line of structural
research is still being rened, it has the promise of generating the likely eects on educational attainment arising
from enforced age limits or increased test diculty. The magnitudes in Table 11 are broadly consistent with the
estimates reported from natural experiments in Heckman et al. [2008].

5.2 The GED Inates High School Graduation Statistics
The high school graduation rate is a barometer of the health of American society and the skill level of its future
workforce. Historically, the U.S. graduation rate continued to climb as schooling became increasingly important.
This trend, however, counts GEDs as high school graduates. When GEDs are counted separately, the traditional
high school graduation rate was falling until 2000.

43 See

Section E of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for more in depth description of these

results.

44 A full list of states implementing GED
45 For further results see Section E of the

Option Programs can be found in GED Testing Service [2008].
Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/).

55

Simulation Exercise: The Effects of Eliminating the GEDa
Option Value Model

Table 11: Simulated Response of Educational Attainment to Elimination of the GED

Schooling Level
Four Year College
Some Four Year College
Two Year College
Some Two Year College
Some College GED
High School Graduates
GEDs
High School Dropouts

Simulated with GED
(1)
25.5%
7.0%
7.2%
10.2%
2.5%
31.9%
3.7%
12.0%

No GED
(2)
26.0%
7.1%
7.8%
10.7%
34.0%
14.3%

Change in Rate
(2)-(1)
0.5%
0.1%
0.6%
0.6%

% Change
((2)/(1)-1)%
2.1%
1.3%
8.0%
5.5%

2.1%

6.5%

2.4%

19.6%

Note: The numbers in columns (1) and (2) are computed as fractions of the overall population
Source: Reproduced from Heckman and Urzua [2010].

Two commonly-used measures of the high school graduation rate are reported by the National Center of Education
Statistics (NCES). The rst is the high school status completion rate which counts the number of 18-to-24-yearolds possessing a high school credential and divides it by the population aged 18 to 24. The second is the 17-year-old
graduation ratio, which is the number of diplomas issued in any given state divided by their 17-year-old population
in a given year. The former includes the GED as a high school credential; the latter does not.

Figure 32 shows the time path of both measures, including the completion rate by race. The overall completion rate
and 17 year-old graduation ratio were relatively similar in 1968 but diverged afterward. High school graduation
was falling from the 1970s through about year 2000, The US graduation rate has only recently returned to where
it was forty years ago.

The dierences between status completion rates and the graduation ratio has previously been noted. Most of the
gap comes from alternative certications which are predominantly GEDs [Finn, 1987]. Once the nonequivalence
of GEDs to high school graduates is demonstrated, the growing gap in the status completion rate and graduation
ratio becomes a great concern. Rather than an 88% graduation rate in the recent decade, estimates were reported
as low as 66% as several researchers made eorts to construct correct high school graduation rates not counting
GEDs as high school graduates (Greene [2001], Swanson [2004], Miao and Haney [2004], Warren [2005]).

These

corrected estimates varied depending on the data set and methodology used, leading to further confusion over which
number was the real graduation rate.

Heckman and LaFontaine [2010] systematically examine each data set used in this debate and consider sources of

56

Figure 32: Trends in Commonly-Reported Measures of High School Graduation Rates

Reproduced from Heckman and LaFontaine [2010]. Source: Reproduced in part from the National Center for Educational
Statistics (NCES) publication Dropout Rates in the United States: 2005 (Laird et al. [2007]). Notes: Rates prior to 1972 are
based on author's calculations using Current Population Survey (CPS) data. The status completion rate is the percentage of
18-to24-year-olds not enrolled in secondary school who have a high school credential. High school credentials include regular
diplomas and alternative credentials such as GED certicates. Hispanic ethnicity is not available before 1972. The 17-yearold graduation ratio is from the Digest of Education Statistics. HS graduates for the graduation ratio include both public
and private school diplomas and exclude GED recipients and other certicates. October 17-year-old population estimates
are obtained from Census Bureau P-20 reports.

57

Figure 33: GEDs as a Percent of HS Credentials by Race, 2005

Source: GED Testing Service [1958-2008].

46 They nd that using

bias in each data set in order to construct measures that are consistent across data sets.

year 2000 Census data, removing GEDs lowers overall graduation rates by 7.4%. Because of dierential rates of
alternative credentialing, graduation rates fall by dierent amounts for dierent groups: 8.1% for males, 6.6% for
females, 10.3% for black males, and 8.7% for black females.

While the completion rates by race shown in Figure 32 shows a decreasing white-black and white-Hispanic high
school certication rate over time, those trends are fully explained by increasing rates of alternative certication.
Figure 33 shows GED credentials as a percent of high school credentials issued broken down by race in 2005. GEDs

47 Over the last 40 years the

account for 20% of black high school credentials, but only 11% of white credentials.
minority education gap has been constant.

5.3 The GED Obscures the Actual Returns to Education
The misclassication of GEDs also aects estimates of the returns to education. While the dropout-to-high school
and high school-to-college wage gaps have indeed been increasing, the GED misclassication is responsible for a

46 For

bias extending beyond the GED across the Census, the Current Population Survey (CPS), and Common Core Data (CCD) see

Heckman and LaFontaine [2010] directly.

47 See

Section E of the Web Appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/GEDHandbookChapter/) for tables demonstrating the eect on the

dierential eect on graduation rates for dierent races and genders of removing prisoners, immigrants, and military servicemen from
calculations of the graduation rate.

58

sizable amount of this gap. Using the traditional CPS method of treating GED recipients and high school graduates
as equivalent, Cameron and Heckman [1993] estimate a 21% return to four year college completion. When classifying
GEDs and high school graduates separately, the high school-to-college gap falls to 19.6%.

Heckman and LaFontaine [2006] show that the imputation method used by the CPS generates biased wages across
educational levels. The CPS imputes missing wages by matching on socioeconomic data using other observations in
the same educational categories: 1) high school dropouts; 2) high school graduates with up to, but not including, a
bachelor's degree; and 3) bachelor's degree or above. This procedure allocates missing GED wages with data drawn
from high school graduates (including individuals with some college), and lls in missing high school graduate
wages with data drawn from GEDs. Heckman and LaFontaine nd that estimated returns to GED certication
were overstated by 35% when CPS allocated wages are included for native-born males, and 25% for native-born
females. Similarly, they nd that excluding allocated earners lowers the returns to high school graduation for the
full sample of males by 5% and the returns to college by 12%. The fact that the CPS increasingly reports missing
values, coupled with the misallocation error of GED and high school wages, has lead to increasingly biased estimates
of the returns to education over time.

Table 12 displays evidence from three birth cohorts within the NLSY79 sample to compare how high school-tocollege and dropout-to-high school wage dierentials vary depending on how GED recipients are classied. Because
the number of GED recipients grows from 9% of high school credentials to 20% across these birth cohorts, the bias
the GED generates in returns to educational categories also increases over time. For the 1957-1958 birth cohort,
GED misclassication accounts for 6.1% of the college-high school wage gap in log annual earnings. By the 19621964 birth cohort, GED misclassication grew to 9.5% of the college-high school wage gap in log annual earnings
and 5.6% of the dropout-college wage gap.

6 Conclusion
This chapter reviews the scholarly literature on the General Educational Development certicate. The consensus
in the literature is that the GED testing program does little good for the substantial majority of its takers in
generating economic opportunity directly and in opening the door to post-secondary education.

This nding is

especially troubling given the size and rate of growth of the GED. Growth in the GED appears to be largely fueled
by various government policies. Until recently, misclassication of the GED as a high school equivalent credential has

59

Table 12: The Role of the GED in Explaining Rising Educational Wage Gaps

Source: Reproduced from Heckman and LaFontaine [2010] who use NLSY79 data on males and females aged 25-29. Notes: The college
category includes those with a four year degree or higher. Those with some college and no two or four year degree are included in the
GED and HS categories, respectively, depending on their credential. Two year degree holders are estimated separately. All education
dummies are mutually exclusive. Estimated wage gaps are based on the following 3 OLS specications; Model 1: GEDs are included as
HS graduates; Model 2: GEDs treated separately; and Model 3: GEDs treated as dropouts. Persons enrolled in school at each age are
deleted as are those who are not working or self-employed. Those making less than $2 or more than $100 per hour are deleted as are
those making less than $100 or more than $4,000 weekly. In addition, those making less than $2,000 or more than $200,000 are dropped.
Region dummies are included in all regressions but are not shown. Percentages of GEDs are calculated using sampling weights. Weekly
wage estimates are weighted by weeks worked last year. Hourly wage estimates are weighted by hours worked last year. Huber-white
robust standard errors clustered by individual are reported.
*Based on Model 1: Counting GEDs as HS graduates
**Computed as the dierence in the college-HS log wage gap in Model 1 vs. Model 2

Â„Computed

as the dierence in the college-dropout wage premium in Model 1vs. Model 3

60

hidden decreases in the high school graduation rate and has disguised the failure of minority graduation convergence.
The study of the GED sheds considerable light on the value of noncognitive skills and the danger of relying solely
on tests of scholastic aptitude to monitor the success of American educational policy.

References
David H. Autor, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. Trends in U.S. wage inequality: Revising the revisionists.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2):300323, 2008.

Julian R. Betts and Magnus Lofstrom. The educational attainment of immigrants: Trends and implications. In
George J. Borjas, editor, Issues in the Economics of Immigration, Chapter 2, pp. 51116. University of Chicago
Press, 2000.

st edition, 2002.

Jerry Bobrow. GED (General Educational Development). Clis Notes, Indianapolis, IN, 1

David Boesel, Nabeel Alsalam, and Thomas M. Smith.
Recipients.

Educational and Labor Market Performance of GED

U.S. Dept. of Education, Oce of Educational Research and Improvement, National Library of

Education, Washington D.C., 1998.

Lex Borghans, Bart H. H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman, and John Eric Humphries. IQ, achievement, and personality.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Maastricht and University of Chicago (revised from the 2009 version), 2010.

George J. Borjas, editor. Issues in the economics of immigration. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2000.

Stephen V. Cameron and James J. Heckman.

The nonequivalence of high school equivalents.

Journal of Labor

Economics, 11(1, Part 1):147, January 1993.

Jian Cao, Ernst W. Stromsdorfer, and Gregory Weeks. The human capital eect of general education development
certicates on low income women. Journal of Human Resources, 31(1):206228, Winter 1996.

Pedro Carneiro, James J. Heckman, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. Labor market discrimination and racial dierences
in pre-market factors. Journal of Law and Economics, 48(1):139, April 2005.

Joseph M. Carroll.

The Copernican Plan: Restructuring the American high school.

358365, 1990.

61

Phi Delta Kappan, 71(5):

Duncan Chaplin. GEDs for teenagers: Are there unintended consequences? Technical report, The Urban Institute,
November 1999.

Melissa A. Clark and David A. Jaeger. Natives, the foreign-born, and high school equivalents: New evidence on the
returns to the GED. Journal of Population Economics, 19(4):769793, October 2006. doi: 10.1007/s00148-0050037-8.

Laurie E. Ekstrand. Reintegration of oenders into communities. Technical Report GAO-01-966T, United States
General Accounting Oce, Washington, DC, 2001.

Testimony Before the Subcommittee on the District of

Columbia, Committee on Government Reform, House of Representatives.

Chester E. Finn, Jr. The high school dropout puzzle. Public Interest, 87(2):322, 1987.

Gerald G. Gaes.

The impact of prison education programs on post-release outcomes.

Presented at the Reentry

Roundtable on Education, March 31 and April 1, 2008. John Jay College of Criminal Justice, New York City.,
November 2009.

GED Testing Service. The GED Option Program Statistical Report. GED Testing Service, Washington, DC, 2008.

GED Testing Service. Technical Manual: 2002 Series GED Tests. GED Testing Service, Washington, DC, March
2009.

GED Testing Service.

Examiner's Manual Tests of General Educational Development.

GED Testing Service,

Washington, DC, Various Years.

GED Testing Service.

Who Took the GED?:

GED Statistical Report.

American Council on Higher Education,

Washington, DC, 1958-2008.

Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz.

The race between education and technology.

Belknap Press of Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008.

Jay P. Greene. High school graduation rates in the United States. Civic Report 31, Center for Civic Innovation at
the Manhattan Institute with Black Alliance for Educational Options, 2001.

W. Norton Grubb. Learning and earning in the middle, part I: National studies of pre-baccalaureate education.
Economics of Education Review, 21(4):299321, 2002.

62

Jinyong Hahn, Petra E. Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. Identication and estimation of treatment eects with
a regression-discontinuity design. Econometrica, 69(1):201209, January 2001.

Karsten T. Hansen, James J. Heckman, and Kathleen J. Mullen. The eect of schooling and ability on achievement
test scores. Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2):3998, JulyAugust 2004.

Caroline Wolf Harlow. Education and correctional populations. Bureau of Justice Statstics Special Report NCJ
195670, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Washington, DC, 2003.

James J. Heckman and Paul A. LaFontaine. Bias corrected estimates of GED returns. Journal of Labor Economics,
24(3):661700, July 2006.

James J. Heckman and Paul A. LaFontaine. The American high school graduation rate: Trends and levels. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 92(2):244-262, 2010.

James J. Heckman and Yona Rubinstein. The importance of noncognitive skills: Lessons from the GED testing
program. American Economic Review, 91(2):145149, May 2001.

James J. Heckman and Sergio Urzua.

The option value and rate of return to educational choices.

Unpublished

Manuscript, Northwestern University, 2010.

James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, and Nicholas Mader.

Studies of the GED testing program.

Under

preparation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2010a.

James J. Heckman, John Eric Humphries, and Nicholas Mader. Hard evidence on soft skills: The GED and the
problem of soft skills in America. Under preparation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2010b.

James J. Heckman, Paul A. LaFontaine, and Pedro L. RodrÃ­guez. Taking the easy way out: How the GED testing
program induces students to drop out. Under review, Journal of Labor Economics, 2008.

James J. Heckman, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. The eects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on labor
market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3):411482, July 2006.

James J. Heckman, Sergio Urzua, and Gregory Veramendi. The eects of schooling on labor market and health
outcomes. Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University, 2010.

John Eric Humphries.

Young GEDs:

The growth and change in GED test takers.

University of Chicago, 2010.

63

Unpublished Manuscript.

Guido Imbens and Thomas Lemieux. Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice. Journal of Econometrics,
142(2):615635, 2008.

Christopher Jepsen, Peter Mueser, and Kenneth Troske. Labor market returns to the GED using regression discontinuity analysis. Presented at the EALE - SOLE 2010 Third World Conference . June 17-19, 2010 at University
College London., April 2010.

Jennifer Laird, Gregory Keinzl, Matthew DeBell, and Chris Chapman. Dropout rates in the United States: 2005.
Compendium Report NCES 2007-059, National Center for Education Statistics, June 2007.

Janice H. Laurence. The military performance of dropouts and GED holders. In: Heckman, J. J., Humphries. J.
E., Mader, N. S. (Eds.), Studies of the GED Testing Program. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Dean R. Lillard and Philip DeCicca. Higher standards, more dropouts? Evidence within and across time. Economics
of Education Review, 20(5):459473, 2001.

Joseph W. McLaughlin, Gary Skaggs, and Margaret Becker Patterson.

Preparation for and performance on the

GED test. Research Studies 2009-2, American Council on Education: GED Testing Service, Washington, DC,
August 2009.

Jing Miao and Walt Haney. High school graduation rates: Alternative methods and implications. Education Policy
Analysis Archives, 12:168, 2004.

Richard J. Murnane, John B. Willett, and Kathryn Parker Boudett. Do high school dropouts benet from obtaining
a GED? Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 17(2):133147, Summer 1995.

Richard J. Murnane, John B. Willett, and Kathryn P. Boudett. Does acquisition of a GED lead to more training,
post-secondary education, and military service for school dropouts?

Industrial Relations Review, 51:100116,

1997.

Richard J. Murnane, John B. Willett, and Kathryn Parker Boudett. Do male dropouts benet from obtaining a
GED, postsecondary education, and training? Evaluation Review, 22(5):475502, October 1999.

Richard J. Murnane, John B. Willett, and John H. Tyler. Who benets from obtaining a GED? Evidence from
High School and Beyond. Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(1):2337, February 2000.

64

National Advisory Council on Adult Education. A History of the Adult Education Act. National Advisory Council
on Adult Education, Washington, DC, 1980.

National Advisory Council on Adult Education.

Annual Report to the President of the United States.

National

Advisory Council on Adult Education, Washington, DC, Various Years.

National Center for Education Statistics. Education Longitudinal Study of 2002 (ELS:2004/04), First Follow-up,
Student Survey. National Center for Education Statistics, Washington, DC, 2006.

National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Education Statistics. National Center for Education Statistics,
Washington, DC, Various.

National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Educational Statistics. National Center for Education Statistics,
Washington, DC, Various Years.

Margaret Becker Patterson, Wei Song, and Jizhi Zhang.

GED candidates and their postsecondary educational

outcomes: A pilot study. Research Studies 2009-5, GED Testing Service, Washington, DC, December 2009.

Lois M. Quinn. An institutional history of the GED. WI: University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Employment and
Training Institute, 2002.

Amy D. Rose. Ends or Means: An overview of the history of the Adult Education Act. Information Series 346, ERIC
Clearinghouse on Adult, Career, and Vocational Education, Center on Education and Training for Employment,
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 1991.

Yona Rubinstein. The use of inter-states variation in GED passing standards for estimating the eect of a GED
degree on labor market outcomes of high school dropouts - a critique. Unpublished Manuscript, Brown University,
Department of Economics, August 2003.

Russell W. Rumberger. Dropping out of high school: The inuence of race, sex, and family background. American
Educational Research Journal, 20(2):199220, 1983.

Society

for

dential

Human

for

jobs

Resource
requiring

Management.
a

high

school

Does

your

degree?

company
Online

accept

Poll,

applicants

Retrieved

with

January

a

25,

GED
2008

www.shrm.org/poll/results.asp?question=67., 2002.

A. Michael Spence. Job Market Signaling. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87(3):355374, August 1973.

65

crefrom

Laurence Steinberg.

Risk taking in adolesence - New perspectives from brain and behavioral science.

Current

Directions in Psychological Science, 16(2):5559, 2007.

Laurence Steinberg.

A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking.

Developmental Review, 28(1):

78106, 2008.

Christopher B. Swanson.
graduation,

class

of

Who graduates?

2001.

Technical

Who doesn't?

report,

The

Urban

A statistical portrait of public high school
Institute

Education

Policy

Center,

2004.

http://www.urban.org/url.cfm?ID=410934, Last accessed April 26, 2010.

The College Board. Annual Survey of Colleges. The College Board, New York, NY, 2007. Data le.

John H. Tyler and Jerey R. Kling. Prison-based education and re-entry into the mainstream labor market. In
Shawn Bushway, Michael Stoll, and David Weiman, editors, Barriers to Reentry? The Labor Market for Released
Prisoners in Post-Industrial America. Russell Sage Foundation Press, New York, NY, 2007.

John H. Tyler, Richard J. Murnane, and John B. Willett. Estimating the labor market signaling value of the GED.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2):431468, May 2000.

John H. Tyler, Richard J. Murnane, and John B. Willett. Who benets from a GED? Evidence for females from
High School and Beyond. Economics of Education Review, 22(3):237247, June 2003.

Austin Texas United States Sentencing Commission, Western District of Texas. Regional hearing on the state of
federal sentencing. Testimony of Harley G. Lappin, March 18 2009.

U.S. Department of Education. Division of Adult Education and Literacy. Washington, DC, Various Years. Unpublished Data. Oce of Vocational and Adult Education.

U.S. Department of Justice.

Inmate work and performance pay.

Technical report, U.S. Department of Justice,

Federal Bureau of Prisons, Washington, DC, 2008.

John Robert Warren. State-level high school completion rates: Concepts, measures, and trends. Education Policy
Analysis Archives, 13:134, 2005.

John Robert Warren, Krista N. Jenkins, and Rachael B. Kulick.
completion and GED rates:

1975 through 2002.

High school exit examinations and state-level

Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 28(2):131152,

Summer 2006.

66

Jizhi Zhang, Mee Young Han, and Margaret Becker Patterson. Young GED examinees and their performance on
the GED tests. Research Studies 2009-1, GED Testing Service, 2009.

67

