NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK AVERSION AND WEALTH:
EVIDENCE FROM PERSON-TO-PERSON LENDING PORTFOLIOS
Daniel Paravisini
Veronica Rappoport
Enrichetta Ravina
Working Paper 16063
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16063

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

We are grateful to Lending Club for providing the data and for helpful discussions on this project.
We thank Michael Adler, Manuel Arellano, Nick Barberis, Geert Bekaert, Patrick Bolton, John Campbell,
Larry Glosten, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Bernard Salanie, and seminar participants at CEMFI, Columbia
University GSB, Duke Fuqua School of Business, Hebrew University, Harvard Business School, Kellogg
School of Management, Kellstadt Graduate School of Business-DePaul, London Business School,
Maryland Smith School of Business, M.I.T. Sloan, Universidad Nova de Lisboa, the Yale 2010 Behavioral
Science Conference, and the SED 2010 meeting for helpful comments. All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Daniel Paravisini, Veronica Rappoport, and Enrichetta Ravina. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Aversion and Wealth: Evidence from Person-to-Person Lending Portfolios
Daniel Paravisini, Veronica Rappoport, and Enrichetta Ravina
NBER Working Paper No. 16063
June 2010, Revised April 2011
JEL No. D12,D14,E21,G11
ABSTRACT
We estimate risk aversion from the actual financial decisions of 2,168 investors in Lending Club (LC),
a person-to-person lending platform. We develop a methodology that allows us to estimate risk aversion
parameters from each portfolio choice. Since the same individual makes repeated investments, we
are able to construct a panel of risk aversion parameters that we use to disentangle heterogeneity in
attitudes towards risk from the elasticity of investor-specific risk aversion to changes in wealth. In
the cross section, we find that wealthier investors are more risk averse. Using changes in house prices
as a source of variation, we find that investors become more risk averse after a negative wealth shock.
These preferences consistently extrapolate to other investor decisions within LC.
Daniel Paravisini
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 416
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dp2239@columbia.edu
Veronica Rappoport
Finance & Economics Division
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 821
New York, NY 10027
ver2102@columbia.edu

Enrichetta Ravina
Columbia University
Finance and Economics Division
Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY, 10027
er2463@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Theoretical predictions on investment, asset prices, and the cost of business cycles, depend
crucially on assumptions about the relationship between risk aversion and wealth.1 Although
characterizing this relationship has long been in the research agenda of empirical finance and
economics, progress has been hindered by the difficulty of disentangling the shape of the utility
function from preference heterogeneity across agents and changes in beliefs over time. For
example, the bulk of existing work is based on comparisons of risk aversion across investors
of different wealth, which requires assuming that agents have the same preference function.
If agents have heterogeneous preferences, however, cross sectional analysis leads to incorrect
inferences about the shape of the utility function when wealth and preferences are correlated.
Such a correlation may arise, for example, if agents with heterogenous propensity to take risk
make different investment choices, which in turn affect their wealth.2 To both characterize the
properties of the joint distribution of preferences and wealth in the cross section, and estimate
the parameters describing the utility function, one needs to observe how the risk aversion of the
same individual changes with wealth shocks.
Important recent work improves on the cross-sectional approach by looking at changes in
the fraction of risky assets in an investor’s portfolio that stem from the time series variation
in investor wealth (Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) and Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2009)).
The crucial identifying assumption required for using the share of risky assets as a proxy for
investor Relative Risk Aversion (RRA) in this setting, is that all other determinants of the share
of risky assets remain constant as the investor’s wealth changes. One must assume, for example,
that changes in investors’ beliefs about the expected return of risky assets, or about the returns
1
See Kocherlakota (1996) for a discussion of the literature aiming at resolving the equity premium and low
risk free rate puzzles under different preference assumptions. Campbell and Cochrane (1999), for example, model
preferences with habit formation that produce cyclical variations in risk aversion, and decreasing relative risk
aversion after a positive wealth shock. Gollier (2001) shows that wealth inequality raises the equity premium if
the absolute risk aversion is concave in wealth.
2
Guvenen (2009) and Gomes and Michaelides (2008) propose a model with preference heterogeneity that
endogenously generates cross sectional variation in wealth. Alternatively, an unobserved investor characteristic,
such as having more educated parents, may jointly affect wealth and the propensity to take risk.

2

of unobservable components of wealth such as human capital, are uncorrelated with shocks
to financial wealth. Attempts to address this identification problem through an instrumental
variable approach have produced mixed results: the estimated sign of the elasticity of RRA to
wealth varies across studies depending on the choice of instrument.3
The present paper exploits a novel environment to obtain unbiased measures of investor
risk aversion and relate them to investor wealth. We analyze the risk taking behavior of 2,168
investors based on their actual financial decisions in Lending Club (LC), a person-to-person
lending platform in which individuals invest in diversified portfolios of small loans. We develop
a methodology to estimate the local curvature of an investor’s utility function (Absolute Risk
Aversion, or ARA) from each portfolio choice. The key advantage of this estimation approach
is that it does not require characterizing investors’ outside wealth. We exploit the fact that
the same individuals make repeated investments in LC to construct a panel of risk aversion
estimates. We use this panel to both characterize the cross sectional correlation between risk
preferences and wealth, and to obtain reduced form estimates of the elasticity of investor-specific
risk aversion to changes in wealth.
Our estimation method is derived from an optimal portfolio model where investors not only
hold the market portfolio, but also securities for which they have subjective insights (Treynor
and Black (1973)). We treat investments in LC as special-insight securities, with returns that are
correlated with other securities through a common systematic factor (Sharpe’s Diagonal Model).
This implies that LC returns can be decomposed into a systematic component, correlated with
macroeconomic fluctuations, and a pure idiosyncratic component. We use the idiosyncratic
component to characterize investors’ preferences: an investor’s ARA is given by the additional
expected return that makes her indifferent about allocating the marginal dollar to a loan with
higher idiosyncratic default probability. Estimating risk preferences from the idiosyncratic component of returns implies that the estimates are independent from the investors’ overall risk
exposure or wealth. Moreover, by measuring the curvature of the utility function directly from
3

See Calvet et al. (2009) and Calvet and Sodini (2009) for a discussion.

3

the first order condition of this portfolio choice problem, we do not need to impose a specific
shape of the utility function. We show that our method obtains consistent estimates for the
curvature of the utility function under alternative preference specifications, such as expected
utility (EU) over wealth, EU over wealth and income, loss aversion, and narrow framing.
The average ARA implied by the tradeoff between expected return and idiosyncratic risk
in our sample of portfolio choices is 0.037. Our estimates imply an average income-based Relative Risk Aversion (income-based RRA), a commonly reported risk preference parameter in
experimental studies obtained assuming that the investor’s outside wealth is zero, of 2.85, with
substantial unexplained heterogeneity and skewness.4 We use experimental measurements of
risk aversion to benchmark our estimates because investors in our model face choices that are
similar to those faced by typical experimental subjects along important dimensions: Our model
transforms a complex portfolio choice problem into a choice between well defined lotteries of
pure idiosyncratic risk, where returns are characterized by a discrete failure probability (i.e.,
default) and the stakes are small relative to total wealth (the median investment in LC is $375).
The level, distribution, and skewness of the estimated risk aversion parameters are similar to
those obtained in laboratory and field experiments.5 These similarities indicate that investors
in our sample, despite being a self selected sample of individuals who invest on-line, have similar
risk preferences to individuals in other settings.
Using imputed net worth as a proxy for wealth in the cross section of investors, we find that
wealthier investors exhibit lower ARA and higher RRA when choosing LC loan portfolios.6 Our
preferred specification, which corrects for measurement error in the wealth proxy using house
prices in the investor’s zip code as an instrument, obtains an elasticity of ARA to wealth of
-0.059, which implies a cross sectional wealth elasticity of the RRA of 0.94.7
4

The income-based RRA, often reported in the experimental literature, is defined as ARA · E[y], where E[y]
is the expected income from the lottery offered in the experiment.
5
See for example Barsky, Juster, Kimball and Shapiro (1997), Holt and Laury (2002), Choi, Fisman, Gale and
Kariv (2007), and Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom (2007b).
6
Net worth is imputed by Acxiom as of October 2007. Acxiom is a third party specialized in recovering
consumer demographics based on public data.
7
Although the wealth-based RRA is not directly observable, we compute its elasticity from the following
relationship: ξRRA,W = ξARA,W + 1,where ξRRA,W and ξARA,W refer to the wealth elasticities of RRA and ARA,

4

The results demonstrate that there is a link between heterogeneity in risk preferences and
wealth in the cross section. Existing empirical evidence on this link, which is increasingly relevant
for modeling asset prices, is inconclusive. When the risk aversion parameters are estimated from
the share of risky and riskless assets, the sign of the correlation between risk aversion and wealth
is sensitive to the definition of wealth and the categorization of assets into risky and riskless
(see, among others, Blume and Friend (1975), Cohn, Lewellen, Lease and Schlarbaum (1975),
Morin and Suarez (1983), and Blake (1996)). Guiso and Paiella (2008) and Cicchetti and Dubin
(1994) avoid this problem by estimating risk aversion from answers to an hypothetical lottery
and data on insurance against phone line troubles, respectively. These studies find, as we do, a
positive cross sectional correlation between Relative Risk Aversion and wealth.
To characterize the shape of the utility function for the average investor, we estimate the
elasticity of risk aversion to changes in wealth in an investor fixed-effect specification. As a
wealth shock, we use the decline in house prices in the investor’s zip code during our sample
period—October 2007 to April 2008. The results indicate that the average investor’s RRA
increases after experiencing a negative housing wealth shock, with an estimated elasticity of
−1.82. Under reasonable assumptions about the relationship between housing and total wealth
during this period, the point estimates imply that the curvature of the value function increases
after a negative wealth shock. This is consistent with investors exhibiting decreasing Relative
Risk Aversion, and with theories of habit formation (as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999)), and
incomplete markets (as in Guvenen (2009)).8
A novel feature of our estimation approach is that it disentangles the measurement of risk
aversion from investors’ assessments about the systematic risk of LC loans. On average, the LC
systematic risk premium increases from 6.3% to 9.2% between the first and last three months
of the sample, indicating that investors’ priors on LC’s systematic risk increase substantially
during the period.
respectively.
8
These preference specifications are also consistent with the empirical findings in Calvet et al. (2009). Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008), on the other hand, find support for CRRA.

5

Overall, the results confirm that not accounting for preference heterogeneity and changes
in beliefs may bias estimates of the relationship between risk preferences and wealth. First,
the contrasting signs of the cross sectional and investor-specific wealth elasticities indicate that
inference on the elasticity of risk aversion to wealth from cross sectional data will be biased,
since risk taking behavior in the cross section of investors depends not only on the shape of the
utility function but also on the joint distribution of preferences and wealth.9 Second, our finding
that the expected return on LC systematic risk increases after house prices decline indicates that
wealth shocks are potentially correlated with general changes in investors’ beliefs. This implies
that the share of risky assets may not be a valid measure for investor RRA in the presence of
wealth shocks. In our context, for example, inference based on the share of risky assets alone
would have overestimated the elasticity of risk aversion to wealth.
The LC environment allows us to test for estimation bias due to misspecification of investors’
beliefs. An investor in LC can choose her investment portfolio manually or through an optimization tool. When the choice is manual, she selects loans by processing herself the information on
interest and idiosyncratic default rates provided on LC’s website. When she uses the tool, the
tool processes this information for her, by providing all the possible efficient (minimum variance)
portfolios that can be constructed with the available loans. The investor then chooses among the
efficient portfolios according to her own risk preferences. Importantly, our estimation procedure
and the tool use the same information on risk and return, and the same modeling assumptions
regarding a common systematic component across all potential loans. Any bias due to misspecified beliefs will result in a wedge between the risk aversion estimates based on manual and
automatic choices. Instead, we obtain the same risk aversion estimates when investors choose
portfolios manually or through the tool, which validates our modeling assumption.
We provide additional validity to our estimates by testing whether the level and wealth
9

Chiappori and Paiella (2008) find the bias from the cross sectional estimation to be economically insignificant.
In their case, however, changes in agent’s wealth are not exogenous, and risk aversion is measured through the
share of risky assets. Tanaka, Camerer and Nguyen (2010) use rainfall across villages in Vietnam as an instrument
for wealth and find significant difference between the OLS and IV estimators. However, to obtain the elasticity
of the agent-specific risk aversion, they must assume that preferences are equal across villages otherwise.

6

elasticity of risk aversion are consistent across different investors’ decisions within LC. We test
the consistency of the estimated level of risk aversion using a revealed preference argument.
The median investor has in her portfolio only a subset of the loans available at the time of her
investment decision. We use the foregone loans to perform an out-of-sample validation of the
ARA estimate obtained from the loans in the portfolio. We confirm that including the foregone
loans in the portfolio would lower the investor’s expected utility if her preferences are described
by the estimated ARA.
We also verify the consistency of the estimated elasticities of RRA to wealth by testing
the following predictions of the standard EU framework: when relative risk aversion decreases
(increases) in outside wealth, the share of wealth invested in LC will increase (decrease) in
outside wealth. Since our risk aversion measures are obtained solely from the composition of
each investment, these predictions can be tested out of sample by independently estimating
the elasticity of the total amount invested in LC to wealth. We find that the implied signs of
the RRA and total investment elasticities, both in the cross section and within investor, are
consistent with the predictions above.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Lending Club platform.
Section 3 solves the portfolio choice model and sets out our estimation strategy. Section 4
describes the data and the sample restrictions. Section 5 presents and discusses the empirical
results and provides a test of the identification assumptions. Section 6 explores the relationship
between risk preferences and wealth. Section 7 tests the consistency of the investor preferences
across different decisions within LC. And Section 8 concludes.

2

The Lending Platform

Lending Club (LC) is an online U.S. lending platform that allows individuals to invest in portfolios of small loans. The platform started operating in June 2007. As of May 2010, it has funded
$112,003,250 in loans and provided an average net annualized return of 9.64% to investors.10
10

For the latest figures refer to: https://www.lendingclub.com/info/statistics.action.

7

Below, we provide an overview of the platform and derive the expected return and variance of
investors’ portfolio choices.

2.1

Overview

Borrowers need a U.S. SSN and a FICO score of 640 or higher in order to apply. They can
request a sum ranging from $1,000 to $25,000, usually to consolidate credit card debt, finance a
small business, or fund educational expenses, home improvements, or the purchase of a car.
Each application is classified into one of 35 risk buckets based on the FICO score, the
requested loan amount, the number of recent credit inquiries, the length of the credit history,
the total and currently open credit accounts, and the revolving credit utilization, according to
a pre-specified published rule posted on the website.11 LC also posts a default rate for each
risk bucket, taken from a long term validation study by TransUnion, based on U.S. unsecured
consumer loans. All the loans classified in a given bucket offer the same interest rate, assigned
by LC based on an internal rule.
A loan application is posted on the website for a maximum of 14 days. It becomes a loan
only if it attracts enough investors and gets fully funded. All the loans have a 3 year term with
fixed interest rates and equal monthly installments, and can be prepaid with no penalty for the
borrower. When the loan is granted, the borrower pays a one-time fee to LC ranging from 1.25%
to 3.75%, depending on the credit bucket. When a loan repayment is more than 15 days late,
the borrower is charged a late fee that is passed to investors. Loans with repayments more than
120 days late are considered in default, and LC begins the collection procedure. If collection is
successful, investors receive the amount repaid minus a collection fee that varies depending on
the age of the loan and the circumstances of the collection. Borrower descriptive statistics are
shown in Table 1, panel A.
Investors in LC allocate funds to open loan applications. The minimum investment in a loan
is $25. According to a survey of 1,103 LC investors in March 2009, diversification and high
11

Please refer to https://www.lendingclub.com/info/how-we-set-interest-rates.action for the details of the classification rule and for an example.

8

returns relative to alternative investment opportunities are the main motivations for investing
in LC.12 LC lowers the cost of investment diversification inside LC by providing an optimization
tool that constructs the set of efficient loan portfolios for the investor’s overall amount invested in
LC—i.e., the minimum idiosyncratic variance for each level of expected return (see Figure 1).13
In other words, the tool helps investors to process the information on interest rates and default
probabilities posted on the website into measures of expected return and idiosyncratic variance,
that may otherwise be difficult to compute for an average investor (these computations are
performed in Subsection 2.2).14 When investors use the tool, they select, among all the efficient
portfolios, the preferred one according to their own risk preferences. Investors can also use the
tool’s recommendation as a starting point and then make changes. Or they can simply select
the loans in their portfolio manually.
Of all portfolio allocations between LC’s inception and June 2009, 39.6% was suggested by
the optimization tool, 47.1% was initially suggested by the tool and then altered by the investor,
and the remaining 13.3% was chosen manually.15
Given two loans that belong to the same risk bucket (with the same idiosyncratic risk), the
optimization tool suggests the one with the highest fraction of the requested amount that is
already funded. This tie-breaking rule maximizes the likelihood that loans chosen by investors
are fully funded. In addition, if a loan is partially funded at the time the application expires,
LC provides the remaining funds.
12
To the question “What would you say was the main reason why you joined Lending Club”, 20% of respondents
replied “to diversify my investments”, 54% replied “to earn a better return than (...)”, 16% replied “to learn more
about peer lending”, and 5% replied “to help others”. In addition, 62% of respondents also chose diversification
and higher returns as their secondary reason for joining Lending Club.
13
During the period analyzed in this paper, the portfolio tool appeared as the first page to the investors. LC
has recently changed its interface and, before the portfolio tool page, it has added a stage where the lender can
simply pick between 3 representative portfolios of different risk and return.
14
The tool normalizes the idiosyncratic variance into a 1–0 scale. Thus, while the tool provides an intuitive
sorting of efficient portfolios in terms of their idiosyncratic risk, investors always need to analyze the recommended
portfolios of loans to understand the actual risk level imbedded in the suggestion.
15
We exploit this variation in Subsection 5.2 to validate the identification assumptions.

9

2.2

Return and Variance of the Risk Buckets

All the loans in a given risk bucket z = 1, ..., 35 are characterized by the same scheduled monthly
payment per dollar borrowed, Pz , over the 3 years (36 monthly installments). The per dollar
scheduled payment Pz and the bucket specific default rate πz fully characterize the expected
return and variance of per project investments, µz and σz2 .
LC considers a geometric distribution for the idiosyncratic monthly survival probability of
the individual projects, Pr (T = τ ) = πz (1 − πz )τ for T ∈ [1, 36]. The resulting expectation and
variance of the present value of the payments, Pz , of a project in bucket z are:
"
µz = Pz 1 −
σz2 =

35
X
t=1



1 − πz
1+r

πz (1 − πz )t

36 #

t
X
τ =1

1 − πz
r + πz

Pz
(1 + r)τ

!2
+

36
X
τ =1

Pz
(1 + r)τ

!2
(1 − πz )36 − µ2z

where r is the risk-free interest rate. Although LC considers all risk to be idiosyncratic, our
estimations are not affected by the introduction of a non-diversifiable risk component, Vz . The
resulting variance of the return on investment in bucket z is given by:

 
 
var Rzi = Vz + var rzi
where rzi is the idiosyncratic component of the bucket’s return Rzi .
The idiosyncratic risk associated with bucket z decreases with the level of diversification
within the bucket; that is, the number of projects from bucket z in the portfolio of investor i,
niz . The resulting idiosyncratic variance is therefore investor specific:
 
1
var rzi = i σz2 .
nz

(1)

The expected return of an investment in bucket z is not affected by the number of loans in
the investor’s portfolio and is equal to the expected return of the representative project in that

10

bucket, µz , which is constant across investors:16
 
E [Rz ] = E Rzi = µz .

3

(2)

Estimation Procedure

The portfolio model in this section is based on Treynor and Black (1973). This framework
considers investors that, instead of simply holding a replica of the market portfolio, also hold
securities based on their own subjective insights.
Person-to-person lending markets, including LC, are not well known investment vehicles
among the general public. The decision to invest in LC depends on investors’ knowledge of its
existence and their subjective expectation that LC is, indeed, a good investment opportunity.
Thus, it is reasonable to assume that investors in LC have special insights, which explains why,
as we show later, their portfolio departs from just replicating the market; exactly the case
considered in Treynor and Black (1973).
This theoretical framework starts by recognizing that there is a high degree of co-movement
between securities, and specifically to our case, the probability of default of all loans in LC
is potentially correlated with macroeconomic fluctuations. We use Shape’s Diagonal Model of
covariance among securities to capture this insight. It assumes that returns are related only
through a common systematic factor (i.e., market or macroeconomic fluctuations). Under this
assumption, returns on LC loans can be decomposed into this common systematic factor and a
pure idiosyncratic component (we also refer to it as independent return).
The virtue of the model developed here is that the optimal portfolio depends only on the
expected return and variance of the idiosyncratic component. In other words, the optimal
amount invested in each LC loan does not depend on the return covariance with the investor’s
overall risk exposure, nor does it require knowing the amount and characteristics of her outside
16

The analysis in subsection 5.2 confirms that investors’ beliefs about the probabilities of default do not differ
substantially from those posted on the website and, therefore, σz and µz are constant across investors.

11

wealth. The optimality condition is such that the investor is indifferent about allocating an
extra dollar in a riskier bucket: the extra idiosyncratic risk would be exactly compensated by
the increase in expected return, given the risk aversion of the investor. Based on this optimality
condition, and having computed the expected return and the variance of the loans idiosyncratic
risk in Subsection 2.2, we infer the investor specific risk aversion.

3.1

The Model

Each investor i chooses the share of wealth to be invested in the Z + 2 available securities: a
security m that represents the market portfolio, with return Rm ; a security f , with risk-free
return equal to 1; and Z securities that are part of the active portfolio of the investor, with
return Rz .
We consider investments in LC as part of the active portfolio. We also allow for the existence
of unobservable outside active risky investments. That is, the 35 risk buckets in LC are denote
z = 1, ..., 35, with 35 ≤ Z.17 The resulting portfolio of investor i is
"
i

c =W

i

xif

+

xim Rm

+

Z
X

#
xiz Rzi

(3)

z=1

where ci stands for the investor’s consumption and xf , xm , and {xz }Z
z=1 correspond to the share
of wealth, W i , invested in the risk-free asset, the market portfolio, and the securities in the
active portfolio, respectively.
A projection of the return of each active security z = 1, ..., Z against the market gives two
factors. The first is the market sensitivity, or beta, of the security, and the second its independent
return:
Rzi = βzi · Rm + rzi

(4)

We consider all risk buckets to have the same systematic component, and allow the prior
17

In an alternative hypothesis, participants in LC do not have special insights and their investment in LC is
not part of the active component but only a fraction of the market portfolio. In that case, the composition of risk
buckets within LC is not given by the investor’s risk aversion, as the optimal shares in the market portfolio are
constant across investors. This hypothesis is strongly rejected by the data in the results section.

12

about the market sensitivity of LC returns to be investor specific. That is, for all z = 1, ..., 35 :
βzi = βLi . This assumption is tested in Subsection 5.2.18
We can rewrite the investor’s budget constraint in the following way:
"
ci = W i xif + xiZ+1 Rm +

Z
X

#
xiz rzi

(5)

z=1

where xiZ+1 is the total exposure to market risk, given both by the investor’s direct holdings of
market portfolio, xim , and, indirectly, by her accumulation of market risk as a by-product of the
position in the active portfolio:
xiZ+1 = xim +

Z
X

xiz βzi

(6)

z=1

Following Treynor and Black (1973), we use Sharpe’s Diagonal Model for covariance among
securities. It posits that the returns of the different investment opportunities are related to each
other only through their relationships with a common underlying factor. In the case of LC, the
loans in the program are assumed to be related to other securities only through the market’s
effect on LC systematic risk. That is, the independent returns, defined in equation (4), are
uncorrelated.
Assumption 1. Sharpe’s Diagonal Model19



for all n 6= h : cov rni , rhi = 0

To grasp the intuition behind this assumption consider, for example, how an increase in
macroeconomic risk (i.e., financial crisis) is captured in the model. Macro fluctuations, which
can trigger correlated defaults across buckets, represent an underlying common factor. Such
a common factor is reflected in the systematic component of equation (4) and can vary across
investors and time.
18

Note that under this assumption, the prior
about the systematic risk Vz introduced in Subsection 2.2 is

i 2
investor specific and it is given by Vzi = βL
· var [Rm ], for all z = 1, ..., 35.
19
Allowing a time dimension, the independent returns are also uncorrelated across time. That is, the portfolio
choices within LC are time-independent.

13

Under assumption 1, our theoretical framework transforms the original investor budget constraint in equation (3) into the portfolio in equation (5), composed of a risk-free asset and Z + 1
mutually independent securities. The investor is constrained to non-negative positions in all the
LC buckets: xz ≥ 0 for z = 1, ..., 35. The following problem describes the portfolio choice of
investor i:
"
max

xf ,{x}Z+1
z=1

Eu W

i

xf + xZ+1 Rm +

Z
X

#!
xz rzi

z=1

For all active buckets with xz > 0, the first order condition characterizing the optimal portfolio
share is:20




f oc xiz : E u0 ci · W i rzi − 1 = 0
A first-order linearization of the first order condition around expected consumption results
in the following optimality condition:

 
E rzi − 1 =

  !
 
u00 E ci
− 0
· W i xiz · var rzi .
i
u (E [c ])

(7)

Note that, even when LC projects are affected by market fluctuations, the optimal investment
in bucket z is independent of market risk considerations, or the volatility of the investor’s
securities outside LC. This is because the holding of market portfolio, xZ+1 in equation (6),
optimally adjusts to account for the indirect market risk imbedded in LC or any other security
in the active portfolio of the investor. The optimal LC portfolio depends only on the investor’s
risk aversion, and the expectation and variance of the independent return of each bucket z.
Rewriting investor-specific idiosyncratic risk in terms of the common parameter σz , com 
puted in equation (1), and substituting the expectation of the independent return, E rzi , with
expected return E [Rz ], common across investors, computed in equation (2), we derive our main

empirical equation. Let Ai be the set of all active risk buckets —i.e. Ai = z ≤ 35|xiz > 0 −,
20
The minimum investment per loan is $25. This limit results in discrete intervals over which the number of
projects financed, niz , is unaltered by a marginal change in xz . The following first order condition characterizes
the optimal portfolio within these discrete intervals.

14

then for all z ∈ Ai :
E [Rz ] = θi + ARAi ·

W i xiz 2
σ
niz z

(8)

where:

θi ≡ 1 + βLi E [Rm ]

i

ARA

 
u00 E ci
≡ − 0
u (E [ci ])

(9)

(10)

The parameter ARAi corresponds to the Absolute Risk Aversion. It captures the extra expected return needed to leave the investor indifferent when taking extra risk. The parameter θi
collects the systematic component of the LC investment, which is constant across buckets. We
estimate this parameter as a person-specific constant (the constant is investment-specific when
investors make multiple portfolio choices). Thus, our estimation procedure does not require the
computation of the LC portfolio covariance with the market. Our main estimation procedure
exploits only the active risk buckets (z ∈ Ai ); we show in Subsection 7.1 that the estimated risk
preferences are consistent with those implied by the forgone buckets (z ∈
/ Ai ).
We show in Appendix A that the same equation characterizes the optimal LC portfolio
and allows recovering the curvature of the utility function under three alternative preference
specifications: 1) when investors are averse to losses in their overall wealth, 2) an extreme version
of narrow framing in which investors’ preferences within LC are independent from their attitude
towards risk in other settings, and 3) when investor utility depends in a non-separable way on
both the overall wealth level and the income flow from specific components of the portfolio (for
example, as in Barberis and Huang (2001), Barberis, Huang and Thaler (2006), and Cox and
Sadiraj (2006)).
The expected lifetime wealth of the investors is unknown and we therefore cannot compute
the Relative Risk Aversion (RRA).21 However, for the purpose of comparing our estimates with
21

Although we cannot compute RRA, in Section 6 we infer its elasticity with respect to wealth, based on the

15

results from laboratory experiments, we follow that literature and define a relative risk aversion
based solely on the income generated by investing in LC (income-based RRA), which we denote
ρ (see, for example, Holt and Laury (2002)):

 i

ρi ≡ ARAi · ILi · E RL
−1
where ILi is the total investment in LC, ILi = W i
 i  P35 i
on the LC portfolio, E RL
= z=1 xz E [Rz ].

4

(11)

P35

 
i , and E Ri
x
z
z=1
L is the expected return

Data and Sample

Our sample covers the period between October 2007 and April 2008. Below we provide summary
statistics of the investors’ characteristics and their portfolio choices, and a description of the
sample construction.

4.1

Investors

For each investor we observe the home address zip code, verified by LC against the checking
account information, and age, gender, marital status, home ownership status, and net worth, obtained through Acxiom, a third party specialized in recovering consumer demographics. Acxiom
uses a proprietary algorithm to recover gender from the investor names, and matches investor
names and home addresses to available public records to recover age, marital status, home ownership status, and an estimate of net worth. Such information is available at the beginning of
the sample.
Table 1, panel B, shows the demographic characteristics of the LC investors. The average
investor in our sample is 43 years old, 8 years younger than the average respondent in the
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). As expected from younger investors, the proportion of
married participants in LC (56%) is lower than in the SCF (68%). Men are over-represented
elasticity of ARA: ξRRA,W = ξARA,W + 1.

16

among participants in financial markets, they account for 83% of the LC investors; similarly, the
faction of male respondents in the SCF is 79%. In terms of income and net worth, investors in LC
are comparable to other participants in financial markets, who are typically wealthier than the
median U.S. households. The median net worth of LC investors is estimated between $250,000
and $499,999, significantly higher then the median U.S. household ($120,000 according to the
SCF), but similar to the estimated wealth of other samples of financial investors. Korniotis and
Kumar (2010), for example, estimate the wealth of clients in a major U.S. discount brokerage
house in 1996 at $270,000.
To obtain an indicator of housing wealth, we match investors’ information with the Zillow
Home Value Index by zip code. The Zillow Index for a given geographical area is the value of the
median property in that location, estimated using a proprietary hedonic model based on house
transactions and house characteristics data, and it is available at a monthly frequency. Figure
2 shows the geographical distribution of the 1,624 zip codes where the LC investors are located
(Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico excluded). Although geographically disperse, LC investors
tend to concentrate in urban areas and major cities. Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of
median house values on October 2007 and their variation during the sample period—October
2007 to April 2008.

4.2

Sample Construction

We consider as a single portfolio choice all the investments an individual makes within a calendar
month.22 The full sample contains 2,168 investors, 5,191 portfolio choices, which results in 50,254
investment-bucket observations. To compute the expected return and idiosyncratic variance of
the investment-bucket in equations (2) and (1), we use as the risk free interest rate, the 3-year
yield on Treasury Bonds at the time of the investment. Table 2, panel A, reports the descriptive
statistics of the investment-buckets. The median expected return is 12.2%, with an idiosyncratic
22
This time window is arbitrary and modifying it does not change the risk aversion estimates. We chose a
calendar month for convenience, since it coincides with the frequency of the real estate price data that we use to
proxy for wealth shocks in the empirical analysis.

17

variance of 3.6%. Panel B, describes the risk and return of the investors’ LC portfolios. The
median portfolio expected return in the sample is 12.2%, almost identical to the expectation
at the bucket level, but the idiosyncratic variance is substantially lower, 0.0054%, due to risk
diversification across buckets.
Our estimation method imposes two requirements for inclusion in the sample. First, estimating risk aversion implies recovering two investor specific parameters from equation (8).
Therefore, a point estimate of the risk aversion parameter can only be recovered when a portfolio choice contains more than one risk bucket.
Second, our identification method relies on the assumption that all projects in a risk bucket
have the same expected return and variance. Under this assumption investors will always prefer
to exhaust the diversification opportunities within a bucket, i.e., will prefer to invest $25 in
two different loans belonging to bucket z instead of investing $50 in a single loan in the same
bucket. It is possible that some investors choose to forego diversification opportunities if they
believe that a particular loan has a higher return or lower variance than the average loan in the
same bucket. Because investors’ private insights are unobservable to the econometrician, such
deviations from full diversification will bias the risk aversion estimates downwards. To avoid
such bias we exclude all non-diversified components of an investment. Thus, the sample we base
our analysis on includes: 1) investment components that are chosen through the optimization
tool, which automatically exhausts diversification opportunities, and 2) diversified investment
components that allocate no more than $50 to any given loan.
After imposing these restrictions, the analysis sample has 2,168 investors and 3,745 portfolio
choices. The descriptive statistics of the analysis sample are shown in Table 2, column 2.
As expected, the average portfolio in the analysis sample is smaller and distributed across a
larger number of buckets than the average portfolio in the full sample. The average portfolio
expected return is the same across the two samples, while the idiosyncratic variance in the
analysis sample is smaller. This is expected since the analysis sample excludes non-diversified
investment components.

18

In the wealth analysis, we further restrict the sample to those investors that are located in zip
codes where the Zillow Index is computed. This reduces the sample to 1,806 investors and 3,145
portfolio choices. This final selection does not alter the observed characteristics of the portfolios
significantly (Table 2, column 3). To maintain a consistent analysis sample throughout the
discussion that follows, we perform all estimations using this final subsample unless otherwise
noted.

5

Risk Aversion Estimates

Our baseline estimation specification is based on equation (8). We allow for an additive error
term, such that for each investor i we estimate the following equation:

E [Rz ] = θi + ARAi ·

W i xiz 2
σ + εiz
niz z

(12)

There is one independent equation for each active bucket z in the investor’s portfolio. The
median portfolio choice in our sample allocates funding to 10 buckets, which provides us with
multiple degrees of freedom for estimation. We estimate the parameters of equation (12) with
Ordinary Least Squares.
Figure 3 shows four examples of portfolio choices. The vertical axis measures the expected
return of a risk bucket, E [Rz ], and the horizontal axis measures the bucket variance weighted by
the investment amount, W i xiz σz2 /niz . The slope of the linear fit is our estimate of the absolute
risk aversion and it is reported on the top of each plot.
The error term captures deviations from the efficient portfolio due to the $25 constraint
for the minimum investment, measurement errors by investors, and real or perceived private
information. The OLS estimates will be unbiased as long as the error component does not vary
systematically with bucket risk. We discuss and provide evidence in support of this identification
assumption below.

19

5.1

Results

The descriptive statistics of the estimated parameters of equation (8) for each portfolio choice
are presented in Table 3. The average estimated ARA across all portfolio choices is 0.0368.
Investors exhibit substantial heterogeneity in risk aversion, and its distribution is left skewed:
the median ARA is 0.0439 and the standard deviation 0.0246. This standard deviation overestimates the standard deviation of the true ARA parameter across investments because it includes
the estimation error that results from having a limited number of buckets per portfolio choice.
Following Arellano and Bonhomme (2009), we can recover the variance of the true ARA by subtracting the expected estimation variance across all portfolio choices. The calculated standard
deviation of the true ARA is 0.0237, indicating that the estimation variance is small relative to
the variance of risk aversion across investments.23 The range of the ARA estimates is consistent
with the estimates recovered in the laboratory. Holt and Laury (2002), for example, obtain
ARA estimates between 0.003 and 0.109, depending on the size of the bet.
The experimental literature often reports the income-based RRA, defined in equation (11).
To compare our results with those of laboratory participants, we report the distribution of the
implied income-based RRA in Table 3. The mean income-based RRA is 2.85 and its distribution
is right-skewed (median 1.62). This parameter scales the measure of absolute risk aversion
according to the lottery expected income; therefore, it mechanically increases with the size of the
bet. Table 3 reports the distribution of expected income from LC. The mean expected income
is $130, substantially higher than the bet in most laboratory experiments. Not surprisingly,
although the computed ARA in experimental work is typically larger than our estimates, the
income-based RRA parameter is smaller, ranging from 0.3 to 0.52 (see for example Chen and
Plott (1998), Goeree, Holt and Palfrey (2002), Goeree, Holt and Palfrey (2003), and Goeree
and Holt (2004)). Our results are comparable to Holt and Laury (2002), who also estimate risk
23

The variance of the true ARA is calculated as:
h
i
h
i
 2

i
[ −E σ
var ARAi = var ARA
bARAi

where the first term is the variance of the OLS ARA point estimates across all investments, and the second term
is the average of the variance of the OLS ARA estimates across all investments.

20

aversion for agents facing large bets and (implicitly) find income-based RRA similar to ours,
1.2. Finally, Choi et al. (2007) report risk premia with a mean of 0.9, which corresponds to an
income-based RRA of 1.8 in our setting. That paper also finds right skewness in their measure
of risk premia.
Our findings imply that the high levels of risk aversion exhibited by experimental subjects
extrapolate to actual small-stake investment choices. Rabin and Thaler (2001) and Rabin and
Thaler (2002) emphasize that such levels of risk aversion with small stakes are difficult to reconcile, within the expected utility framework over total wealth, with the observable behavior of
agents in environments with larger stakes. This suggests that EU framework on overall wealth
cannot describe agents behavior in our environment. We show in the Appendix that the ARA
estimated here describes the curvature of the utility function in other preference frameworks
that are consistent with observed risk behavior over small and large stake gambles (Barberis
and Huang (2001) and Cox and Sadiraj (2006)). In such alternate preference specifications,
agents’ ARA depends on, both, the level of initial wealth and the income generated by the
gamble. This implies that the estimated level of ARA may change with the expected income
of investments. Nevertheless, the elasticity of ARA with respect to investor’s wealth, our focus
in the next section, is consistent across different investment decisions and levels of expected
income in these frameworks. We provide evidence in Section 7 that our conclusions regarding
the relationship between investor risk aversion and wealth extrapolates to other decisions within
LC.
The parameter θ, defined in equation (9), captures the systematic component of LC. In
our framework, the systematic component is driven by the common covariance between all LC
bucket returns and the market, βL . The average estimated θ is 1.086, which indicates that the
average investor requires a systematic risk premium of 8.6%. The estimated θ presents very
little variation in the cross section of investors (coefficient of variation 2.7%), when compared
to the variation in the ARA estimates (coefficient of variation of 67%).24 Note that our ARA
24

As with the ARA, the estimation variance is small relative to the variance across investments. The standard
deviation of θ̂ is 0.0269, while the standard deviation of θ after subtracting the estimation variance is 0.0260.

21

estimates are not based on this risk premium; instead, they are based on the marginal premium
required to take an infinitesimally greater idiosyncratic risk.
Table 4 presents the average and standard deviation of the estimated parameters by month.
The average ARA increases from 0.032 during the first three months, to 0.039 during the last
three. This average time series variation is potentially due to heterogeneity across investors as
well as within investor variation, since not all investors participate in LC every month. The
analysis in the next section disentangles the two sources of variation.
The estimated θs imply that the average systematic risk premium increases from 6.3% to
9.2% between the first and last three months of the sample period. Note that the LC web page
provides no information on the systematic risk of LC investments. Thus, this change is solely
driven by changes in investors’ beliefs about the potential correlation between the likelihood
of default of LC loans and aggregate macroeconomic shocks (covariance between LC returns
and market returns, βL ), or about the expected market risk premium (E [Rm ]). This pattern
indicates that wealth shocks are potentially correlated with changes in investors’ beliefs about
risk and return on financial assets. Thus, we cannot infer the elasticity of RRA to wealth by
observing changes in the share of risky assets after a wealth shock, as they may be simply
reflecting changes in beliefs about the underlying distribution of risky returns. Our proposed
empirical strategy in the next section overcomes this identification problem.

5.2

Belief Heterogeneity and Bias: The Optimization Tool

Above we interpret the observed heterogeneity of investor portfolio choices as arising from differences in risk preferences. Such heterogeneity may also arise if investors have different beliefs
about the risk and returns of the LC risk buckets. Note that differences in beliefs about the
systematic component of returns will not induce heterogeneity in our estimates of the ARA. This
type of belief heterogeneity will be captured by variations in θ across investors. The evidence in
the previous section suggests that investors have relatively common priors about this systematic
component of the returns, i.e., common priors about LC’s beta, βL .

22

However, the parameter θ will not capture heterogeneity of beliefs that affects the relative risk
and expected return across buckets. This is the case if investors believe the market sensitivity
of returns to be different across LC buckets, i.e. if βzi 6= βLi for some z = 1, ..., 35; or if investors’
priors about the stochastic properties of the buckets idiosyncratic return differ from the ones
computed in equations (1) and (2), i.e. E i [Rz ] 6= E [Rz ] or σzi 6= σz for some z = 1, ..., 35. In
such cases, the equation characterizing the investor’s optimal portfolio is given by:

 W i xiz 2
σ
E [Rz ] = θi + ARAi · Bσi + Bµi + Bβi ·
niz z
This expression differs from our main specification equation (8) in three bias terms: Bσ ≡
2



σzi /σz , Bµ ≡ E [Rz ] − E i [Rz ] / W i xiz σz2 /niz , and Bβ ≡ βzi − βLi /(W i xiz σz2 /niz ).
Two features of the LC environment allow us to estimate the magnitude of the overall bias
from these sources. First, LC posts on its website an estimate of the idiosyncratic default
probabilities for each bucket. Second, LC offers an optimization tool to help investors diversify
their loan portfolio. The tool constructs the set of efficient loan portfolios, given the investor’s
total amount in LC —i.e., the minimum idiosyncratic variance for each level of expected return.
Investors then select, among all the efficient portfolios, the preferred one according to their own
risk preferences. Importantly, the tool uses the same modeling assumptions regarding investors’
beliefs that we use in our framework: the idiosyncratic probabilities of default are the ones
posted on the website and the systematic risk is common across buckets, i.e. βz = βL .25
Thus, we can measure the estimation bias by comparing, for the same investment, the ARA
estimates obtained independently from two different components of the portfolio choice: the
loans suggested by the tool and those chosen manually. If investors’ beliefs do not deviate
systematically across buckets from the information posted on LC’s website and from the assumptions of the optimization tool, we should find investor preferences to be consistent across
the two measures. Note that our identification assumption does not require that investors agree
with LC assumptions. It suffices that the difference in beliefs does not vary systematically across
25

See Appendix B for the derivation of the efficient portfolios suggested by the optimization tool.

23

buckets. For example, our estimates are unbiased if investors believe that the idiosyncratic risk
is 20% higher than the one implied by the probabilities reported in LC, across all buckets. Note,
moreover, that our test is based on investors’ beliefs at the time of making the portfolio choices.
These beliefs need not to be correct ex post.
For each investment, we independently compute the risk aversion implied by the component suggested by the optimization tool (Automatic buckets) and the risk aversion implied by
the component chosen directly by the investor (Non-Automatic buckets). Figure 4 provides an
example of this estimation. Both panels of the figure plot the expected return and weighted idiosyncratic variance for the same portfolio choice. Panel A includes only the Automatic buckets,
suggested by the optimization tool. Panel B includes only the Non Automatic buckets, chosen
directly by the investor. The estimated ARA using the Automatic and Non-Automatic bucket
subsamples are 0.048 and 0.051 respectively for this example.
We perform the independent estimation above for all portfolio choices that have at least
two Automatic and two Non-Automatic buckets. To verify that investments that contain an
Automatic component are representative of the entire sample, we compare the extreme cases
where the entire portfolio is suggested by the tool and those where the entire portfolio is chosen
manually. The median ARA is 0.0440 and 0.0441 respectively, and the mean difference across
the two groups is not statistically significant at the standard levels. This suggests that our focus
in this subsection on investments with an Automatic component is representative of the entire
investment sample.
Table 5, panel A, reports the descriptive statistics of the ARA estimated using the Automatic and the Non-Automatic buckets. The average ARA is virtually identical across the two
estimations (Table 5, columns 1 and 2), and the means are statistically indistinguishable at
the 1% level. This implies that, if there is a bias our ARA estimates induced by differences in
beliefs, its mean across investments is zero. Column 3 shows the descriptive statistics of the
investment-by-investment difference between the two ARA estimates. The mean is zero and the
distribution of the difference is concentrated around zero, with kurtosis 11.72 (see Figure 5).

24

This implies that the bias is close to zero not only in expectation, but investment-by-investment.
These results suggest that investors’ beliefs about the stochastic properties of the loans in LC
do not differ substantially from those posted on the website. They also suggest that investors’
choices are consistent with the assumption that the systematic component is constant across
buckets. Overall, these findings validate the interpretation that the observed heterogeneity
across investor portfolio decisions is driven by differences in risk preferences.
In Table 5, panels B and C, we show that the difference in the distribution of the estimated
ARA from the automatic and non-automatic buckets is insignificant both during the first and
second half of the sample period. This finding is key for interpreting the results in the next
section, where we explore how the risk aversion estimates change in the time series with changes
in housing prices. There, we interpret any observed time variation in the ARA estimates as a
change in investor risk preferences over time.
Table 5, columns 4 through 6, show that the estimated risk premia, θ, also exhibit almost
identical mean and standard deviations when obtained independently using the Automatic and
Non-Automatic investment components. The mean difference is not statistically difference at
the 1% confidence level. This suggests that our estimates of the risk premium are unbiased.26
It is worth reiterating that these findings do not imply that investors’ beliefs about the
overall risk of investing in LC do not change during the sample period. On the contrary, the
observed average increase in the estimated systematic risk premium in Table 4 is also observed
in panels B and C of Table 5: θ increases by 2.5 percentage points between the first and second
halves of the sample. The results in Table 5 imply that changes in investors’ beliefs are fully
accounted for by a common systematic component across all risk buckets and, thus, do not bias
our risk aversion estimates.
26

In Appendix B we show that a bias in the risk premia estimate may arise because the optimization tool’s
suggestion is potentially suboptimal relative to the one implied by condition (8). The intuition is that, for any
given return, condition (8) minimizes the variance of the investor’s entire risky portfolio, while the optimization
tool minimizes the variance of the LC portion of her portfolio only. The results imply that the inclusion of the
Automatic component of investments does not bias our estimations and further validates the conclusions of this
section.

25

6

Risk Aversion and Wealth

This section explores the relationship between investors’ risk taking behavior and wealth. We
estimate the elasticity of ARA with respect to wealth, and use it to obtain the elasticity of RRA
with respect to wealth, based on the following expression:

ξRRA,W = ξARA,W + 1,

(13)

where ξRRA,W and ξARA,W refer to the wealth elasticities of RRA and ARA, respectively. For
robustness, we also estimate the elasticity of the income-based RRA in equation (11), ξρ,W .
We exploit the panel dimension of our data and estimate these elasticities, both, in the cross
section of investors and, for a given investor, in the time series. In the cross section, wealthier
investors exhibit lower ARA and higher RRA when choosing their portfolio of loans within LC;
we refer to these elasticity estimates with the superscript xs to emphasize that they do not
xs
xs
xs ). And, in the time
represent the shape of individual preferences (i.e., ξARA,W
, ξRRA,W
, ξρ,W

series, investor specific RRA increases after experiencing a negative wealth shock; that is, the
preference function exhibits decreasing RRA. The contrasting signs of the cross sectional and
investor-specific wealth elasticities indicate that preferences and wealth are not independently
distributed across investors.

6.1

Wealth and Wealth Shock Proxies

Below, we describe our proxies for wealth in the cross section of investors, and for wealth shocks
in the time series. Since the bulk of the analysis uses housing wealth as a proxy for investor
wealth, we focus the discussion in this section on the subsample of investors that are homeowners.27
27

None of the results in this section is statistically significant in the subsample of investors that are renters.
This is expected since housing wealth and total wealth are less likely to be correlated for renters, particularly in
the time series. However, this is also possibly due to lack of power, since only a small fraction of the investors in
our sample are renters.

26

6.1.1

Cross Section

We use Acxiom’s imputed net worth as of October 2007 as a proxy for wealth in the cross
section of investors. As discussed in Section 4, Acxiom’s imputed net worth is based on a
proprietary algorithm that combines names, home address, credit rating, and other data from
public sources. To account for potential measurement error in this proxy, we use a separate
indicator for investor wealth in an errors-in-variable estimation: median house price in the
investor’s zip code at the time of investment. Admittedly, house value is an imperfect indicator
wealth; it does not account for heterogeneity in mortgage level or the proportion of wealth
invested in housing. Nevertheless, as long as the measurement errors are uncorrelated across the
two proxies, a plausible assumption in our setting, the errors-in-variable estimation provides an
unbiased estimate of the cross-sectional elasticity of risk aversion to wealth.
The errors-in-variables approach works in our setting because risk preferences are obtained
independently from wealth. If, for example, risk aversion were estimated from the share of
risky and riskless assets in the investor portfolio, this estimate would inherit the errors in the
wealth measure. As a result, any observed correlation between risk aversion and wealth could
be spuriously driven by measurement errors. This is not a concern in our exercise.

6.1.2

Wealth Shocks

House values dropped sharply during our sample period. Since housing represents a substantial
fraction of household wealth in the U.S., this decline implied an important negative wealth shock
for home-owners.28 We use this source of variation, to estimate the wealth elasticity of investorspecific risk aversion in the subsample of home-owners that invest in LC. In this subsample the
average zip code house price declines 4% between October 2007 and April 2008.29
The drop in house value is an incomplete measure of the change in the investor overall wealth.
28

According to the Survey of Consumer Finances of 2007, the value of the primary residence accounts for
approximately 32% of total assets for the median U.S. family (see Bucks, Kennickel, Mach and Moore (2009)).
29
In addition, the time series house price variation is heterogeneous across investors: the median house price
decline is 3.6%.

27

It is important, then, to analyze the potential estimation bias introduced by this measurement
error. Any time-invariant measurement error or unobserved heterogeneity across investors is
captured by the investor fixed effect and does not affect our elasticity estimates. However, the
estimate of the wealth elasticity of risk aversion will be biased if the percentage change in wealth
is different from the drop in house values. If the drop in house prices is disproportionately large
relative to the change in overall wealth, our estimates of the elasticity will be biased towards
zero. And, alternatively, if the percentage decline in house values underestimates the change in
the investor’s total wealth, then the wealth elasticity of risk aversion will be overestimated (in
absolute value). Finally, if the measurement error in the computation of the wealth shock is not
systematic, we will estimate the elasticity with the classic attenuation bias, in which case our
estimates provide a lower bound for the elasticities of risk aversion to wealth. In subsection 6.3,
we analyze how our conclusions are affected under different types of measurement error.

6.2

Cross-Sectional Evidence

We begin by exploring non-parametrically the relationship between the risk aversion estimates
and our two wealth proxies for the cross section of home-owner investors in our sample. Figure 6
plots a kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing of the risk aversion measure. The horizontal
axis measures the (log) net worth and the (log) median house price in the investor’s zip code at
the time of the portfolio choice. ARA is decreasing in both wealth proxies, while income-based
RRA is increasing.
Turning to parametric evidence, we estimate the cross sectional elasticity of ARA to wealth
using the following regression:

ln (ARAi ) = β0 + β1 ln (N etW orthi ) + ωi .

(14)

The left hand side variable is investor i’s average (log) ARA, obtained by averaging the
ARA estimates recovered from the investor’s portfolio choices during our sample period. The
right-hand side variable is investor i’s imputed net worth. Thus, the estimated β1 corresponds
28

xs
to the cross-sectional wealth elasticity of ARA, ξARA,W
.

To account for measurement error in our wealth proxy we estimate specification (14) in an
errors-in-variables model by instrumenting imputed net worth with the average (log) house value
in the zip code of residence of investor i during the sample period. Since the instrument varies
only at the zip code level, in the estimation we allow the standard errors in specification (14) to
be clustered by zip code.
Table 6 shows the estimated cross sectional elasticities with OLS and the errors-in-variables
model (panels A and B respectively). Our preferred estimates from the errors-in-variables model
indicate that the elasticity of ARA to wealth in the cross section is -0.059 and statistically
significant at the 1% confidence level (Table 6, column 1). The non-parametric relationship
is confirmed: wealthier investors exhibit a lower ARA. The OLS elasticity estimate is biased
towards zero. This attenuation bias is consistent with classical measurement error in the wealth
proxy.
The estimated ARA elasticity and equation (13) imply that the wealth-based RRA elasticity
xs
to wealth is positive, ξbRRA,W
= 0.94. Column 2 shows the result of estimating specification

(14) using the income-based RRA as the dependent variable. The income-based RRA increases
with investor wealth in the cross section, and the point estimate, 0.12, is also significant at the
1% level. The sign of the estimated elasticity coincide with that implied by the ARA elasticity.
Overall, the results consistently indicate that the RRA is larger for wealthier investors in the
cross section.

6.3

Within-Investor Estimates

The above elasticity, obtained from the variation of risk aversion and wealth in the cross section,
can be taken to represent the form of the utility function of the representative investor only under
strong assumptions. Namely, when the distributions of wealth and preferences in the population
are independent.30 To identify the functional form of individual risk preferences we estimate the
30

Chiappori and Paiella (2008) formally prove that any within-investor elasticity of risk aversion to wealth can
be supported in the cross section by appropriately picking such joint distribution.

29

ARA elasticity using within-investor time series variation in wealth:

ln (ARAit ) = αi + β2 ln (HouseV alueit ) + ωit .

(15)

The left-hand side variable is the estimated ARA for investor i in month t. The right-hand side
variable of interest is the (log) median house value of the investor’s zip code during the month
the risk aversion estimate was obtained (i.e., the month the investment in LC takes places). The
right-hand side of specification (15) includes a full set of investor dummies as controls. These
investor fixed effects (FE) account for all cross sectional differences in risk aversion levels. Thus,
the elasticity β2 recovers the sensitivity of ARA to investor-specific shocks to wealth.
By construction, the parameter β2 can be estimated only for the subsample of investors that
choose an LC portfolio more than once in our sample period. Although the average number of
portfolio choices per investor is 1.8, the median investor chooses only once during our analysis
period. This implies that the data over which we obtain the within investor estimates using
(15) comes from less than half of the original sample. To insure that the results below are
representative for the full investor sample, we also show the results of estimating specification
(15) without the investor FE to corroborate that the conclusions of the previous section are
unchanged when estimated on the subsample of investors that chose portfolios more than once.
Table 7 reports the parameter estimates of specification (15), before and after including the
investor FE (Panels A and B respectively). The FE results represent our estimated wealth
elasticities of ARA, ξARA,W . The sign of the estimated within-investor elasticity of ARA to
wealth (column 1) is the same as in the cross section: absolute risk aversion is decreasing in
investor wealth.
Equation (13) and the estimated wealth elasticity of ARA imply a negative wealth-based
RRA to wealth changes for a given investor, ξRRA,W , of -1.82. Column 2 reports the result of
estimating specification (15) using the income-based RRA as the dependent variable. The point
estimate, -4.18, also implies a negative relationship between this alternative measure of RRA
and wealth. These results consistently suggest that investors’ utility function exhibits decreasing
30

relative risk aversion.
Measurement error in our proxy for wealth is unlikely to change this conclusion. Classical
measurement error would imply that the point estimate is biased towards zero; this estimate is
therefore a lower bound (in absolute value) for the actual wealth elasticity of risk aversion. The
(absolute value) of the elasticity could be overestimated if the percentage decline in house values
underestimates the change in the investor’s total wealth. However, for error in measurement
to account for the sign of the elasticity, the overall change in wealth has to be three times
larger than the percentage drop in house value.31 This is unlikely in our setting since stock
prices dropped 10% and investments in bonds had a positive yield during our sample period.32
Therefore, even if measurement error biases the numerical estimate, it is unlikely to affect our
conclusions regarding the shape of the utility function.
The observed positive relationship between investor RRA and wealth in the cross section
from the previous section changes sign once one accounts for investor preference heterogeneity.
The comparison of the estimates with and without investor FE of panels A and B in Table 7
confirms it. This implies that investors preferences and wealth are not independently distributed
in the cross section. Investors with different wealth levels may have different preferences, for
example, because more risk averse individuals made investment choices that made them wealthier. Alternatively, an unobserved investor characteristic, such as having more educated parents,
may cause an investor the be wealthier and to be more risk averse. The results indicate that
characterizing empirically the shape of the utility function requires, first, accounting for such
heterogeneity.
31
We estimate the elasticity of ARA with respect to changes in house value to be –2.82. Let W be overall
ln H
wealth and H be house value, then: ξARA,W = d dlnlnARA
= −2.82 · dd ln
. The wealth elasticity of RRA is positive
W
W
d ln W
only if ξARA,W > −1, which requires d ln H > 2.82.
32
Between October 1, 2007 and April 30, 2008 the S&P 500 Index dropped 10% and the performance of U.S.
investment grade bond market was positive —Barclays Capital U.S. Aggregate Index increased approximately
2%.

31

7

Consistency of Preferences

In this section we show that the estimated level and wealth elasticity of risk aversion consistently
extrapolate to other investors’ decisions. For that, we exploit the different dimensions of the
investment decision in LC: the total amount to invest in LC, the loans to include in the portfolio,
and the portfolio allocation across these loans.

7.1

Foregone Risk Buckets

The investor-specific ARA is estimated in Section 5 based on the allocation of funds across the
risk buckets included in her portfolio. Yet, investors select in their portfolio only a subset of the
buckets available. We show in this subsection that including the foregone buckets in the median
investor’s portfolio would lower her expected utility given her estimated ARA. Thus, investors’
estimated level of risk aversion is consistent with the preferences revealed by their selection of
loans.
The median investor in the analysis sample assigns funds to 10 out of 35 risk buckets (see
Table 2, panel B). Our empirical specification (12) characterizes the allocation of the median
investment among the 10 active buckets without using the corresponding equations describing
the choice of the foregone 25 buckets. We use these conditions to develop a consistency test for
investors’ choices.
For each investor i, let Ai be the set of active risk buckets. The optimal portfolio model
described in Section 3, predicts that, for all foregone risk buckets z ∈
/ Ai , the first order condition
(8), evaluated at the minimum investment amount per project of $25, is negative—i.e. the
nonnegative constraint is binding. The resulting linearized condition for all z ∈
/ Ai is:

f ocf oregone = E [Rz ] − θi − ARAi · 25 · σz2 < 0

We test this prediction by calculating f ocf oregone for every foregone bucket using the parameters
n
io
[ estimated with specification (12). To illustrate the procedure, suppose
θ = θ̂i , ARAi = ARA

32

that investor i chooses to allocate funds to 10 risk buckets. From that choice we estimate a
i

[ using specification (12). For each of the 25
constant θ̂i and an absolute risk aversion ARA
foregone risk buckets we calculate f ocf oregone above. Then we repeat the procedure for each
investment in our sample and test whether f ocf oregone is negative.
Using the procedure above we calculate 85,366 values for f ocf oregone . The average value
for the first order condition evaluated at the foregone buckets is −0.000529, with a standard deviation of 0.0000839. This implies that the 95% confidence interval for f ocf oregone is
[−0.00069, −0.00036]. The null hypothesis that the mean is equal to zero is rejected with a
t = −6.30. If we repeat this test investment-by-investment, the null hypothesis that mean of
f ocf oregone is zero is rejected for the median investment with a t = −1.99.
These results confirm that the risk preferences recovered from the investors’ portfolio choices
are consistent with the risk preferences implied by the foregone investment opportunities in LC.

7.2

Amount Invested in LC

In this subsection we test whether the cross-sectional and within-investor elasticities of risk
aversion to wealth consistently extrapolate to the investor’s decision of how much to invest
in LC. Our model in Section 3 delivers testable implications for the relationship between an
investor’s risk preferences and her overall holdings of the efficient LC portfolio. Namely, when
relative risk aversion decreases (increases) in wealth, then the share of wealth invested in LC will
increase (decrease) in wealth (see Appendix C). We can use these predictions, both, to provide
an independent validation for the results on the elasticity of risk aversion to wealth based on the
risk aversion estimates obtained in Section 5, and to explore the connection between investors’
risk preferences across different types of choices.
We test the above implications by estimating specifications (14) and (15) using the (log)
amount invested in LC as dependent variable. Table 6 and 7 (column 3) report the estimated
cross sectional and within investor elasticities.
We find that the investment amount is increasing with investor wealth in the cross section

33

(Table 6, column 3). The elasticity is smaller than one, which suggests that the ratio of the
investment to wealth is decreasing. These estimates are consistent with decreasing ARA and
increasing RRA cross sectional elasticities reported in Tables 6. That is, agents that exhibit
larger risk aversion in their portfolio choice within LC are also characterized by lower risk
tolerance when choosing how much to invest in the program.
The estimated wealth elasticity of total investment in LC is positive and grater than one
when we add investor fixed effects (Table 6 column 3). This implies that, for a given investor, the
ratio of investment to wealth is increasing. These results mirror those in the previous subsection
concerning the estimates of the elasticity of investor specific ARA with respect to changes in
wealth. We can therefore conclude that changes in wealth have same qualitative effect on the
investors’ attitudes towards risk, both, when deciding her portfolio within LC and when choosing
how much to allocate in LC relative to other opportunities.
Providing evidence of this link is impossible in a laboratory environment where the investment amount is exogenously fixed by the experiment design. Our results suggest that preference
parameters obtained from marginal choices can plausibly explain decision making behavior in
broader contexts.

8

Conclusion

In this paper we estimate risk preference parameters and their elasticity to wealth based on the
actual financial decisions of a panel of U.S. investors participating in a person-to-person lending
platform. The average absolute risk aversion in our sample is 0.0368. We also measure the
relative risk aversion based on the income generated by investing in LC (income-based RRA).
We find a large degree of heterogeneity, with an average income-based RRA of 2.85 and a
median of 1.62. These findings are similar to those obtained in laboratory studies; they provide
an external validation in a real life investment environment to the estimates obtained from

34

laboratory experiments.33
We exploit the panel dimension of our data and estimate the elasticity of ARA and RRA
with respect to wealth, both, in the cross section of investors and, for a given investor, in the
time series. In the cross section, wealthier investors exhibit lower ARA and higher RRA when
choosing their portfolio of loans within LC. In the time series, investor specific RRA increases
after experiencing a negative wealth shock; that is, the preference function exhibits decreasing
RRA. The contrasting signs of the cross sectional and investor-specific wealth elasticities indicate
that investors’ preferences and wealth are not independently distributed in the cross section.
Therefore, to empirically characterize the shape of the utility function, one needs to take the
properties of the joint distribution of preferences and wealth into account.
Parallel to experimental results, in settings where agents maximize expected utility over total
wealth, the observed levels of risk aversion inside LC are difficult to reconcile with reasonable
choices in large stake environments.34 Our findings are consistent with a behavioral model in
which utility depends (in a non-separable way) on both the overall wealth level and the flow of
income from specific components of agent’s portfolio. This is in line with Barberis and Huang
(2001) and Barberis et al. (2006), which propose a framework where agents exhibit loss aversion
over changes in specific components of their overall portfolio, together with decreasing relative
risk aversion over their entire wealth. In the expected utility framework, Cox and Sadiraj (2006)
propose a utility function with two arguments (income and wealth) where risk aversion is defined
over income, but it is sensitive to the overall wealth level. Since our estimates of risk aversion refer
to the local curvature of preferences over changes in income, they characterize risk preferences
over income irrespectively of the form of the utility function over total wealth. Indeed, we show
in the Appendix that our estimates of risk aversion characterize the local curvature of preferences
over changes in income for different preference frameworks —i.e., expected utility, loss aversion,
33

For estimation of risk aversion in real life environments, see also Jullien and Salanie (2000), Jullien and Salanie
(2008), Bombardini and Trebbi (2007), Cohen and Einav (2007), Harrison, Lau and Towe (2007a), Chiappori,
Gandhi, Salanie and Salanie (2008), Post, van den Assem, Baltussen and Thaler (2008), Chiappori, Gandhi,
Salanie and Salanie (2009), and Barseghyan, Prince and Teitelbaum (2010).
34
This is commonly referred to as the Rabin’s Critique (Rabin (2000) and Rabin and Thaler (2001)). See also
Rubinstein (2001) for an alternative interpretation of this phenomenon within the expected utility theory.

35

and narrow framing–.

References
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephane Bonhomme (2009) ‘Identifying Distributional Characteristics
in Random Coefficients Panel Data Models.’ Working Paper
Barberis, Nicholas, and Ming Huang (2001) ‘Mental Accounting, Loss Aversion, and Individual
Stock Returns.’ The Journal of Finance 56(4), 1247–1292
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard H. Thaler (2006) ‘Individual preferences, monetary gambles, and stock market participation: A case for narrow framing.’ The American
Economic Review 96(4), 1069–1090
Barseghyan, Levon, Jeffrey Prince, and Joshua Teitelbaum (2010) ‘Are Risk Preferences Stable
Across Contexts? Evidence from Insurance Data.’ The American Economic Review
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro (1997) ‘Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
and Retirement Study.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2), 537–579
Blake, David (1996) ‘Efficiency, Risk Aversion and Portfolio Insurance: An Analysis of Financial Asset Portfolio Held by Inverstors in the United Kingdom.’ The Economic Journal
106(136), 1175–1192
Blume, Marshall, and Irwin Friend (1975) ‘The Demand for Risky Assets.’ The American Economic Review 65(5), 900–922
Bombardini, Matilde, and Francesco Trebbi (2007) ‘Risk Aversion and Expected Utility Theory:
an Experiment with Large and Small Stakes.’ Working Paper
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Stefan Nagel (2008) ‘Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate TimeVarying Risk Aversion? Micro-evidence on Individuals.’ The American Economic Review
98(3), 713–36
Bucks, Brian, Arthur Kennickel, Traci Mach, and Kevin Moore (2009) ‘Changes in U.S. Family
Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.’ Federal
Reserve Bulletin 95, A1–A55
Calvet, Laurent, and Paolo Sodini (2009) ‘Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants of RiskTaking in Household Portfolios.’ Working Paper
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini (2009) ‘Fight or Flight? Portfolio
Rebalancing by Individual Investors.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1), 301–348
Campbell, John, and John Cochrane (1999) ‘By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.’ Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251
36

Chen, Kay Yut, and Charles Plott (1998) ‘Non-linear Behavior in Sealed Bid First Price Auctions.’ Games and Economic Behavior 25(1), 34–78
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, Amit Gandhi, Bernard Salanie, and Francois Salanie (2008) ‘You Are
What You Bet: Eliciting Risk Attitudes from Horse Races.’ Working Paper
(2009) ‘Identifying Preferences under Risk from Discrete Choices.’ American Economic
Review 99(2), 356 – 362
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, and Monica Paiella (2008) ‘Risk Aversion is Constant: Evidence from
Panel Data.’ Working Paper
Choi, Syngjoo, Raymond Fisman, Douglas Gale, and Shachar Kariv (2007) ‘Consistency and
Heterogeneity of Individual Behavior under Uncertainty.’ The American Economic Review
97(5), 1921–1938
Cicchetti, Charles, and Jeffrey Dubin (1994) ‘A Microeconomic Analysis of Risk Aversion and
the Decision to Self-Insure.’ Journal of Political Economy 102(11), 169–186
Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav (2007) ‘Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice.’
The American Economic Review 97(3), 745–788
Cohn, Richard A., Wilbur G. Lewellen, Ronald C. Lease, and Gary G. Schlarbaum (1975)
‘Individual Investor Risk Aversion and Investment Portfolio Composition.’ The Journal of
Finance 30(2), 605–620
Cox, James, and Vjollca Sadiraj (2006) ‘Small- and Large-stakes Risk Aversion: Implications of
Concavity Calibration for Decision Theory.’ Games and Economic Behavior 56, 45–60
Goeree, Jacob, and Charles Holt (2004) ‘A Model of Noisy Introspection.’ Games and Economic
Behavior 46(2), 365–382
Goeree, Jacob, Charles Holt, and Thomas Palfrey (2002) ‘Quantal Response Equilibrium and
Overbidding in Private-Value Auctions.’ Journal of Economic Theory 104(1), 247–272
(2003) ‘Risk Averse Behavior in Generalized Matching Pennies Games.’ Games and Economic Behavior 45(1), 97–113
Gollier, Christian (2001) ‘Wealth Inequality and Asset Pricing.’ Review of Econmic Studies
68(1), 181–203
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides (2008) ‘Asset Pricing with Limited Risk Sharing
and Heterogeneous Agents.’ The Review of Financial Studies 21(1), 415–448
Guiso, Luigi, and Monica Paiella (2008) ‘Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk.’ Working
Paper
Guvenen, Fatih (2009) ‘A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing.’ Econometrica
77(6), 1711–1750
37

Harrison, Glenn, Morten Lau, and Charles Towe (2007a) ‘Naturally Occurring Preferences
and Exogenous Laboratory Experiments: A Case Study of Risk Aversion.’ Econometrica
75(2), 433–458
Harrison, Glenn, Morten Lau, and Elisabet Rutstrom (2007b) ‘Estimating Risk Attitudes in
Denmark: A Field Experiment.’ Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109(2), 341–368
Holt, Charles A., and Susan K. Laury (2002) ‘Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects.’ The American
Economic Review 92(5), 1644–1655
Jullien, Bruno, and Bernard Salanie (2000) ‘Estimating Preferences Under Risk: The Case of
Racetrack Bettors.’ The Journal of Political Economy 108(3), 503–530
(2008) ‘Empirical Evidence on the Preferences of Racetrack Bettors.’ In Efficiency of Sports
and Lottery Markets, ed. Don Hausch and Bill Ziemba pp. 27–49
Kocherlakota, Narayana (1996) ‘The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle.’ Journal of Economic
Literature 34(1), 42–71
Korniotis, George, and Alok Kumar (2010) ‘Do Older Investors Make Better Investment Decisions?’ Review of Economics and Statistics. Forthcoming
Morin, Roger-A., and A. Fernandez Suarez (1983) ‘Risk Aversion Revisited.’ The Journal of
Finance 38(4), 1201–1216
Post, Thierry, Martijn J. van den Assem, Guido Baltussen, and Richard H. Thaler (2008) ‘Deal or
No Deal? Decision Making under Risk in a Large-Payoff Game Show.’ American Economic
Review 98(1), 38–71
Rabin, Matthew (2000) ‘Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem.’
Econometrica 68(5), 1281–1292
Rabin, Matthew, and Richard Thaler (2001) ‘Anomalies: Risk Aversion.’ The Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(1), 219–232
(2002) ‘Response from Matthew Rabin and Richard H. Thaler.’ The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 16(2), 229–230
Rubinstein, Ariel (2001) ‘Comments on the Risk and Time Preferences in Economics’
Tanaka, Tomomi, Colin F. Camerer, and Quang Nguyen (2010) ‘Risk and Time Preferences:
Linking Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam.’ American Economic
Review 100(1), 557–571
Treynor, Jack, and Fischer Black (1973) ‘How to Use Security Analysis to Improve Portfolio
Selection.’ Journal of Business 46(1), 66–86

38

Appendix
A

Alternative Utility Frameworks

A.1

Loss Aversion over Changes in Overall Wealth

Consider the following preferences, which exhibit loss aversion with coefficient α around a benchmark consumption c
U = α · E [u(c)|c < c] · P r [c < c] + E [u(c)|c > c] · P r [c > c]]
Since LC is a negligible part of the investor’s wealth and the return is bounded between
default and full repayment of all loans in the portfolio (see Table 2), the distribution of consumption is virtually unaffected by the realization of the independent component of bucket z.
Then, we define ω ≡ c − W xz rz , which is independent from rz , and approximate the distribution
of c with the distribution of ω: F (c) ≈ F (ω). Under this approximation, a marginal increase
in xz does not affect the distribution F (ω) and the first order condition that characterizes the
investor’s portfolio choice is:




f oc(xz ) : α · E u0 (c)(rz − 1)|ω < c · P r [ω < c] + E u0 (c)(rz − 1)|ω > c · P r [ω > c] = 0
Since ω and rz are independently distributed, a first order linearization of expected marginal
utility is given by:


E u0 (c)rz |ω < c = u0 (E[c|ω < c])E[rz ] + u00 (E[c|ω < c])E [(ω − E[ω] + rz − E[rz ])rz |ω < c]
= u0 (E[c|ω < c])E[rz ] + u00 (E[c|ω < c])var[rz ]
Replacing, the first order condition is approximated by:
] · W xz · var[rz ]
E[Rz ] = θ + ARA
This condition is equivalent to the one in the body of the paper, irrespectively of the value of
c or the existence of multiple kinks. However, the absolute risk aversion estimated using this
equation is not the one evaluated around expected consumption, as in the body of the paper.
Instead, it is a weighted average of the absolute risk aversions evaluated in the intervals defined
by the loss aversion kinks:
] ≡ λ · ARA− + (1 − λ) · ARA+
ARA
where :

αF [c]
αF [c] + (1 − F [c])
u00 (E [c|c < c])
≡ − 0
u (E [c|c < c])
u00 (E [c|c > c])
≡ − 0
u (E [c|c > c])

λ ≡
ARA−
ARA+

39

Still, as in the body of the paper, the optimal investment in a risk bucket z is not explained by
first order risk aversion; it is given by its expected return and second order risk aversion over
the volatility of its idiosyncratic component.

A.2

Narrow Framing

Consider the following preferences:
U=

K
X

E [uk (Ik Rk )]

k=1

k = 1, ..., K corresponds to the different sub-portfolios over which the investor exhibits local
preferences. yk = Ik Rk is the income generated by the portfolio component k, given by Ik and
Rk , the total amount allocated in the sub-portfolio and the corresponding return.
Consider LC to be one of these sub-portfolios, so for k = L, the investor chooses the shares
{xz }35
so to maximize
z=1 to be invested in each risk
i her utility over LC, for a given amount
h bucket

P35
invested in the program, IL : E uL IL · z=1 xz Rz
The first order condition that characterizes all active buckets is:
"
! #
35
X
f oc(xz ) : E u0L IL ·
xz Rz Rz − µL = 0
z=1

P
where µL is the multiplier on the budget constraint 35
z=1 xz = 1.
A linearization around expected return results in the following expression:
u0L (E

[yL ]) E [Rz ] +

u00L (E

[yL ]) IL

35
X

xz E [(Rz − E [Rz ]) · Rz ] = µL

z=1

From equation (4) and assuming βz = βL , the returns in LC are decomposed into a common
systematic factor βL Rm and an idiosyncratic component rz . Moreover, under the Diagonal
Sharpe’s Ratio in Assumptions 1, returns from different buckets co-move only through their
market component. That is:
f or all z 6= z 0 : E [(Rz 0 − E [Rz 0 ]) Rz ] = βL2 · var [Rm ]
E [(Rz − E [Rz ]) Rz ] = βL2 · var [Rm ] + var [rz ]
Replacing, the optimal portfolio within LC is characterized by the following expression:

u0L (E [yL ]) · E [Rz ] + u00L (E [yL ]) · IL βL2 · var [Rm ] + xz · var [rz ] = µL
Rearranging terms, this leads to the same empirical equation as in the body of the paper:
E [Rz ] = θ + ARAL · IL xz · var [rz ]

40

(A.1)

IL xz is the total amount invested in bucket z, equivalent to W xz in the body of the paper. Note
that the systematic component is common to all risk buckets and therefore does not alter the
portfolio composition within LC. It is recovered by the investor specific constant, which is given
in this framework by:
µL
θ≡ 0
+ ARAL · IL · βL2 · var [Rm ]
u (E [yL ])
If investors behave according to these preferences the ARA obtained from this empirical equation
only characterizes the preferences within LC, uL , for a given amount invested in the program,
IL :
u00 (E [yL ])
ARAL ≡ − L
.
u0L (E [yL ])
We show in the paper this extreme version of narrow framing does not represent the preferences of the investors in LC. We show that the shape of the utility that follows from investors’
choices within LC extrapolates to other decisions. In particular, the amount invested in LC:
IL . Moreover, follows from the expression above, that if investors exhibit narrow framing as
presented here, realizations of returns in other sub-portfolios k 6= L do not affect risk preferences
ARAL . We show that this is not the case; changes in the value of the investors’ house affect the
preferences exhibited within LC. However, more general forms of narrow framing are consistent
with investors’ choices, as explained in the following subsection.

A.3

Preferences over Income and Wealth

Consider, for example, investor preferences over, both, wealth and income of specific components
of her portfolio:

U = u {yk }K
k=1 , W
where, as before, k = 1, ..., K corresponds to the different sub-portfolios over which the investor
exhibits local preferences, with income given by the amount invested in k and the respective
return, yk = Ik Rk . The LCPsub-portfolio is denoted k = L, with income defined as in the
previous subsection: yL = IL 35
z=1 xz Rz . W is the investor’s overall wealth.
The first order condition that characterizes the active bucket z within LC is similar to the
one in the subsection above:

 
f oc (xz ) : E uL {yk }K
k=1 , W Rz − µL = 0
where uL corresponds to the partial derivative of the utility function with respect
P35 to the income
generated by the sub-portfolio L, and µL is the multiplier over the constraint z=1 xz = 1. The
linearization of this expression around the vector of expected income {E[yk ]}K
k=1 is equivalent
to expression (A.1):
E [Rz ] = θ + ARAL · IL xz · var [rz ]
Under Assumption (1), the investor specific parameter θ is defined as follows:
θ≡

uL


K
X
ukL {E[yk ]}K
µL
k=1 , W
−
 · Ik · βk βL · var [Rm ]
K ,W
{E[yk ]}K
u
{E[y
]}
L
k
k=1 , W
k=1
k=1
41

where ukL is the cross derivative of the utility function with respect to the incomes generated
by components k and L. The absolute risk aversion recovers the investor’s preferences over
fluctuations in income; it is defined as follows:

uLL {E[yk ]}K
k=1 , W
.
ARAL ≡ −
uL {E[yk ]}K
k=1 , W
This behavioral model, in which utility depends (in a non-separable way) on, both, the overall
wealth level and the flow of income from specific components of the agent’s portfolio, is in line
with Barberis and Huang (2001) and Barberis et al. (2006), which propose a framework where
agents exhibit loss aversion over changes in specic components of their overall portfolio, together
with decreasing relative risk aversion over their entire wealth, consistent with the findings of this
paper. In the expected utility framework, Cox and Sadiraj (2006) propose a utility function with
two arguments (income and wealth) where risk aversion is defined over changes in income but it
k
is sensitive to the overall wealth level. Their suggested functional form implies ∂ARA
< 0, which
∂yk
can reconcile low levels of ARA over high stake gambles and high ARA found in experimental
literature when expected income from the lottery is small. Moreover, their functional form
k
implies ∂ARA
< 0, consistent with the findings in this paper.
∂W

B

Optimization Tool

Those investors who follow the recommendation of the optimization tool make a sequential
portfolio decision. First, they decide how much to invest in the entire LC portfolio. And second,
they choose the desired level idiosyncratic risk in the LC investment, from which the optimization
tool suggests a portfolio of loans.
The first decision, how much to invest in LC, follows the optimal portfolio choice model in
Section 3, where the security z = L refer to the LC overall portfolio. The optimal investment
in LC is therefore given by equation (7):
E [rL ] − 1 = ARAi · W i xiL · var [rL ]

(A.2)

(E [rL ] − 1) /var [rL ] corresponds to the investor’s preferred risk-return ratio of the her LC
portfolio. Although this ratio is not directly observable, we can infer it from the Automatic
portfolio suggested by the optimization tool.
The optimization tool suggests the minimum variance portfolio given the investor’s choice
of idiosyncratic risk exposure. The investor marks her preferences by selecting a point in the
[0, 1] interval: 0 implies fully diversified idiosyncratic risk (typically only loans from the A1 risk
bucket) and 1 is the (normalized) maximum idiosyncratic risk. Figure 1 provides two snapshots
of the screen that the lenders see when they make their choice.
For each point on the [0, 1] interval, the website generates the efficient portfolio of risk
buckets. The loan composition at the interior of each risk bucket exhausts the diversification
opportunities, with the constraint that an investment in a given loan cannot be less than $25.

42

The proposed share in each risk bucket sz ≥ 0 for z = 1, ..., 35 satisfies the following program:
( 35
)
( 35
)
35
X
X
X
2
sz − 1
sz E [Rz ] − E [RL ] − λ1
sz var [rz ] − λ0
min
{sz }35
z=1 z=1

z=1

z=1

var [rz ] and E [Rz ] are the idiosyncratic variance and expected return of the (optimally diversified) risk bucket z, computed in equations (1) and (2); and E [RL ] is the demanded expected
return of the entire portfolio.
Although the optimization tool operates under the assumption that LC has no systemic
component, i.e., βL = 0, the suggested portfolio also minimizes variance for a given overall
expected independent return, E [rL ]. That is, the problem is not affected by subtracting a
common systematic component, βL E [Rm ] on both sides of the expectation constraint. The
resulting efficient portfolio suggested by the website satisfies the following condition for every
active bucket z, for which sz > 0:
E [rz ] − λi1
sz = λi0
(A.3)
var [rz ]
That is, the share of LC investment allocated in bucket z is proportional to the bucket’s mean
variance ratio. And the proportionality factor, λi0 , represents the risk preferences of the investor,
imbedded in her chosen point on the [0, 1] interval:
λi0 =

var [rL ]
E [rL ] − λi1

(A.4)

It is possible to recover, from the Automatic portfolio composition, the investor’s preferred
risk-return ratio. Combining equations (A.3) and (A.4) with the optimal LC investment condition (A.2), we obtain the following expression:


E [rL ] − λi1
i
i
i i i
E [Rz ] = βL E [Rm ] + λ1 + ARA · W xL sz · var [rz ]
(A.5)
(E [rL ] − 1)
Note that W i xiL siz is the total amount invested in bucket z, which is equivalent to W i xiz in
Section 3.
Our estimates from the specification (12) may be biased by the inclusion of the Automatic
choices. The magnitude of the bias is:
biasi =

i
E [RL ] − θA
− 1.
i
E [RL ] − θN

i and θ i correspond to the investor specific constant in the specification equations (8)
where θN
A
and (A.5) respectively:
i
θA
≡ λi1 + βL E [Rm ]
i
θN

≡ 1 + βL E [Rm ]

We find that the intercepts estimated from Automatic and Non-Automatic choices (θA and θN )
43

are equal (see Table 5). We therefore conclude that including Automatic choices does not bias
our results.

C

Investment Amount

Limiting, for simplicity, the investor’s outside options to the risk free asset and the market
portfolio, the problem of investor i is:

max Eu W i xif + xim Rm + xiL RL
x

where RL is the overall return of the efficient LC portfolio. The efficient LC
composition
Pportfolio
ZL
is constructed
renormalizing the optimal shares in equation (8): RL = z=1 x
ez Rz where x
ez ≡
P
x
.
A
projection
of
the
return
R
against
the
market,
parallel
to
equation
(4),
gives
xz / 35
z
L
z=1
the investor’s market sensitivity, βLi , and independent return:
RL = βLi · Rm + rL


eim Rm + xiL rL , where
The investor’s budget constraint can be rewritten as ci = W i xif + x
x
eim = xim + xiL βLi incorporates the market risk imbedded in the LC portfolio.
A linearization of the first order condition around expected consumption results in the following optimality condition:
E [RL ] = θi + ARAi · ILi · var [rL ]
where ILi is the total investment in LC, ILi = xiL W i . The composition of the LC portfolio is
optimal; then, differentiating the expression above with respect to outside wealth and applying
the envelope condition, we derive the following result:
d ln (ARA) = −d ln (IL )
 
IL
d ln (RRA) = −d ln
W
ARA and RRA refer to absolute and wealth-based relative risk aversion: ARA ≡ −
u00 (E [ci ])
and RRA ≡ − u0 (E[ci ]) W. We obtain the following testable implications:

u00 (E [ci ])
u0 (E[ci ])

Result 1. If the absolute risk aversion, ARA, decreases (increases) in outside wealth, then the
amount invested in LC, IL , increases (decreases) in outside wealth.
Result 2. If the wealth-based RRA decreases (increases) in outside wealth, then the share of
wealth invested in LC, IL /W, increases (decreases) in outside wealth.
We test these implications by estimating specifications (14) and (15) using the (log) amount
invested in LC.

44

Figure 1: Portfolio Tool Screen Examples for a $100 Investment
A. Screen 1: Interest rate – Normalized Variance “Slider”

B. Screen 2: Suggested Portfolio Summary

The website
provides
optimization
that suggests
theportfolio
efficient
ofinvestor's
loans for
the investor’s
The website
providesan
an optimization
tooltool
that suggests
the efficient
of portfolio
loans for the
preferred
risk
return risk
trade-off,
under
the assumption
are uncorrelated
with each
other and with with
outsideeach
investment
preferred
return
trade-off,
under that
the loans
assumption
that loans
are uncorrelated
other and
The risk measure
is the variance
the diversified
divided byofthe
variance
of a single
investment
with opportunity.
outside investment
opportunity.
Theofrisk
measure portfolio
is the variance
the
diversified
portfolio
divided
in the riskiest loan available (as a result it is normalized to be between zero and one). Once a portfolio has been formed,
by the variance of a single investment in the riskiest loan available (as a result it is normalized to be
the investor is shown the loan composition of her portfolio on a new screen that shows each individual loan (panel B).
between
zero
and
Once
a portfolio
hasallocated
been formed,
thedrop
investor
is shownorthe
In this
screen
theone).
investor
can change
the amount
to each loan,
them altogether,
addloan
others.composition of
her portfolio on a new screen that shows each individual loan (panel B). In this screen the investor can
change the amount allocated to each loan, drop them altogether, or add others.

Figure 1: Portfolio Tool Screen39
Examples for a $100 Investment

45

In color: zip codes with Lending Club investors. The color intensity reflects the total dollar amount
invested in LC by investors in each zip code.

Figure 2: Geographical Distribution of Lending Club Investors

46

Figure 3: Examples of Risk Return Choices and Estimated RRA
Theta = 1.068, ARA = .0120
1.105

1.12

Theta = 1.082, ARA = .0661
C1

B4

1.1

1.11

B3
B4

B2
B1

1.095

B3
B2

A5

1.085

1.1

1.09

B1

A4

1.08

.2

.3

.4
WxVrz_actual
ERz

.5

.6

1

1.5

Fitted values

ERz

Theta = 1.080, ARA = .0488

2.5

3

Fitted values

Theta = 1.079, ARA = .0013
1.14

1.18

2
WxVrz_actual

G2
G3

1.16

G5

F2
F5

1.12

1.09

A3
A4

G1

F1

1.14

F2

D4

1.1

1.12

E1
E3

E4

E3
E2
E1
D5
D3

D2

C5
C4
C3

C5

1.1

1.08

C3
C2
C1
B5

C4

B4

B3

1.06

1.08

B2
B1
A4
A3

0

.5

1
WxVrz_actual
ERz

D5

D1

1.5

2

A4
A1

0

Fitted values

A5

A2

10

20
WxVrz_actual
ERz

30

40

Fitted values

Eachplot
plot represents
represents one
in our
The plotted
represent
risk and the
weighted
returnweighted
of each of
Each
oneinvestment
investment
in sample.
our sample.
The points
plotted
points the
represent
risk and
the
buckets
that
compose
the
investment.
The
dots
are
labeled
with
the
corresponding
risk
classification
of
the
bucket.
return of each of the buckets that compose the investment. The dots are labeled with the corresponding
The
vertical
axis
measures
the
expected
return
of
a
risk
bucket,
and
the
horizontal
axis
measures
the
bucket
variance
risk classification of the bucket. The vertical axis measures the expected return of a risk bucket, and the
weighted by
themeasures
total investment
in thatvariance
bucket. The
slope ofbythethe
linear
fit investment
is our estimate
the bucket.
absolute The
risk aversion
horizontal
axis
the bucket
weighted
total
in of
that
slope
(ARA). The intersection of this linear fit with the vertical axis is our estimate for the risk premium (Theta).
of the linear fit is our estimate of the absolute risk aversion (ARA). The intersection of this linear fit with
the vertical axis is our estimate for the risk premium (θ).

Figure 3: Examples of Risk Return Choices and Estimated RRA

47

41

1.081.08 1.1 1.1 1.121.12 1.141.14 1.161.16

Figure 4: Example of Risk Aversion Estimation Using Automatic and Non-Automatic
Figure
Example
of Risk
Aversion Estimation Using Automatic and Non-Automatic
Buckets4:for
the Same
Investment
Buckets for the Same Investment
A. Automatic Buckets
A. Automatic Buckets
Theta = 1.075, ARA = 0.048
Theta = 1.075, ARA = 0.048

G4
G4

F4
F4

E3
E3

D2
D2

C1
C1

A2

0

.5
A2

0

.5

ERz

1
1.5
WxVrz_actual
1
1.5
WxVrz_actual
Fitted values

ERz

2
2

Fitted values

(a) Automatic Buckets

1.081.08 1.1 1.1 1.121.12 1.141.14 1.161.16

B. Non-Automatic Buckets
B. Non-Automatic Buckets
Theta = 1.068, ARA = 0.051
Theta = 1.068, ARA = 0.051
G3
G3

E4
E2
D3

E4

E2

D3

C5
C5

B5
B2

B5

A5
B2

0

.5

A5

0

.5

ERz

1
1.5
WxVrz_actual
1
1.5
WxVrz_actual
Fitted values

ERz

2
2

Fitted values

(b) Non-Automatic Buckets

BothBoth
plotsplots
represent
allocations to risk buckets of the same actual investment. As in Figure 3, the plotted points
represent allocations to risk buckets of the same actual investment. As in Figure 3, the plotted
Both
plotstherepresent
to risk
of the
samethat
actual
investment.
As in Figure
plotted
points
represent
risk and allocations
weighted return
of buckets
each of the
buckets
compose
the investment.
Panel3,A the
shows
the buckets
points represent the risk and weighted return of each of the buckets that compose the investment. Panel
represent
risk and
weighted
return
each of theand
buckets
compose
the investment.
Panel by
A shows
the buckets
that were the
chosen
by the
portfolio
toolof(Automatic),
panelthat
B shows
buckets
directly chosen
the investor
(NonA shows the buckets that were chosen by the portfolio tool (Automatic), and panel B shows buckets
that
were chosen
by the
portfolio
toolrepresents
(Automatic),
panelrisk
B shows
buckets
by thewith
investor
(NonAutomatic).
The slope
of the
linear fit
the and
absolute
aversion
(ARA),directly
and itschosen
intersection
the vertical
directly chosen by the investor (Non-Automatic). The slope of the linear fit represents the absolute risk
Automatic).
Thethe
slope
the linear
fit represents the absolute risk aversion (ARA), and its intersection with the vertical
axis represents
riskofpremium
(Theta).
aversion (ARA), and its intersection with the vertical axis represents the risk premium (θ).
axis represents the risk premium (Theta).
Figure 4: Risk Aversion Estimation Example Using Automatic and Non-Automatic Buckets

48
42
42

0

0

Density
Density
10 10 20 20 30 30

40 40

Figure 5: Distribution of the Difference in ARA and θ0 Estimates Obtained
Figure
5: Distribution
of the Difference
in ARAforand
Estimates
Obtained
from Automatic
and Non-Automatic
Buckets
theθ0Same
Investment
from Automatic and Non-Automatic Buckets for the Same Investment
A. ARA Non-Automatic – ARA Automatic
A. ARA Non-Automatic – ARA Automatic

-.15

-.1

-.15

-.1

-.05
0
.05
ARA Non-Automatic – ARA Automatic
-.05
0
.05
ARA Non-Automatic – ARA Automatic
Kernel Density Estimate
NormalDensity
densityEstimate
Kernel

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0035
Normal

.1
.1

density

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0035

(a) ARA: Automatic and Non-Automatic Choices

0

0

10 10

Density
Density
20 20 30 30

40 40

B. θ0 Non-Automatic – θ0 Automatic
B. θ0 Non-Automatic – θ0 Automatic

-.1
-.1

-.05
0
.05
.1
– Theta
-.05 Theta Non-Automatic
0
.05 Automatic.1
Theta Non-Automatic – Theta Automatic
Kernel Density Estimate
NormalDensity
densityEstimate
Kernel

Normal
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0033

.15
.15

density

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0033

(b) θ: Automatic and Non-Automatic Choices

Difference between the estimate for ARA and θ0 obtained using buckets chosen directly by investors (Automatic) and
Difference
between
the estimate
for and
ARA
and θ obtained
using chosen
bucketsdirectly
chosenbydirectly
investors and
Difference
between
estimate
for
θ0 obtained
using
buckets
investorsby(Automatic)
buckets
suggested
by the
optimization
toolARA
(Non-Automatic),
for the
same
investment.
(Non-Automatic)
and
buckets
suggested
by
optimization
tool
(Automatic),
for
the
same
investment.
buckets suggested by optimization tool (Non-Automatic), for the same investment.

Figure 5: Investment-by-Investment Bias Distribution

49

43
43

.04
ARA
.035
.03
10

11

12
13
14
log Net Worth/ log Median House Prices

ARA and Net Worth
95% C.I.

15

ARA and House Prices

2

Income-Based RRA
2.5
3

3.5

(a) ARA and Wealth

10

11

12
13
14
log Net Worth/log Median House Prices

RRA and Net Worth
95% C.I.

15

RRA and House Prices

(b) Income-Based RRA and Wealth

Subsample: home-owners. The vertical axis plots a weighted local second degree polynomial smoothing of
the risk aversion measure. The observations are weighted using an Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth
of 0.75. The horizontal axis measures the (log) net worth and the (log) median house price at the investor’s
zip code at the time of the portfolio choice, our two proxies for investor wealth.

Figure 6: Risk Aversion and Wealth in the Cross Section

50

Variable

Mean

FICO score
Debt to Income
Monthly Income ($)
Amount borrowed ($)

A. Borrower Characteristics
694.3
0.128
5,427.6
9,223.7

B. Investor Characteristics
Male
83%
Age
43.4
Married
56%
Home Owner
75%
Net Worth, Imputed ($1,000)
663.0
Median House Value in Zip Code ($1,000)
397.6
% Change in House Price, 10-2007 to 04-2008
-4.0%

Std. Dev.

Median

38.2
0.076
5,963.1
6,038.0

688.0
0.128
4,250.0
8,000.0

15.0

994.4
288.0
5.8%

100%
40.0
100%
100%
375.0
309.6
-3.6%

Sources: Lending Club, Acxiom, and Zillow. October 2007 to April 2008. FICO scores and debt to
income ratios are recovered from each borrower’s credit report. Monthly incomes are self reported during
the loan application process. Amount borrowed is the final amount obtained through Lending Club.
Lending Club obtains investor demographics and net worth data through a third party marketing firm
(Acxiom). Acxiom uses a proprietary algorithm to recover gender from the investor’s name, and matches
investor names, home addresses, and credit history details to available public records to recover age,
marital status, home ownership status, and net worth. We use investor zip codes to match the LC data
with real estate price data from the Zillow Home Value Index. The Zillow Index for a given geographical
area is the median property value in that area.

Table 1: Borrower and Investor Characteristics

51

Sample/Subsample:

52

All Investments
(1)
Mean
S.D
Median

Diversified investments
(2)
Mean
S.D
Median

A. Unit of observation: investor-bucket-month
(N = 50,254)
Investment ($)
302.8
2,251.4
50.0
N Projects in Bucket
1.9
1.8
1.0
Interest Rate
12.89% 2.98% 12.92%
Default Rate
2.77%
1.45%
2.69%
E(PV $1 investment)
1.122
0.027
1.122
Var(PV $1 investment)
0.036
0.020
0.035

(N = 43,662)
86.0
206.9
50.0
2.0
1.8
1.0
12.91% 2.96% 12.92%
2.78%
1.45%
2.84%
1.122
0.027
1.123
0.027
0.020
0.022

B. Unit of observation: investor-month
(N = 5,191)
Investment
2,932
28,402
375
N Buckets
9.7
8.7
7.0
N Projects
18.8
28.0
8.0
E(PV $1 investment)
1.121
0.023
1.121
Var(PV $1 investment) 0.0122
0.0159
0.0054

1,003
11.7
23.3
1.121
0.0052

(N = 3,745)
2,736
375
8.4
10.0
28.9
14.0
0.021
1.121
0.0065 0.0025

With real estate data
(3)
Mean
S.D
Median
(N
90.1
2.0
12.92%
2.79%
1.122
0.036

1,067
11.8
23.8
1.121
0.0066

= 37,248)
220.5
50.0
1.8
1.0
2.97% 12.92%
1.45%
2.84%
0.027
1.123
0.020
0.035

(N = 3,145)
2,934
400
8.5
10.0
29.5
14.0
0.021
1.121
0.0070 0.0038

Each observation in panel A represents an investment allocation, with at least 2 risk buckets, by investor i in risk bucket z in month t.
In panel B, each observation represents a portfolio choice by investor i in month t. An investment constitutes a dollar amount allocation
to projects (requested loans), classified in 35 risk buckets, within a calendar month. Loan requests are assigned to risk buckets according
to the amount of the loan, the FICO score, and other borrower characteristics. Lending Club assigns and reports the interest rate and
default probability for all projects in a bucket. The expectation and variance of the present value of $1 investment in a risk bucket is
calculated assuming a geometric distribution for the idiosyncratic monthly survival probability of the individual loans and independence
across loans within a bucket. The sample in column 2 excludes portfolio choices in a single bucket and non-diversified investments. The
sample in column 3 also excludes portfolio choices made by investors located in zip codes that are not covered by the Zillow Index.

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics

ARA

θ

Expected
Income

Income
Based RRA

Mean
sd

0.03679
0.02460

1.086
0.027

130.1
344.3

2.85
3.62

p1
p10
p25
p50
p75
p90
p99

-0.00837
0.01126
0.02271
0.04395
0.04812
0.05293
0.08562

1.045
1.059
1.075
1.086
1.094
1.105
1.157

4.11
8.08
16.0
45.9
111.1
297.1
1,255.1

-0.16
0.28
0.56
1.62
3.66
7.29
17.18

3,145

3,145

3,145

3,145

N

Absolute Risk Aversion (ARA) and intercept θ obtained through the OLS estimation of the following
relationship for each investment:
E [Rz ] = θi + ARAi ·

W i xiz
· σz2 + ξzi
niz

where the left (right) hand side variable is expected return (idiosyncratic variance times the investment
amount) of the investment in bucket z. The income based Relative Risk Aversion (RRA) is the estimated
ARA times the total expected income from the investment in Lending Club. pN represents the N th
percentile of the distribution.

Table 3: Unconditional distribution of estimated risk aversion parameters

53

ARA

θ

Expected
Income

Income
Based RRA

2007m10

0.028
(0.020)

1.057
(0.014)

173.3
(608.5)

1.229
(0.980)

2007m11

0.032
(0.018)

1.065
(0.013)

111.3
(337.6)

1.195
(0.952)

2007m12

0.037
(0.016)

1.066
(0.013)

78.5
(199.8)

1.446
(1.527)

2008m1

0.036
(0.031)

1.083
(0.040)

175.9
(522.8)

2.774
(3.676)

2008m2

0.040
(0.022)

1.089
(0.018)

123.3
(305.9)

3.179
(3.906)

2008m3

0.037
(0.025)

1.097
(0.023)

146.4
(288.0)

3.841
(4.302)

2008m4

0.039
(0.026)

1.089
(0.023)

63.9
(109.8)

2.011
(2.275)

Absolute Risk Aversion (ARA) and intercept θ obtained through the OLS estimation of the following
relationship for each investment:
E [Rz ] = θi + ARAi ·

W i xiz
· σz2 + ξzi
niz

where the left (right) hand side variable is expected return (idiosyncratic variance times the investment
amount) of the investment in bucket z. The income based Relative Risk Aversion (RRA) is the estimated
ARA times the total expected income from the investment in Lending Club. Standard deviations in
parenthesis.

Table 4: Mean risk aversion and systematic risk premium by month

54

Automatic
(1)

ARA
Non-Automatic
(2)

θ
Non-Automatic
(5)

∆
(6)

0.0368
(0.0215)

0.0356
(0.0194)

1.080
(0.0226)

0.001
(0.0213)

0.0355
(0.0235)

B. Subsample: October-December 2007 (n = 74)
0.0340
-0.0016
1.062
1.063
(0.0192)
(0.0223)
(0.0132)
(0.0193)

0.001
(0.0168)

0.0374
(0.0206)

C. Subsample: January-April 2008 (n = 153)
0.0364
-0.0011
1.087
1.089
(0.0195)
(0.0195)
(0.0188)
(0.0190)

0.002
(0.0232)

∆
(3)

Automatic
(4)

A. Full Sample (n = 227)
-0.0012
1.079
(0.0204)
(0.0209)

Descriptive statistics of the Absolute Risk Aversion (ARA) and θ obtained as in Table 3, over the
subsample of investments where the estimates can be obtained separately using Automatic (buckets
suggested by optimization tool) and Non-Automatic (buckets chosen directly by investor) bucket choices
for the same investment. The mean and standard deviation (in parenthesis) of both estimates and the
difference for the same investment are shown for the full sample and for 2007 and 2008 separately. The
mean differences are not significantly different from zero in any of the samples.

Table 5: Estimates from Automatic and Non-Automatic Buckets

55

Dependent Variable:
(in logs)
A. OLS
log (Net Worth)
R-squared
Observations (investors)

ARA

Investment

(1)

Income based
RRA
(2)

-0.009**
(0.004)

0.022***
(0.008)

0.035***
(0.009)

0.003
1,514

0.005
1,514

0.010
1,514

(3)

First Stage
log (Net Worth)
(4)

B. Errors-in-Variables (Instrument: House Value)
log (Net Worth)
-0.059***
0.123***
0.203***
(0.019)
(0.031)
(0.038)
log (House Value)
Observations (investors)

1.664***
(0.146)
1,261

1,261

1,261

1,261

Estimated elasticity of risk aversion to wealth in the cross section. Panel A presents the OLS estimation
of the between model and Panel B presents the errors-in-variables estimation using the median house
value in the investor’s zip code as an instrument for net worth. The dependent variables are the (log)
absolute risk aversion (column 1), income-based relative risk aversion (column 2), and investment amount
in LC (column 3), averaged for each investor i across all portfolio choices in our sample. The right hand
side variable is the investor (log) net worth (from Acxiom). Column 4 reports the first stage of the
instrumental variable regression: the dependent variable is (log) net worth and the right hand side
variable is the average (log) median house price in the investor’s zip code (from Zillow). Standard errors
are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered at the zip code level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of confidence, respectively.

Table 6: Risk Aversion and Wealth, Cross Section Estimates

56

Dependent Variable:
(in logs)
A. No Fixed Effects
log (House Value)
Risk Premium Controls
Investor Fixed Effects
R-squared
Observations
Investors

ARA

Investment

(1)

Income based
RRA
(2)

-0.166***
(0.047)

0.192***
(0.048)

0.367***
(0.070)

Yes
No
0.020
2,030
1,292

Yes
No
0.010
2,030
1,292

Yes
No
0.032
2,030
1,292

-4.815***
(1.611)

1.290
(1.745)

Yes
Yes
0.011
2,030
1,292

Yes
Yes
0.001
2,030
1,292

B. Investor Fixed Effects
log (House Value)
-2.825*
(1.521)
Risk Premium Controls
Investor Fixed Effects
R-squared (adj)
Observations
Investors

Yes
Yes
0.008
2,030
1,292

(3)

Estimated investor-specific elasticity of risk aversion to wealth. The left hand side variables are the (log)
absolute risk aversion (column 1), income-based relative risk aversion (column 2), and investment amount
in LC (column 3), obtained for investor i for a portfolio choice in month t. The right hand side variables
are the (log) median house price in the investor’s zip code in time t, and an investor fixed effect (omitted).
Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered at the zip code level. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of confidence, respectively.

Table 7: Risk Aversion and Wealth Shocks, Investor-Specific Estimates

57

