NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO GLOBAL BANKS SPREAD GLOBAL IMBALANCES? THE CASE OF ASSET-BACKED
COMMERCIAL PAPER DURING THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 2007-09
Viral V. Acharya
Philipp Schnabl
Working Paper 16079
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16079

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

Authors are grateful to Adam Ashcraft, Dave Backus, Christa Bouwman, Florian Heider, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Ayhan Kose, Gustavo Suarez, Amit Seru and faculty members at Stern School of Business,
New York University for discussions on the topic. We thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, IMF Annual Research Conference and the 9th Annual Darden International Finance
Conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Viral V. Acharya and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances? The Case of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper
During the Financial Crisis of 2007-09
Viral V. Acharya and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 16079
June 2010
JEL No. F1,F3,G21,G28,G3
ABSTRACT
The global imbalance explanation of the financial crisis of 2007-09 suggests that demand for riskless
assets from countries with current account surpluses created fragility in countries with current account
deficits, most notably, in the United States. We examine this explanation by analyzing the geography
of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) conduits set up by large commercial banks. We show that
both banks located in surplus countries and banks located in deficit countries manufactured riskless
assets of $1.2 trillion by selling short-term ABCP to risk-averse investors, predominantly U.S. money
market funds, and investing the proceeds primarily in long-term U.S. assets. As negative information
about U.S. assets became apparent in August 2007, banks in both surplus and deficit countries experienced
difficulties in rolling over ABCP and as a result suffered significant losses. We conclude that global
banking flows, rather than global imbalances, determined the geography of the financial crisis.

Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Philipp Schnabl
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-76
New York, NY 10012
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
Bernanke (2005) argued in his famous speech that the “savings glut” in Asia,
most notably in China, and several European countries with current account surpluses,
had created severe and persistent global imbalances. These imbalances have by and large
found their way through capital flows into the U.S. economy (Caballero et al, 2008).
Importantly, unlike capital flows to emerging markets, a large share of these flows have
been invested in effectively risk-free assets, such as U.S. treasuries, U.S. government
agency debt, and money market fund shares. Some observers (for example, Caballero
and Krishnamurthy, 2009) have argued that this demand for risk-free assets coming from
surplus countries left the U.S. economy fragile by concentrating the real risks in its
financial sector. Together, these observations constitute the global imbalance explanation
of the financial crisis of 2007.4
We argue in this paper that global imbalances fall short of explaining why the
financial crisis took such a global form right from its inception. To understand the global
spread, we analyze how financial sectors around the world became exposed to the crisis.
We show that large commercial banks in both current account surplus and current
account deficit countries manufactured risk-free assets by setting up asset-backed
commercial paper (ABCP) conduits. These conduits are a form of securitization in which
banks use off-balance sheet vehicles to purchase long-term assets financed with shortterm debt. However, contrary to other forms of securitization, such as mortgage-backed
securities or collateralized debt obligations, banks effectively retain the credit risk
4

Bernanke (2009) and Portes (2009) also argue that it is impossible to understand the financial crisis fully
without appealing to global imbalances and that they are the underlying cause of the crisis. Jagannathan,
Kapoor, and Schaumberg (2009) argue that imbalances in labor supply can help to explain the financial
crisis.

-1-

associated with conduit assets. Hence, as long as banks are solvent, conduits are riskfree for outside investors but can generate significant risks for banks. In exchange for
bearing these risks, banks have access to low-cost funding via the asset-backed
commercial paper market.
We believe that ABCP conduits are an interesting laboratory for studying the
geography of risk-free assets for two reasons. First, before the financial crisis of 2007,
asset-backed commercial paper was the largest short-term debt instrument with more than
$1.2 trillion outstanding in January 2007. For comparison, the second largest instrument
was Treasury Bills with about $940 billion outstanding. Second, we show that the risks
associated with ABCP conduits were primarily borne by large commercial banks. Hence,
we can construct the geography of risk-taking using bank headquarters’ locations. These
data are not available for other safe assets such as AAA-rated tranches of securitized
assets.
Our analysis shows that most asset-backed commercial paper was issued in U.S.
dollars and sold to risk-averse investors such as money market funds. Most of the
proceeds were used to invest in long-term financial assets of current account deficit
countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom. However, the sponsoring
commercial banks were based both in current account surplus countries (e.g., Germany,
Japan, and the Netherlands) and current account deficit countries (e.g., United States,
United Kingdom). In fact, we find that the country-wide level of asset-backed
commercial paper outstanding, our proxy for the scale of production of risk-free assets,
was effectively uncorrelated with a country’s current account balance.

-2-

Hence, when information about the deteriorating quality of U.S. sub-prime assets
traveled across the financial markets in the summer of 2007, it was not just banks in the
U.S. that suffered losses. On August 9, 2007, the French Bank BNP Paribas announced
their suspension of net asset value calculation,5 following which risk-averse investors
stopped refinancing maturing asset-backed commercial paper. In fact, asset-backed
commercial paper outstanding decreased sharply in August 2007 (see Figure 1), and the
cost of issuing overnight asset-backed commercial paper relative to the U.S. Fed Funds
rate increased from 10 basis points to 150 basis points within one day of the
announcement (see Figure 2).
The first banks to collapse and be bailed out by their government were IKB
Deutsche Industriebank and Sachsen Landesbank based in Germany (Acharya and
Schnabl, 2009). These banks had provided credit guarantees more than three times their
equity capital in order to issue asset-backed commercial paper of the risk-free variety.
The German banks were unable to fulfill promises under these guarantees and were
rendered insolvent. Other large banks in both Europe and the United States, such as
ABN Amro (eventually Royal Bank of Scotland) and Citibank, survived the decline in
the asset-backed commercial paper market but suffered significant losses because their
credit guarantees to outside investors required them to pay off maturing asset-backed
commercial paper at par independently of underlying asset values (the so-called
“securitization without risk transfer”, a term employed by Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez
(2009) to describe asset-backed commercial paper). In our empirical analysis, we find
that a one-standard deviation increase in a bank’s exposure to conduits, measured as the
5

See “BNP Paribas Freezes Funds as Loan Losses Roil Markets”, Bloomberg.com, August 9, 2008.

-3-

ratio of asset-backed commercial paper to bank equity in January 2007, reduces stock
returns in August 2007 by 0.8 percent.
Thus, contrary to the global imbalance explanation, we find that countries with
current account surpluses such as Germany, Japan and the Netherlands did as badly in
terms of bank stock returns as deficit countries like the United States and the United
Kingdom, with Germany in fact doing the worst. Indeed, there is no correlation between
the extent of safe asset “manufacturing” measured by ABCP outstanding and global
imbalances measured by current account balances.
Instead, we conjecture based on descriptive evidence of the regulation of ABCP
conduits across countries, that bank risk-taking was driven primarily by “weak”
regulation in the sense that it allowed banks to hold assets in conduits with little capital
relative to the required capital for assets on bank balance sheets. We describe the capital
regulation for conduits in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Spain, and
Canada and how it affected the likelihood of banks in these countries to set up conduits.
Lastly, we document that the inability to roll over ABCP led to “dollar shortages”
among European banks that had sponsored conduits (Baba, McCauley and Ramaswamy,
2009, and McGuire and von Peter, 2009). As a result, U.S. subsidiaries of European
banks increased their borrowing from the Federal Reserve in the United States, which
eventually prompted the Federal Reserve to set up dollar-swap facilities with a large
number of central banks in other countries, especially in Europe.
Overall, our results suggest that the geography of the financial crisis depends on
the incentives of global banks to manufacture riskless assets rather than the direction of
capital flows. According to the pure global-imbalance view, the financial sectors of
-4-

current account surplus countries should have been shielded from the financial crisis.
Instead we observe that banks in surplus countries are at least as affected as banks in
deficit countries. Thus, in a world with global banking, the financial sectors of surplus
countries are themselves at substantial risk from capital flows into deficit countries.
In terms of related literature, Rose and Spiegel (2009a, b) document that the crisis
does not seem to have spread through contagion from the U.S. They document that
countries that had disproportionately high amounts of trade with the U.S. in either
financial or real markets did not experience more intense crises. Our paper employs a
nuanced version of financial exposure to the U.S. – the extent of ABCP conduit activity
undertaken by banks in different countries – and shows that it explains performance of
country-level and bank-level stock returns in the early phase of the crisis. However, we
too do not view this as a “transmission” from the U.S.; instead as a direct financial
exposure to the U.S., that is uncorrelated with trade exposure to the United States.
Gorton and Souleles (2005), Gorton (2008), Brunnermeier (2009), and Adrien et
al (2010) provide descriptions of the shadow banking sector. Ashcraft and Shuermann
(2008) present a detailed description of the process of securitization of sub-prime
mortgages, of which conduits were one component. Nadauld and Sherland (2008) study
the securitization by investment banks of AAA-rated tranches – “economic catastrophe
bonds” as explained by Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2008) – and argue that the change in
the SEC ruling regarding capital requirements for investment banks spurred them to
engage in excessive securitization. In contrast, Shin (2009), Acharya and Richardson
(2009), and Acharya and Schnabl (2009) argue that banks were securitizing without
transferring risks to end investors and, in particular, asset-backed commercial paper and
-5-

the purchase of AAA-rated tranches were a way of taking on tail-natured systemic risk of
the underlying pool of credit risks.
In an analysis that focuses on the economic causes of the financial sector’s
increasing propensity to take such risks (in one class of conduits – the “credit arbitrage”
vehicles), Arteta et al (2008) provide evidence consistent with government-induced
distortions and problems of corporate governance. They also present an overview of the
location of credit arbitrage conduits, but do not relate it to global imbalances, the focus of
our paper. Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2009) document that ABCP was indeed riskfree in that only 3% of losses were borne by ABCP investors. They also illustrate the
important role played by bank guarantees in enabling conduits to issue ABCP by showing
that rollovers of ABCP that had weaker guarantees (“extendible notes” and “SIVs”) were
more difficult during the crisis than those of ABCP with stronger guarantees (“credit
guarantees” and “liquidity guarantees”). Finally, Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009)
document the “run” in the shadow banking sector and link it to the deterioration of asset
quality in conduits.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the
structure of ABCP conduits, describes the data sources, and presents summary statistics.
Section 3 examines the role of global imbalances and country-specific financial
regulation in setting up ABCP conduits. Section 4 analyzes the geography of ABCP in
terms of their sponsor, their investment strategy, and their outside investors. Section 5
shows how the financial crisis erupted in August 2007 in different parts of the world and
links bank’s exposure to ABCP conduits. Section 6 provides a discussion of economic

-6-

incentives behind ABCP issuance and related activities aimed at producing risk-free
assets. Section 7 concludes.

2. Institutional background
Asset-backed commercial paper conduits form an integral part of financial
intermediation that has over time come to be called "shadow banking". Put simply,
shadow banking is that part of the intermediation sector that performs several functions
(e.g., maturity transformation which involves borrowing short and lending long) that we
traditionally associate with commercial and investment banks, but which runs in the
“shadow” of the regulated banks in that it is off-balance sheet and less regulated. Adrian
et al (2010) provide an excellent overall summary of shadow banking. We focus here on
a few headline facts that help position the important role of ABCP conduits in shadow
banking.
Adrian et al (2010) document that shadow banking assets grew from an amount
close to zero in 1980 to somewhere between $15 to $20 trillion by 2008. These include
assets managed or owned by conduits (SIVs, SIV Lites, and other conduits such as
securities arbitrage conduits), prime money-market funds, asset-backed securities (ABS)
collateralized debt obligations (CDO) of both mezzanine and high-grade types, enhanced
cash accounts, and securities lending. In 2007, of the total assets newly transported to
shadow banking, conduits represented about 25%. In terms of the "stock" of assets, as of
July 2007, ABCP conduits held over $1.2 trillion, compared to securities lending of $0.6
trillion, broker-dealer repo of $2.5 trillion, and financial commercial paper of $0.4
trillion.
-7-

Next, we describe the organizational structure of ABCP conduits on both assets
and liabilities sides, and discuss how these conduits remain linked to the sponsoring
institutions through credit and liquidity enhancements.

2.1. Conduit structure
Figure 3 depicts the typical structure of an asset-backed commercial paper conduit
and its relation to its sponsoring financial institution, asset sellers, and outside investors.
We describe this structure using the conduit Ormond Quay as an example. Ormond Quay
is a conduit set up in May 2004 and managed by Sachsen Landesbank, a large regional
bank in Germany. Sachsen Landesbank’s management responsibilities consist of
selecting the assets to be purchased by Ormond Quay and issuing short-term asset-backed
commercial paper in order to finance the assets. Sachsen Landesbank sells the assetbacked commercial paper to outside investors, such as money market funds, and rolls
over the asset-backed commercial paper at regular intervals.
Panel A of Table 1 shows the composition of Ormond Quay’s investments by
asset type as of July 2007. Ormond Quay invested almost exclusively in asset-backed
securities with a total value of $11.4bn. The majority of the securities were backed by
residential mortgages (55.5%) and commercial mortgages (23.8%). The remainder was
split between corporate loans (4.1%), consumer loans (4.1%), collateralized debt
obligations (2.7%), and a mix of equipment lease receivables, car loans and leases,
student loans, credit card receivables, and other asset types. As shown in Panel B of
Table 1, the majority of Ormond Quay’s assets were originated in the United States
(37.7%) and the United Kingdom (22.1%). The remainder was split between unspecified
-8-

countries in Europe (11.2%), Italy (9.3%), Spain (8.4%), Netherlands (3.9 %), and other
European and Asian countries. All assets had the highest “AAA” rating from at least one
certified credit rating agency.
On the liabilities side, Ormond Quay financed the assets almost exclusively by
issuing short-term asset-backed commercial paper. As of July 2007, total asset-backed
commercial paper outstanding was $12.1 billion of which 32% were issued in U.S.
dollars and 68% were issued in Euro.6 We estimate that Ormond Quay only had a sliver
of equity, around $36 million, or 30 basis points of its asset value. There were no other
liabilities. We have no information on Ormond Quay’s hedging strategy but, like most
conduits, Ormond Quay’s is likely to have hedged its currency risk and interest rate risk.
Ormond Quay benefits from a credit guarantee provided by Sachsen Landesbank
which guarantees that Sachen Landesbank pays off maturing asset-backed commercial
paper if Ormond Quay is unable to do so. Hence, as long as Sachen Landesbank is
solvent, outside investors are expected to be repaid. This structure is different from
traditional commercial paper which is considered safe because of its seniority in the
capital structure due to its short-term maturity (Kacperczyk and Schnabl, 2009). Instead,
asset-backed commercial paper is considered safe because it is backed jointly by conduit
assets and a bank guarantee.
As a result of the bank guarantee, Moody’s awarded the conduit the highest
possible short-term rating “P-1”. Moody’s also explicitly mentions in its report that the

6

We do not have information on the maturity of Ormond Quay’s asset-backed commercial paper but,
according to the Federal Reserve Board, most conduits have asset-backed commercial paper outstanding
with a maturity of 30 days or less. The majority of issuance is with a maturity of 1 to 4 days. Regarding
outside investors, we have no information of their identity but according to the Federal Reserve’s Flow of
Funds, the main investors in asset-backed commercial paper are US money market funds.

-9-

guarantees provided by Sachen Landesbank are required for the “P-1” rating and notes
that these guarantees are considered sufficient because Sachsen Landesbank itself
benefits from a grandfathered state guarantee. The rating is important for the sponsor of
asset-backed commercial paper because many outside investors, such as U.S. money
market funds, have regulatory constraints which require them to buy only highly-rated
securities (Kacperczyk and Schnabl, 2009).
The structure of Ormand Quay is typical for asset-backed commercial paper
conduits. Most conduits, with the exception of Structured Investment Vehicles, are
financed almost exclusively with asset-backed commercial paper. Also, most conduits
benefit from a credit guarantee provided by a large commercial bank which guarantees
them Moody’s highest short-term rating (Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez, 2009). Unlike
Sachsen Landesbank, most sponsors do not have an explicit state guarantee, but they are
typically large enough such that they are considered very unlikely to fail. Also, many
sponsors may benefit from implicit too-big-to fail guarantees by their respective
governments.
Like Ormand Quay, most conduits invest in “AAA”-rated securitized assets, unsecuritized assets of similar quality, or a combination of both. Ormand Quay is a credit
arbitrage conduit, which is a type of conduit that invests almost exclusively in securitized
assets. Other types of conduits are multi-seller conduits or single-seller conduits that
usually invest in unsecuritized assets. In the case of multi-seller conduits and singleseller conduits (sometimes also called loan conduits), a large share of the assets are
bought from customers of the sponsoring financial institution.

-10-

Regarding asset types, many conduits invest in mortgages but not all conduits do.
Other common asset types are trade receivables, credit card receivables, student loans,
auto loans, home equity loans, corporate loans, and consumer loans. Most conduits are
diversified across several asset classes. Regarding investment strategies, credit arbitrage
conduits tend to invest more in long-term assets such as mortgages, whereas multi-seller
conduits and single seller conduits tend to invest more in medium term assets such as
trade receivables.
Overall, conduits are similar to regular banks in the sense that they hold long-term
and medium-term risky assets and finance themselves via issuing short-term debt.

2.2 Data
We use several data sources for the empirical analysis in this paper. The primary
data sources are conduit ratings reports from Moody’s Investor Service covering the
period from January 2001 to March 2009. The rating reports are typically three to five
pages and contain information on conduit sponsor, conduit type, conduit assets, credit
guarantees, and a general description of the conduit. Moody’s Investor Service publishes
the first report when it first issues a rating and subsequently updates the reports at regular
intervals. For some conduits, Moody’s Investor Service publishes monthly monitoring
reports. Monthly reports are typically one page and comprise information on conduit
size, credit guarantees, and conduit assets. In addition, Moody’s Investor Service
publishes a quarterly spreadsheet that summarizes basic information on all active
conduits.

-11-

To construct our data set, we start with the universe of conduits collected by
Moody’s Investor Service. We merge conduits that have more than one funding
operation (79 out of 9536 observations). We drop South African conduits because they
are rated on a different scale (72 out of 9536 observations). We drop ABCP issued by
collateralized debt obligations because the credit guarantees for collateralized debt
obligations are different from the credit guarantees provided to conduits (292 out of 9536
observations).
For each conduit, we identify the sponsor and match the sponsor to the
consolidated financial company (e.g., we match Deutsche Bank New York to Deutsche
Bank in Germany). We use several data sources such as Bankscope and Osiris to identify
sponsors. Once we identify a potential match, we verify the information using the
company website.
We match sponsors to sponsor characteristics using the Bankscope database. We
use the ISIN identifier to match Bankscope data to stock return data from Datastream. If
a bank does not have an ISIN identifier, we verify with the company website that the
bank is not listed on a stock exchange. We use the headquarters of the consolidated
financial company to identify the location of the sponsor.

2.3. Summary statistics
Table 2 provides summary statistics for all conduits authorized to issues ABCP as
of January 1, 2007. Panel A shows that there are 296 conduits with total ABCP
outstanding of $1.235 trillion. The average conduit size is $4.2 billion with a standard
deviation of $5.2 billion. The largest conduit type is multiseller conduits with $548
-12-

billion in ABCP. Multiseller conduits purchase assets from more than one seller. The
assets are often not securitized and the sellers are usually clients of the conduit sponsor.
The main asset types held by multiseller conduits are trade receivables (15%), securities
(12%), auto loans (11%), credit card receivables (10%), and commercial loans (9%).
The second-largest type is credit arbitrage conduits with $213 billion in ABCP.
Credit arbitrage conduits usually purchase securitized assets from many sellers. The
main asset types held by credit arbitrage conduits are residential mortgage loans (26%),
collateralized loan obligations and collateralized bond obligations (21%), commercial
mortgage loans (12%), and commercial loans (11%). The third-largest type is singleseller conduits with $173 billion in ABCP. Single-seller conduits are often used by
mortgage originators to warehouse assets before they are securitized.
Table 3 presents summary statistics per sponsor. We define a sponsor as a single
consolidated financial company and we aggregate ABCP at the holding level. In total,
there are 126 sponsors with average ABCP outstanding of $9.8 billion. The largest
sponsor type is commercial banks. Commercial banks sponsor $903 billion, or 73%, of
ABCP. The second largest group is structured finance groups with $181 billion in
ABCP. Other sponsors are mortgage lenders ($71 billion), insurance companies and
monoline insurers ($14 billion), and investment banks ($11 billion).

3. Understanding the geography of asset-backed commercial paper conduits
As explained at the outset in our introductory remarks, the global imbalance view
of the crisis attributes the financial crisis to the fragility of the financial sector in the
United States as it faced a pressure to meet the persistent and heightened demand for
-13-

“safe” assets from the rest of the world, most notably from surplus countries such as
China. A pure global imbalance view – based primarily on the direction of capital flows
– would suggest that other than through an indirect exposure to the U.S. financial sector
(for example, through inter-bank linkages or complementarities across countries in trade),
surplus countries should not have been exposed to the fragility of the U.S..
Some researchers (for instance, Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2008)) view
the large and persistent global imbalances as an efficient outcome of the financial
integration in which advanced financial markets accumulate foreign liabilities as a
gradual process concomitant with their (further) financial deepening, resulting in sizable
welfare gains for developed countries.
More recent accounts of the global imbalance view, such as in Caballero (2009),
do attribute the financial crisis to the insatiable demand for safe debt instruments that put
an enormous pressure on the U.S. financial system, but recognize that the system caved
in to this pressure due to poor design of incentives and regulatory mistakes in the
financial sector.
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2009) argue that both global imbalances and the financial
crisis are rooted in common causes linked to economic policies adopted in several
countries such as the low-interest rate environment in the United States and the
undervaluation of its currency by China. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001, 2005, 2007) also
note the systemic risk imposed to the global economy due to untested developments in
financial markets during 2000s.
In contrast, we contend that it was lax financial sector regulation in a world with
global banking that contributed to the fully global nature of the crisis right from its
-14-

inception. In particular, we argue below that weakly regulated financial sectors – of both
capital surplus and deficit countries – expanded rapidly by taking in capital flows into the
U.S. and creating assets in the U.S. Hence, when the U.S. assets experienced
deterioration in 2007, the geography of the crisis was determined by global banking
flows. That is, it was determined on the basis of which financial sectors were weakly
regulated – and thus allowed to build significant leveraged exposure to the U.S. assets –
rather than by the global capital flows, as predicated by the global imbalances view of the
crisis.

3.1. The role of financial sector regulation
There is considerable variation across countries in their regulatory treatment of
ABCP conduits. One important component of regulation in all countries is the
distinction between credit enhancement and liquidity enhancement. In the context of
conduits, credit enhancement is an unconditional guarantee by the sponsoring bank to
pay off maturing commercial paper if the conduit is unable to do so. In almost all
countries, credit enhancement is considered equivalent to on-balance sheet financing and
therefore requires the same amount of regulatory capital.
However, there is important variation across countries in the regulatory treatment
of liquidity enhancement. In the context of conduits, liquidity enhancement is a
conditional guarantee by the sponsoring bank to pay off maturing commercial paper if
the conduit is unable to do so. The condition is that conduit assets are deemed
performing when the sponsor is called upon to provide liquidity. In practice, conduits
usually stipulate assets as performing if the delinquency rate is below a pre-specified
-15-

level (unsecuritized assets) or if the assets are rated as investment grade (securitized
assets).
This structure of liquidity enhancement ensures that liquidity enhancement is
effectively providing the same level of insurance to outside investor as credit
enhancement. The reason is that most assets in conduits are considered high quality,
which ensures that there is a considerable time lag between the first signs of a decline in
asset quality and the date on which assets are deemed non-performing. Since commercial
paper is short-term, this means that the commercial paper almost always expires before
assets are deemed non-performing. Consistent with this interpretation, Acharya,
Schnabl, and Suarez (2009) find that there is not a single bank-sponsored conduit in
which the liquidity enhancement expired before asset-backed commercial paper investors
were repaid.
We therefore focus on bank regulation regarding liquidity enhancement. We
summarize the relevant regulation regarding liquidity enhancement for the countries
which are the main three sponsors of conduits: United States, United Kingdom, and
Germany. We also describe the regulations for Canada and Spain, which differ in their
treatment of liquidity enhancement. Finally, we summarize regulation for other
countries.

3.1.1. United States
Before 2001, bank regulators in the United States made a strict distinction
between credit enhancement and liquidity enhancement. Credit enhancement was
considered equivalent to on-balance sheet financing, resulting in an eight percent capital
-16-

charge for assets covered by credit enhancement. Liquidity enhancement was considered
off-balance sheet financing, resulting in a zero percent capital charge for assets covered
by liquidity enhancement. Most conduits primarily used liquidity enhancement to
provide insurance to outside investors against non-repayment of maturing ABCP, which
resulted in low capital charges for assets in conduits relative to assets on balance sheets.
In 2001, the energy company Enron declared bankruptcy due to fraud and
regulators uncovered the role of Enron’s off-balance sheet vehicles in hiding Enron’s
financial liabilities. As a result, regulators decided to re-examine the regulatory treatment
of ABCP conduits because conduits shared many structural features of Enron’s offbalance sheet vehicles.
In January 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued final
accounting guidance on variables interest entities (FASB Interpretation No. 46 or FIN
46), which would have required the consolidation of conduits on bank balance sheets
under U.S. GAAP. Industry publications around that time discussed the likely possibility
that new regulation would require the same capital charges for assets in conduits as for
assets on balance sheets. Consistent with this interpretation, Figure 1 shows that there is
no growth in ABCP outstanding during the period from 2001 to 2004.
In October 2003, U.S. bank regulators - the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision (together, the
"Agencies") – issued an interim ruling that permit banks that sponsor ABCP conduits to
ignore the consolidated conduit assets for the purpose of calculating risk-weighted assets.
In July 2004, the Agencies issued a final ruling which required banks to hold capital
-17-

against eligible liquidity enhancement at a 10% conversion factor. This ruling implied
that assets in conduits required 90% less capital than assets on balance sheets. Moreover,
this ruling allowed banks to leave conduits off the bank balance sheet under U.S. GAAP.
Hence, the new regulation continued to mandate much lower capital for assets in
conduits relative to assets on balance sheets. As shown in Figure 1, there was a large
increase in ABCP outstanding after the Agencies issued this ruling. This increase
suggests that banks interpreted the ruling as a confirmation that they could continue to
use off-balance sheet vehicles without holding significant capital against them.

3.1.2. United Kingdom
Before 2004, the United Kingdom had the same capital regulation as the United
States. Assets in conduits covered by liquidity enhancement were exempted from capital
charges. Contrary to the United States, the United Kingdom did not revise this regulation
after 2004. However, there are two important developments that are different from the
United States.
First, in the early 2000s several UK banks started adopting new accounting
standards based on International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). IFRS does not
recognize the transfer of assets to a conduit as a true sale in the accounting sense, which
means that UK banks using IFRS were required to consolidate conduits on its balance
sheet for the purposes of financial reporting.7 However, the UK bank regulator did not
update the rules for computing capital requirement following the consolidation under

7

As noted in a report by Price Waterhouse on the “Great Accounting Debate: Conduits off or on balance
sheet under IFRS”, IFRS does not recognize the usual structure employed by U.S. banks to circumvent
consolidation under FIN 46.

-18-

IFRS. Hence, for the purpose of computing regulatory capital, conduits continued to be
treated as off-balance sheet even though for financial reporting purposes they were on the
balance sheet.
Second, in 2007 most UK banks started adopting the new regulatory framework
based on Basel 2. Under the standardized approach, Basel 2 mandates a 20% capital
charge against liquidity enhancement covering assets in conduits. 8 Hence, the
standardized approach still maintained an 80% lower capital charge for assets in conduits
relative to assets on the balance sheet. However, if a conduit was holding highly rated
assets, the absolute reduction in required capital was lower, because highly rated assets
had lower risk weights under Basel 2 than under Basel 1. Hence, even though the relative
incentive to put assets off balance sheet remained significant under Basel 2, the absolute
reduction in regulatory capital decreased.

3.1.3. Germany
The history of the regulatory framework in Germany is similar to the United
Kingdom. German banks were not required to hold capital against liquidity
enhancement. In the early 2000s, some large German banks started adopting IFRS but,
similar to UK banks, conduits continued to be off-balance sheet for regulatory purposes
even though they were on the balance sheet for financial reporting purposes. Also,

8

Under the internal ratings based approach, the difference in regulatory capital between off-balance sheet
and on-balance sheet financing may be even lower, because this approach is based on modeling
assumptions which make less distinction between credit and liquidity enhancement. In 2007, however, the
regulatory treatment of ABCP conduits under the internal ratings based approach was still under
discussion.

-19-

starting in 2006 and 2007 German banks adopted Basel 2 which reduced the difference in
regulatory treatment of assets on the balance sheet relative to assets in conduits.
Contrary to other countries, Germany has a large number of regional banks called
Landesbanken, which are owned by state governments. Importantly, before 2005,
German Landesbanken operated with guarantees by their respective state government,
which significantly lowered their funding costs. In 2001, the European Union decided
that such guarantees violated EU competition law and required state governments to
abandon state guarantees by 2005. However, all debt issued prior to 2005 still benefited
from grandfathered state guarantees until 2015. As a result, many Landesbanken issued
debt before 2005 in order to raise financing at low funding costs.
Apparently, many Landesbanken chose to invest these funds into conduits. As
discussed above, the grandfathered state guarantees were of critical importance in the
ratings agencies’ assessments whether Landesbanken could support conduits. Due to the
guarantees, Landesbank were able to take on significantly more conduits assets relative to
their size, which resulted in significantly higher exposure to conduits. This was the
reason why German banks were among the first banks to be bailed out by their
government.

3.1.4. Spain
The regulation in Spain with respect to IFRS and Basel 2 was similar to the UK
and Germany. Contrary to the other countries, however, in the early 2000s, the Spanish
banks regulator decided to require an 8% capital charge against assets in conduits.
Reportedly, the regulator was worried about a domestic housing boom and wanted to
-20-

prevent Spanish banks from taking on additional exposure via conduits. As a result, in
Spain there was effectively no difference in capital requirements for assets on balance
sheet and assets off balance sheet.
Interestingly, we find no exposure of Spanish bank to conduits. This observation
is consistent with lower benefits from conduits in Spain due to this regulation. However,
we observe that one Spanish bank, Santander, had exposure to conduits via its whollyowned UK subsidiary Abbey National plc. It is not possible to determine whether the
Spanish regulator required capital against conduits sponsored by Abbey National but, if
not, this may be another example of the limitation of national regulation in dealing with
global banks.

3.1.5. Canada
Before 2004, bank regulation in Canada was similar to the United States. If
support to conduits was structured via liquidity enhancements, the bank was not required
to hold any capital against the conduit. In 2004, the Canadian bank regulator, the Office
of the Superintendant, introduced capital charges for banks that had used standard
liquidity enhancements. However, the Office of the Superintendant suggested that
financial institutions can structure liquidity enhancements such that they are only paid out
if there is a general market disruption. These “Canadian-style” liquidity enhancements
did not require a capital charge.
As a result, most Canadian conduits adopted the new Canadian-style liquidity
enhancement. In response, the international rating agencies Moody’s and S&P decided to
leave the Canadian market (i.e., not rate any Canadian ABCP) because the Canadian-21-

style liquidity enhancements were insufficient to safeguard outside investors. However,
the local rating agency Dominion Bond Rating Services continued to rate Canadian
issuances.
At the start of the financial crisis in 2007, many Canadian conduits experienced
difficulties in issuing ABCP. Some Canadian banks decided to provide liquidity, either
because they determined that they were legally required to do so or because they wanted
to protect the franchise value of their conduits. However, some banks did not provide
liquidity with the argument that the crisis did not qualify as a general market disruption.
Hence, there were two groups of conduits. The first group defaulted on their ABCP,
which triggered significant losses for outside investors, such as Canadian money market
funds. The second group of conduits restructured their liquidity enhancement according
to U.S. rules and managed to remain in the market.

3.1.6. Other countries
To the best of our knowledge, most other countries had similar regulations as the
United Kingdom and United States. Under Basel 1, liquidity enhancements were
considered off balance sheet and bank regulators required no capital charge against them.
Under the standardized approach of Basel 2, which was implemented in parts of Europe,
there was an 80% lower capital charge for assets in conduits relative to assets on the
balance sheet. According to industry publications, the only exception to this regulation
apart from Spain was Portugal, which may have been following Spain’s lead. Consistent
with this regulation, we do not find any Portuguese bank sponsoring conduits.

-22-

4. Location of sponsor, investors, and asset originators
4.1. Summary statistics
To analyze the location of sponsors empirically, we restrict the sample to
commercial banks. The reason is that sponsors other than commercial banks usually do
not have the financial strength to support conduits. To get a sense of the potential
selection bias from this restriction, consider the example of the Dutch Bank ABN Amro.
In January 2007, ABN Amro directly sponsored conduits with ABCP of $68.6 billion
outstanding. At the same time, the rating agency Fitch reports that ABN Amro provided
total credit guarantees of $107.5 billion to conduits. Hence, the difference of $38.9
billion is credit guarantees provided by ABN Amro to conduits other than its own.
Typically these credit guarantees are for conduits sponsored by structured investment
groups, which accounted for about 14% of ABCP outstanding as of January 2007. To the
best of our knowledge, conduits managed by structured investment groups are similar in
terms of asset composition to credit arbitrage conduits sponsored by large commercial
banks.
We identify the location of a sponsor as the location of the headquarters of the
sponsoring bank. For example, if the sponsor is Deutsche Bank New York, then we
aggregate the ABCP at the level of the holding company of Deutsche Bank in Germany.
The reason for this classification is that subsidiaries usually do not have the financial
strength to sponsor a conduit. Hence, credit guarantees provided by subsidiaries are
usually backed, either explicitly or implicitly, by the holding company.
Figure 4 shows the time-series of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding per
country for the seven largest countries by ABCP outstanding. We find that that the
-23-

majority of sponsors are located in the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, France, Japan, and Belgium. In all countries, ABCP outstanding increased
significantly until August 2007 and dropped steeply afterwards.
Independent of the sponsor location, however, we find a common strategy
regarding the funding source. We use Moody’s reports to identify the funding currency
as of January 2007. If a conduit issues in more than one currency, we separately account
for each currency. Table 4 reports total asset-backed commercial paper outstanding by
the location of the sponsor and the funding currency as of January 2007. For example,
German banks sponsored $204 billion in ABCP of which $139 billion was issued in U.S.
dollars, $63 billion in Euro, and $2.5 billion in other currencies. In total, $714 billion out
of $969 billion, or 74%, was issued in U.S. dollars. We note that most European banks
financed their conduits by issuing asset-backed commercial paper in U.S. dollars rather
than in Euro.
Next, we examine the country of origin of assets held by conduits. Unfortunately
there is no comprehensive data on conduits assets’ country of origin. However, Moody’s
publishes monthly reports for some larger conduits, in particular for credit arbitrage
reports, which often contain information on assets’ country of origin. Table 5 lists the ten
largest conduits by ABCP outstanding for which information on assets’ country of origin
is available. For each conduit, the table reports the sponsor location and the allocation of
assets across countries. We find that all conduits have a significant share of assets
invested in U.S. assets independent of whether the sponsor is located in the United States
or elsewhere. For almost all conduits, investments in the United States represent the
largest share for a single country. We also note that most conduits invest most of their
-24-

portfolio in assets with the highest “AAA” ratings. These results suggest that conduits
invest primarily in high quality assets of current account deficit countries, in particular
the United States and the United Kingdom.9 However, we note that this analysis relies on
credit arbitrage conduits only and that we have little data on assets’ country of origin for
other conduits.
Finally, we examine the identity of investors in asset-backed commercial paper.
We identify the broad investor classes using the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds. The
Flow of Funds aggregates asset-backed commercial paper and regular commercial paper
which have a total value of $2.2 trillion in early 2007. Assuming investors hold both
types of commercial paper in constant proportions, the Flow of Funds provides
information of the relative importance of different investor classes.
Panel A of Table 6 shows that the largest investor class is money market funds
and mutual funds which account for $722 billion (32.6%) of the market. Other important
investors are funding corporations (26.4%), foreign investors (10.2%), and state
governments (8.4%). Relative to their size, households and non-financial corporations
hold little commercial paper directly but they are large investors via money market funds.
We use holdings data from iMoney Net to examine the importance of assetbacked commercial paper to money market funds. Panel B of Table 6 lists the 20 largest
prime funds with non-zero holdings of asset-backed commercial paper. The share of the
portfolio invested in asset-backed commercial paper varies between 1% and 49% with
9

To validate these findings, we also consult a market-level report issued by Moody’s Investor Service
(Moody’s Investor Service, 2007). The report provides summary statistics on assets held by credit
arbitrage conduits in March 2007. Based on conduits with assets outstanding of $196 billion, Moody’s find
that 53% of assets measured by outstanding principal amount are originated in the United States and that
99% of rated assets are rated “Aa” or higher. These results support the findings based on conduit-level
data.

-25-

most funds investing between 10% and 30% of their portfolio in asset-backed
commercial paper. Overall, we interpret this finding as evidence that ABCP is an
important asset class for risk-averse investors, such as money market funds.

4.2. ABCP activity and global imbalances
The previous section shows that conduits finance themselves primarily in U.S.
dollars and purchase financial assets in current account deficit countries such as the
United States and the United Kingdom. However, the main risks associated with ABCP
conduits remain with the sponsors, which are located in both Europe and the United
States. To put ABCP activity in the context of global imbalances, we examine the
relation between ABCP activity and global imbalances using both country-level and
bank-level data.
We measure global balances as the current account balance in 2006. We restrict
the sample to banks located in countries in the Eurozone (as of 2006), Denmark, Japan,
Sweden, United Kingdom, and the United States (excluding countries with populations
smaller than 1 million). We choose this sample because most large banks are based in
these countries. Among countries with banks that sponsor conduits, we exclude
Australia, Canada, and South Africa because credit guarantees to conduits in these
markets are not comparable to credit guarantees in the United States and Europe. Among
countries with large banks, we exclude China because Chinese banks do not sponsor
conduits.
Figure 5 shows the current account surplus in 2006. The two largest deficit
countries in our dataset are the United States and the United Kingdom and the two largest
-26-

surplus countries are Japan and Germany. There is significant variation in the data
ranging from a current account deficit of -11.1% (Greece) to a current account surplus of
17.3% (Norway).
Figure 6 presents total ABCP as of January 2007 relative to the current account
balance. The figure shows that ABCP is unrelated to a country’s current account balance.
Thus, the fragility of a country’s banking sector, as measured by its exposure to ABCP
conduits, is unrelated to the direction of the global imbalances. Both banks in surplus
countries and banks in deficit countries sponsor ABCP conduits. To correct for the
relative size of countries, Figure 7 shows the correlation of ABCP activity, measured as
ABCP outstanding relative to total bank equity, and the current account balance. We use
bank equity to scale ABCP outstanding with the size of banking sector.10 Again, we find
that ABCP activity is unrelated to the current account balance.
In order to control for bank observables in the geography of asset-backed
commercial paper conduits, we examine the decision to sponsor conduits using the banklevel. We define an indicator variable “sponsor” equal to one if a bank sponsors ABCP
conduits worth 10% or more of its equity and zero otherwise. We choose this cutoff
because a few banks have conduits worth far less than 10% of their equity. However, we
only want to identify banks as sponsors that have significant exposure to conduits. We
note that our results on the geography of conduits are robust to choosing alternative
cutoffs of 0% and 50%.

10

An alternative measure of the size of the banking sector is bank assets. For our purposes, we prefer bank
equity because, as discussed above, countries vary in their financial reporting of ABCP on bank balance
sheets.

-27-

We estimate the regression

where

are bank-level observables such as the share of deposits, the share of short-term

debt, the capital ratio, the natural logarithm of bank assets, and the natural logarithm of
equity. The variables

are country-level fixed effects for the five countries with the

largest ABCP exposure. We restrict the sample to banks with total assets of at least $10
billion.
Table 7 presents the results. Column (1) shows that the country indicator
variables are statistically significant at the 1% level for all countries with the exception of
France. Column (2) adds bank size measured as the natural logarithm of bank assets.
The coefficient on bank size is statistically significant, which suggests that larger banks
are more likely to sponsor conduits, but the bank size control does not affect the country
fixed effects. Columns (3) to (6) add further control variables such as the natural
logarithm of equity, the capital ratio, profitability, and the share of short financed with
deposits. Importantly, the coefficients on the country indicator variables remain
statistically significant and the economic magnitude of the coefficient even increases.
Column (7) restricts the sample to banks with at least $100 billion of assets and finds
similar results.
Overall, these results suggest that both banks located in surplus countries and
banks located in deficit countries manufacture riskless assets by issuing asset-backed
commercial paper. These results are robust to controlling for bank-level observable
characteristics.

-28-

5. Conduit Exposure and the Financial Crisis
Our hypothesis is that banks with large conduit exposure would be more
adversely affected by the crisis in the ABCP Market which took hold on August 9th,
2007, and this would be true regardless of their geographic location. The difficulty in
testing this hypothesis is that the financial crisis has many different aspects and ABCP is
only one of them. Hence, if we observe that banks with conduit exposure have lower
returns during the financial crisis, then this result may be driven by other bank activities
that negatively affect stock prices and are correlated with conduit exposure. For
example, starting October 2007, banks started taking write-downs also on their exposure
to AAA-tranches of sub-prime assets. As shown in Figures 1 and 2, on August 9, 2007,
ABCP investors reduced purchases of newly issued ABCP and spreads jumped from 10
bps to 150 bps. Therefore, in order to avoid other confounding effects, we focus only on
the month of August 2007 when testing for the impact of conduit exposure on banks.
We restrict our sample to the 300 largest financial institutions because only those
institutions had the financial strength to support conduits. We restrict our analysis to
commercial banks based in Europe and the United States because these were the main
sponsors of conduits. We restrict the sample to banks with share price data and more
than $10 billion in assets (93 observations). We measure conduit exposure as ABCP
outstanding relative to equity capital as of January 1, 2007.

5.1 Country-level Response
First, we illustrate that the effect of the ABCP crisis was felt globally wherever
ABCP exposure was high. This can be seen in Figure 8 where we employ as the
-29-

independent variable the average stock return performance from August 1, 2007 to
August 31, 2007 of all banks in a given country and as the dependent variable the average
ABCP to equity exposure of that country’s banks. Countries that have non-trivial
exposures are the U.S., the UK and the France (deficit countries) and Belgium,
Netherlands and Germany (surplus countries). Most other countries are close to zero in
terms of ABCP exposure. Nevertheless, there is a reasonably negative relationship
between country-level stock price reaction and ABCP exposure. This underscores our
main thesis of the paper that the financial crisis materialized at the very onset – in August
2007 – also in many of the surplus countries, and that it was not just the U.S. (and the
UK) that got affected by the production of risk-free ABCP to meet the inflow of global
imbalances into the U.S. money market funds.

5.2 Bank-level response
To verify that the stock price responses in August 2007 were indeed due to ABCP
exposure, we examine the bank-level stock price response and its relationship to banklevel exposure. Our baseline specification is

where

is the cumulative stock return of bank i computed over the month of August

2007,

is bank i’s ABCP conduit exposure relative to equity,

i’s observable characteristics (measured as of January 1, 2007) and

are banks

is an error term.

We estimate the specification using robust standard errors to allow for correlation across
error terms.

-30-

Table 8 presents the results. Column (1) shows that a one-unit increase in conduit
exposure reduces the cumulative stock return by 1.8 percentage points. The cumulative
stock return for this sample was -1.7 percentage points in August 2007 with a standard
deviation of 4.7%. A one-unit increase in exposure is approximately two standard
deviations in the exposure variable or the difference between the exposure of Citibank
(high exposure) and Wells Fargo (no exposure). Hence, conduit exposure had a
statistically and economically important effect on bank stock returns over this period.
Column (2) controls for banks size with the natural logarithm of assets and the
natural logarithm of equity. The coefficient of interest decreases to 1.6% but remains
statistically significant. In Column (3), we add controls for the equity ratio and this
coefficient remains unchanged. In Columns (4) and (5), we add control variables for
funding sources such as deposit funding and short-term debt funding and the results are
again unaffected. To test if exposure explains within-country variation in stock price
reactions, Column (6) adds indicator variables for the country of bank headquarters.
Again, the coefficient of interest is unaffected and remains statistically significant. We
interpret these results as evidence that banks with higher conduit exposure were more
negatively affected by the ABCP crisis. The coefficient may in fact constitute a lower
bound of the realized impact because investors may have underestimated the severity of
the downturn or may not have been fully aware of the (relatively opaque) credit
guarantees provided to conduits.

-31-

5.3 Dollar shortages
As discussed above, most conduits financed themselves in U.S. dollars but many
sponsoring banks were located in European countries. To the best of our knowledge,
conduits usually hedge their currency exposure. For example, if a conduit owns longterm assets in U.S. dollars and finances the assets by issuing short-term asset-backed
commercial paper in U.S. dollars, the conduit is considered hedged from a currency
perspective. However, this structure exposes the sponsoring bank to the risk that the
commercial paper cannot be rolled over and that the bank has to provide liquidity in U.S.
dollars. Consistent with this interpretation, the Belgium bank Fortis, a large sponsor of
asset-backed commercial paper, states in its 2006 annual report that “the Fortis policy for
banking activities is to hedge via short-term funding in the corresponding currency where
possible”.
As a result, we expect a large demand for U.S. dollar funding by European banks
around the start of the financial crisis in 2007. In particular, if assets held by conduits
are illiquid or can only be sold at fire-sale prices, banks need to secure U.S. dollar
funding from sources other than the asset-backed commercial paper market. In fact,
McGuire and von Peter (2009) document a significant “U.S. dollar shortage” during the
financial crisis. One way to measure the extent of the U.S. dollar shortage is as the total
borrowing in U.S. dollars by European banks’ U.S. offices.
Figure 9 shows total borrowing by European banks’ U.S. offices, measured as
total liabilities in U.S. dollars minus total assets in U.S. dollars. The figure shows that
total borrowing increased significantly at the start of the financial crisis in August 2007.
McGuire and von Peter (2009) argue that at least some of the increase in borrowing of
-32-

European banks’ U.S. offices was borrowing from Federal Reserve facilities to which
several European institutions had access to in their capacity as primary dealers. This
evidence suggests that European banks substituted financing from the asset-backed
commercial paper with financing from the Federal Reserve. As discussed by McGuire
and von Peter (2009), such dollar shortages became particularly severe after the Lehman
bankruptcy, which prompted the Federal Reserve to establish swap lines with other
central banks, in particular in European countries.

6. Discussion: Bank Incentives to Concentrate Risks through Securitization
We have presented evidence that the geography of the financial crisis of 2007-09
had more to do with banking flows rather than with global imbalances. Hence, we avoid
reiterating the question asked elsewhere – which is what has caused the global
imbalances and how to fix them. Instead, we ask – what incentives did large, global
banks have to concentrate risks while deploying securitization methods such as ABCP
Conduits to absorb the capital inflows? We discuss a few possibilities including the
changing nature of banking business, erosion of margins in traditional lending activity
due to competition and securitization, risk-taking incentives induced by such erosion of
bank franchise values, weak enforcement of capital requirements, bank size and
government guarantees, and finally, globalization of banking. More empirical work is
needed in order to tease between these different possible explanations.
To understand the surge in setting up of conduits in the period preceding July
2007, it is useful to start with the traditional banking model. In traditional banking, banks
held on to the loans they originated while performing the role of delegated monitoring
-33-

and screening on behalf of depositors (Diamond, 1984). In modern banking, there was a
fundamental change in that banks originated loans and then distributed them to outside
investors. In particular, banks began transferring financial assets, such as mortgages,
trade receivables, consumer loans, corporate loans, and consumer loans off their balance
sheets into separate legal entities called structured purpose vehicles (SPVs), of which
ABCP conduits are one example. SPVs own the financial assets and issue asset-backed
securities structured using several layers of tranches with higher tranches having priority
over lower tranches in case of default of the underlying assets. This process of
securitization was deemed to improve the safety of the financial system by allocating the
financial risks to investors best able to hold those risks (Duffie, 2007).
Financial system regulators have long recognized the benefits of securitization
and provided incentives for financial institutions to shed risk and securitize assets. In
practice, these incentives take the form of lower capital requirements if assets are
securitized. This is beneficial from the bank’s perspective, because issuing equity is
generally costly relative to issuing debt. The downside of securitization is that it reduces
bank incentives to properly monitor and screen borrowers relative to the traditional
banking model (see, for instance, Stiglitz (1992)). Indeed, Berndt and Gupta (2008),
Dell’Ariccia et al (2008), Keys et al (2008) and Mian and Sufi (2008) provide evidence
that securitization and credit risk transfer weakened bank monitoring incentives in the
run-up to the financial crisis of 2007-09.11

11

For example, Keys et al (2008) show that loans eligible for securitization had higher default rates relative
to comparable loans not eligible for securitization. If outside investors are unable to assess loan quality
properly and instead rely on information provided by banks or rating agencies, banks have an incentive to
originate low quality loans and sell them at inflated prices.

-34-

However, this explanation cannot fully explain the large losses on securitized
assets realized within the banking sector in the ongoing financial crisis. Krishnamurthy
(2008) shows that 39% of securitized mortgages were held on bank balance sheets as of
June 2008. In fact, many banks securitized assets but effectively were exposed to
significant risk of assets after securitization (as with ABCP conduits in our paper) or
explicitly continued to hold the risks after securitization (as with holdings of AAA
tranches of sub-prime mortgages).12 This suggests that reduced monitoring incentives
only provide a partial explanation for why banks decided to originate and hold
securitized assets.
We conjecture that in modern banking, while securitization freed up costly equity
capital that banks could deploy elsewhere, at the same time, banks no longer collected
revenues from holding and managing risk, thus operating at weaker margins in their
traditional business. As a result, banks started to explore how to reduce capital
requirements while still earning compensation for holding risk. For example, in the case
of ABCP conduits, banks sold credit and liquidity guarantees so that short-term debt
investors in the conduits’ assets had effectively close to full, contingent recourse to bank
balance-sheets but banks benefited from lower capital requirements in the short run. In
particular, if asset quality deteriorated in future, then the end investors in securitization
vehicles would not roll over debt, a form of a “run” in the shadow banking sector, and the
asset risks would be brought back by banks on their balance-sheets (Covitz, Liang, and
Suarez, 2009).

12

E.g., a report commissioned by the Swiss Banking Regulator documents that UBS, one of the world
largest banks by assets in 2006, actively sought to keep and purchase assets they had previously securitized.

-35-

This most modern banking model – which Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2009)
call as “securitization without risk transfer” - evidently violates the defining characteristic
of securitization, namely, the transfer of credit risk to outside investors. It is however
consistent with banks wanting to risk shift (Jensen and Meckling, 1976) or pay out
private profits at the expense of transferring hidden debt risks on to others (for example,
on to taxpayers, as argued by Akerlof and Romer (1993)). Such incentives in turn might
have arisen because of heightened competition and cross-border banking leading to a
thinning of margins in traditional banking business (Keeley, 1990, Gorton, 2009),13 shorttermism on part of bank management and risk-takers (Gorton and Rosen, 1995), and the
presence of government guarantees such as deposit insurance and the too-big-to-fail
doctrine (Arteta et al, 2008).
Also, as stressed earlier in the paper, banks found ABCP conduits especially
attractive as risk-free assets were created with very little capital on balance-sheet by
providing guarantees to conduits in the form of liquidity enhancement (essentially, shortterm revolvers being rolled over to synthesize a long-term credit guarantee). While this
practice was legal, it was clearly an exploitation of a loophole in capital requirements
since the accordance of such guarantees did not constitute a complete credit risk transfer
and capital treatment of conduits should thus have been identical to on balance-sheet
assets. Indeed, Spain and Portugal adopted national capital standards to rule out any

13

Stiroh (2002) shows, for example, that the component of revenues earned through interest payments by
commercial banks in the United States has been dwindling steadily, and it has been replaced by fee-based
income and trading revenues. While interest and fee income is relatively stable over the business cycle,
trading revenues are highly volatile and in fact much lower in Sharpe ratios. This can be considered
evidence supportive of a gradual trend in banking to engage increasingly in short-term, speculative
activities, a phenomenon only further facilitated by the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act (separating
commercial and investment banking activities) and enactment of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999
(allowing commercial, investment and insurance activities within a single bank).

-36-

preferential treatment of conduits, and had little conduit activity, whereas other regulators
chose to allow the “regulatory arbitrage”.
Viewed through this lens – that of global banks and bankers wanting to take
excessive risks to transfer value away from creditors and taxpayers – global imbalances
could in fact be considered as a catalyst or amplifier of the financial crisis of 2007-09
rather than the root cause.

7. Conclusion
In this paper, we provided evidence that while global imbalances may help to
explain the capital flows from surplus to deficit countries, they fail to explain the
geography of the financial crisis of 2007-09, in particular, why surplus countries such as
Germany and their banks were as heavily involved as the U.S. banks in the business of
creating risk-free securities and concentrating risks in the process. We examined the
asset-backed commercial paper conduits – one production technology for risk-free assets
to meet the needs of U.S. money market funds – as a way of illustrating this point.
We note that global banks may also have taken on similar risks via investing in
other assets. For example, some banks actively invested in AAA rated tranches of
mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations.14 This strategy is similar
to that of selling liquidity enhancements to ABCP conduits: banks take on highly levered
bets on the economy because AAA rated tranches yield a premium over treasuries in
good times and only suffer in case of an economic catastrophe. While the crisis in the

14

For example, the Swiss bank regulator issued a detail report on how the universal bank UBS suffered
huge losses due to its exposure to the U.S. housing backed AAA-rated tranches.

-37-

ABCP market constituted the first important phase of the crisis starting August 2007, the
losses on AAA-rated tranches took center stage beginning October 2007. Due to lack of
bank-level data, we are unable to provide an in-depth analysis of global banking flow
patterns linked to AAA-rated tranches. However, if such data become available, it would
be important to extend our analysis and analyze whether risk-taking is uncorrelated with
global imbalances. To the extent possible, such an analysis should also include other safe
assets such as U.S. treasuries and U.S. agency debt.
We conclude that while it is useful for future reforms to take head on the issue of
reducing global imbalances, such reforms are no panacea for ruling out global financial
crises that seem more attributable to an increasing propensity of the global banking sector
to manufacture tail risks (or “carry trade” style payoffs) coupled with its weak or
ineffective regulation. Maturity mismatch of the ABCP conduits and their effective
recourse to sponsor bank balance sheets can be considered a canonical example of such
propensity. Addressing this propensity might reduce incidences of global financial crises
even in a world where global imbalances persist. While many reforms to the financial
sector are being proposed, one seems most important to us: the quality of enforcement of
capital requirements (and not just their level). Not allowing global imbalances to find
their way into the poorly-capitalized shadow banking world of ABCP conduits might
have simply reversed or at least blocked the pattern of capital flows, and enabled
financial regulators worldwide to effect a (relatively) market-based correction to the
global imbalances.
It is sometimes easier to guard against a disease than to eradicate it. Global
imbalances may be a case in point.
-38-

References
Acharya, Viral V., Douglas Gale and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2008. “Rollover Risk and
Market Freezes”, Working Paper, New York University Stern School of Business.
Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew Richardson, 2009. “Causes of the Financial Crisis”,
Critical Review, 21(2–3), 195–210.
Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl, 2009. “How Banks Played the Leverage
‘Game’”, Chapter 2 in Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew Richardson (editors), 2009.
“Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a Failed System”, New York University
Stern School of Business, John Wiley & Sons.
Acharya, Viral V., Philipp Schnabl and Gustavo Suarez, 2009. “Securitization without
risk transfer”, Working Paper, New York University Stern School of Business.
Adrian, Tobias, Adam Ashcraft, Hayley Boesky and Zoltan Pozsar, 2010, "Shadow
Banking", Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Akerlof, George A. and Paul M. Romer, 1993. "Looting: The Economic Underworld of
Bankruptcy for Profit," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies
Program, The Brookings Institution, vol. 24(2), pages 1-74.
Arteta, Carlos, Mark Carey, Ricardo Corrrea, and Jason Kotter, 2008, “Revenge of the
Steamroller: ABCP as a Window on Risk Choices”, Working Paper, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve.
Ashcraft, Adam and Til Schuermann, 2008, “Understanding the Securitization of the
Subprime Mortgage Credit”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff reports.
Baba, Naohiko, Robert N McCauley and Srichander Ramaswamy, 2009, “U.S. dollar
money market funds and non-U.S. banks”, Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
Quarterly Review, March, 65-81.
Bernanke, Ben, 2005, ``The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,"
speech delivered for the Sandridge Lecture at the Virginia Association of Economists,
Richmond, March 10,
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/default.htm.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2009). “Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk.” Speech at the
Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C. (March 10). URL:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20090310a.htm

-39-

Berndt, Antje and Anurag Gupta, 2008. “Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection in the
Originate-to-Distribute Model of Bank Credit”, Working paper, Carnegie Mellon
University.
Brunnermeier, Markus, 2009. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch of 2007-08”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 77-100.
Caballero, R. J., 2009. “The “Other” Imbalance and the Financial Crisis”, the Paolo Baffi
Lecture delivered at the Bank of Italy on December 10th, 2009, MIT and NBER.
Caballero, R.J, E. Farhi, and P.O. Gourinchas, “An Equilibrium Model of Global
Imbalances and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, March 2008.
Caballero, R.J. and A. Krishnamurthy, 2009, “Global Imbalances and Financial
Fragility,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), 584-88.
Calomiris, Charles, 2009, “Financial Innovation, Regulation and Reform”, forthcoming,
the Cato Journal.
Calomiris, Charles and Joseph Mason, 2004, “Credit Card Securitization and Regulatory
Arbitrage”, Journal of Financial Services Research 26(1), 5-27
Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek and Erik Stafford, 2009, “Economic Catastrophe Bonds,”
forthcoming American Economic Review.
Covitz, Daniel, Nellie Liang and Gustavo Suarez, 2009, “The Anatomy of a Financial
Crisis: The Evolution of Panic-Driven Runs in the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper
Market,” Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Deniz Igan and Luc Laeven, 2008. “Credit Booms and Lending
Standards: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Market”, Working paper, International
Monetary Fund.
Diamond, Douglas, 1984. “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring”, Review
of Economic Studies, 51, 393-414.
Gilliam, Lee, 2005, “Accounting Consolidation versus Capital Calculation: The Conflict
Over Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Programs”, North Carolina Banking Institute
Journal, Volume 9
Gorton, Gary, 2008, “The Panic of 2007”, Yale University working paper.
Gorton, Gary, 2009, “Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the Panic
of 2007”, Working Paper, Yale University working paper.
-40-

Gorton, Gary and Richard Rosen, 1995, "Corporate Control, Portfolio Choice, and the
Decline of Banking," Journal of Finance, 50(5), pp. 1377-420.
Gorton, Gary and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2005, Special purpose vehicles and securitization,
NBER Working Paper No. 11190.
Jagannathan, Ravi, Mudit Kapoor and Ernst Schaumburg, 2009, “Why are we in a
recession? The Financial Crisis is the Symptom not the Disease!”, Working Paper,
Northwestern University.
Jensen, Michael C., William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4),
305-360.
Kacperczyk, Marcin and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial
Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009”, Working Paper, New York University.
Keeley, Michael, 1990, “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking”,
American Economic Review, 80(5), 1183-1200.
Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig, 2008. “Did
Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence form Subprime Loans?” Working paper,
London Business School.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2008, “The Financial Meltdown: Data and Diagnoses”,
Northwestern University working paper.
McGuire, Patrick and Goetz von Peter, 2009, The U.S. dollar shortage in global banking
and the international policy response, Working Paper, Bank for International Settlements.
Mendoza, Enrique G.,Vincenzo Quadrini, and José Víctor Ríos-Rull, 2007.“Financial
Integration, Financial Deepness, and Global Imbalances.” NBER Working Paper 12909
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2008. “The consequences of mortgage credit expansion:
Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
Moody’s Investor Service, 2007, “ABCP Market at a Glance: ABCP Credit Arbitrage
Snapshot (March 2007)”, Special Report
Nadauld, Taylor D. and Shane M. Sherlund, 2008. “The Role of the Securitization
Process in the Expansion of Subprime Credit”, Working Paper, Ohio State University.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2001). “Perspectives on OECD Capital Market
Integration: Implications for U.S. Current Account Adjustment.” In Global Economic
-41-

Integration: Opportunities and Challenges. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2005). “Global Current Account Imbalances and
Exchange Rate Adjustments.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 67-146.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2007). “The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account
Position Revisited.” In Richard H. Clarida, editor, G7 Current Account Imbalances:
Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2009. “Global Imbalances and the Financial
Crisis: Products of Common Causes”, Working Paper, Harvard University.
Portes, Richard (2009). “Global Imbalances.” In Mathias Dewatripont, Xavier Freixas,
and Richard Portes, editors, Macroeconomic Stability and Financial Regulation: Key
Issues for the G20. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Rose, Andrew K. and Mark M. Spiegel, 2009a. “Cross-Country Causes and
Consequences of the 2008 Crisis: Early Warning”, CEPR Discussion Paper 7354.
Rose, Andrew K. and Mark M. Spiegel, 2009b. “Cross-Country Causes and
Consequences of the 2008 Crisis: International Linkages and American Exposur”, CEPR
Discussion Paper 7476.
Shin, Hyun Song, 2009, “Securitization and Financial Stability” paper presented as the
Economic Journal Lecture at the Royal Economic Society meeting, Warwick, March
2008.
Stiglitz, Joseph, 1992, “Banks versus Markets as Mechanisms for Allocating and
Coordinating Investment,” in J. Roumasset and S. Barr (ed.) The Economics of
Cooperation. Boulder: Westview Press, Inc.
Stiroh, Kevin, 2002, “Diversification in Banking: Is Non Interest Income the Answer?”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

-42-

Figure 1: Rise and Collapse of ABCP Commercial Paper
This figure shows total asset-backed commercial paper outstanding in the period from January 2001 to February 2009. The figure is based on
aggregate data provided by the Federal Reserve Board. The figure indicates the date of the Enron Bankruptcy (November 2001), the
announcement of new accounting rules for liquidity enhancement provided to conduits (April 2004), and the start of the subprime crisis (August
2007).

Figure 2: Yield on overnight ABCP over Federal Funds Rate
This figure shows the yield on overnight asset-backed commercial paper over the fed funds rate from 8/1/2007 to 8/31/2008. The figure is based
on yields data provided by the Federal Reserve Board. We note the large increase in the yield on 9 August 2007.

7.00

6.00

Percent

5.00

4.00

ABCP
Financial CP
Corporate CP

3.00

Fed Funds
2.00

1.00

0.00
1/2/2007

6/1/2007

10/29/2007

3/27/2008

-44-

8/24/2008

1/21/2009

Figure 3: ABCP Structure
This figure illustrates the flow of funds to and from conduits. The sponsoring bank is usually a large commercial bank that provides management
services to the conduit and receives a fee in return. The sponsoring banks usually also provides a credit guarantee to outside conduit investors.
Asset originators sell both securitized and securitized assets to the conduits. Most assets purchased by conduits are originated in the United States
and the United Kingdom. Conduits finance themselves by selling asset-backed commercial paper to outside investors. The main outside investors
are money market funds. The names and values in brackets refer to the conduit Ormond Quay, which is described above.

-45-

Figure 4: Growth in bank-sponsored ABCP by country
This figure shows the growth in ABCP by country based reports provided by Moody’s Investor Service. The data is restricted to the seven largest
countries. The data is restricted to ABCP sponsored by commercial banks and mortgage lenders.
350

300

ABPC (in billion)

250
USA
200

GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM

150

NETHERLANDS
FRANCE

100

JAPAN
BELGIUM

50

0

Figure 5: Global imbalances
This figure shows global imbalance, measured as the current account balance in 2006. The current account deficit data is from the OECD
Economic Outlook database.

Greece
Portugal
Spain
United States
Ireland
United Kingdom
Italy
France
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Japan
Finland
Germany
Sweden
Netherlands
Switzerland
Norway
-15.0

-10.0

-5.0

0.0

5.0

-47-

10.0

15.0

20.0

Figure 6: ABCP and global imbalances, unweighted
This figure shows the correlation between global imbalances, measured as the Current Account Deficit in 2006, and off-balance sheet activity,
measured as ABCP as of 1/1/2007. The current account deficit data is from the OECD Economic Outlook database. The GDP country data is
from the OECD Statistical Database measured at current prices and exchange rates. The ABCP data is based on Moody’s data and is restricted to
ABCP sponsored by commercial banks and mortgage lenders.
United States

300.0

250.0
Germany
ABCP (in USD billion)

200.0
United Kingdom
150.0

Netherlands

100.0
France
Japan
Belgium

50.0
Spain
Greece
Portugal

Denmark
Austria
Finland

Italy
Ireland

Sweden

Switzerland
Norway

0.0
‐15.0

‐10.0

‐5.0

0.0

5.0

Current Account Surplus

-48-

10.0

15.0

20.0

Figure 7: ABCP and global imbalances, weighted by bank equity
This figure shows the correlation between global imbalances, measured as the current account deficit in 2006, and off-balance sheet activity,
measured as ABCP as of 1/1/2007 relative to total bank equity in 2006. The current account deficit data is from the OECD Economic Outlook.
The GDP country data is from the OECD Statistical Database measured at current prices and exchange rates. The ABCP data is based on
Moody’s data and is restricted to ABCP sponsored by commercial banks and mortgage lenders.
35.0%
Netherlands
30.0%

ABCP/Equity

25.0%

20.0%

Belgium

15.0%

Germany

United Kingdom
10.0%

SpainUnited States
Greece
Portugal
‐15.0

‐10.0

France
5.0%
Denmark
Japan
Finland
Austria

Italy
Ireland
0.0%
‐5.0

0.0

5.0

Current Account Surplus

-49-

Sweden
10.0

Switzerland
Norway
15.0

20.0

Figure 8: Stock Returns and ABCP from July 2007 to July 2008, by country
This figure shows average stock returns for the period from July 2007 to July 2008 and ABCP exposure, measured as ABCP outstanding relative
to bank size, per country. Stock returns and ABCP exposure are weighted by bank assets. The stock return index data is from Datastream, the
ABCP data is from Moody’s Investor Service, and the bank data is from Bankscope.

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

NORWAY
‐0.1

SPAIN
‐0.2
FINLAND
ROMANIA
AUSTRIA
GREECE
‐0.3 SWEDEN JAPAN
ITALY
DENMARK
‐0.4

UNITED KINGDOM
NETHERLANDS
USA

GERMANY

FRANCE
‐0.5
PORTUGAL
IRELAND
SWITZERLAND
‐0.6

BELGIUM

‐0.7

-50-

1

Figure 9: Net borrowing of European banks’ U.S. offices in U.S. dollars
This figure shows total liabilities in U.S. dollars minus total assets in U.S. dollars of European banks’ U.S. offices. The data is based on data
collected by the Bank of International Settlements. The figure is based on the left hand panel of Figure 6 in McGuire and von Peter (2009).

‐200

billions

‐300
‐400
‐500
‐600
‐700
‐800

-51-

25.03.2009

25.12.2008

25.09.2008

25.06.2008

25.03.2008

25.12.2007

25.09.2007

25.06.2007

25.03.2007

25.12.2006

25.09.2006

25.06.2006

25.03.2006

25.12.2005

25.09.2005

25.06.2005

25.03.2005

25.12.2004

25.09.2004

25.06.2004

‐100

25.03.2004

0

Table 1: Ormond Quay’s Asset Composition
This table documents the asset composition of the asset-backed commercial paper conduit
Ormond Quay as of July 2007. Panel A shows the break-down by asset type and Panel B shows
the breakdown by assets’ country of origin. All assets held by Ormond Quay are asset-backed
securities (with the exception of corporate, municipal and sovereign bonds). The information is
based on Moody’s July 2007 rating report of Ormond Quay.

Panel A: Asset Type
Asset Type
Residential Mortgages
Commercial Mortgages
Consumer Loans
Commercial Loans
Other Asset-Backed Securities
CDO/CLO
Student Loans
Equipment Lease Receivables
Car Loans & Leases
Credit Card Receivables
Bonds (Corporate/Municipal/Sovereign)
Total
Country
United States
United Kingdom
Europe
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Germany
Australia
Portugal
Singapore
France
Ireland
Korea
Sweden
Total

Amount
%
6,298,165,721 55.5%
2,698,617,285 23.8%
462,789,971 4.1%
461,329,631 4.1%
407,388,697 3.6%
307,397,692 2.7%
268,042,174 2.4%
137,092,590 1.2%
136,437,223 1.2%
104,220,899 0.9%
70,291,219 0.6%
11,351,773,102

Panel B: Asset Origin
Amount
%
4,276,996,597 37.7%
2,509,790,101 22.1%
1,276,916,849 11.2%
1,059,705,514 9.3%
956,051,638 8.4%
442,511,775 3.9%
425,913,091 3.8%
121,468,457 1.1%
69,875,241 0.6%
69,345,153 0.6%
68,009,652 0.6%
41,221,246 0.4%
19,926,998 0.2%
14,040,792 0.1%
11,351,773,104

Table 2: Conduit Characteristics
This table includes all conduits that were rated by Moody's and authorized to issue Commercial Paper on 1/1/2007. We do not include conduits in
South Africa (6 conduits) and CDOs authorized to issue Commercial Paper (35 CDOs). ‘# Programs’ denotes the number of conduits. ‘Size’
denotes total outstanding ABCP in million USD. ‘Mean’ denotes the average size by program, ‘Std’ the standard deviation, ‘Min’ the minimum
size, and ‘Max’ the maximum size. Conduits classified as full liquidity have liquidity enhancement covering all outstanding ABCP. Conduits
classified as full credit have credit enhancement covering all outstanding ABCP.

All Conduits
Type
Multiseller
Singe-Seller
Arbitrage
Hybrid
SIV
Other
Currency
USD
EURO
YEN
AUD
NZD

Market Total
# Conduits
296

Size ($mn)
1,235,281

Per Conduit ($mn)
Mean
Std.
4,173
5,129

Min
0

Max
37,872

135
63
35
27
28
8

547,970
173,549
213,823
148,380
92,645
58,914

4,059
2,755
6,109
5,496
3,309
7,364

4,380
3,964
8,397
5,631
3,351
6,323

0
0
0
302
0
2,373

21,415
18,931
37,872
22,596
12,279
20,337

234
33
16
12
1

972,977
219,959
22,941
19,253
151

4,158
6,665
1,434
1,604
151

4,627
8,424
2,014
1,302
0

0
0
0
142
151

22,596
37,872
5,976
3,944
151

Table 3: Sponsor Characteristics
Panel A shows the characteristics of ABCP sponsors. The analysis is based on Moody’s rating
reports as of 1/1/2007. Panel B shows ABCP by the location of the. Panel B is restricted to
banks-sponsored ABCP.

Sponsor Characteristics
Total
# Sponsors Size ($mn)
All Programs
Sponsor Type
Commercial Banks
Structured Finance
Mortgage Lender
Insurance & Monoline
Investment Banks
Country of Origin
United States
Germany
United Kingdom
Japan
Other

126 1,235,281

Average
Mean Std.
9,804

14,764

64
27
16
3
4

903,291
181,739
71,120
14,118
11,039

14,114
6,731
4,445
4,706
2,760

17,853
11,725
6,131
3,914
2,257

68
15
10
5
28

488,535
204,103
195,678
40,820
306,180

7,184
13,607
19,568
8,164
10,935

14,608
11,593
17,045
10,606
5,096

Table 4: Sponsor Location and Funding Currency
This table shows ABCP outstanding by the location of the sponsor and the funding currency. The
analysis is based on Moody’s rating reports as of 1/1/2007.

Sponsor Location
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
Total

USD
30,473
1,796
51,237
139,068
1,365
18,107
56,790
1,719
13,082
92,842
302,054
714,871

-55-

Funding Currency
Euro
Yen Other
4,729
0
0
0
0
0
23,670
228
557
62,885
0 2,566
0
0
0
0 22,713
0
65,859
0 3,116
0
0
0
0
0
0
62,298
0 3,209
0
0 2,996
219,441 22,941 12,444

Total
35,202
1,796
75,692
204,519
1,365
40,820
125,765
1,719
13,082
158,349
305,050
969,697

Table 5: Asset Allocation by Country of Origin
This table shows the asset allocation and ratings for the nine largest conduits as of 1/1/2007 for
which this information is available. The share of “AAA”-rated assets is reported if this
information is available. The information is collected from Moody’s ratings reports.
Asset Allocation
Conduit
Grampian
Amstel
Scaldis

Sponsor
(Location)
HBOS (UK)
ABN Amro
(Netherlands)
Fortis
(Belgium)

Size
Country
37.0 U.S. (70.4%), others (29.6%)
20.4 Netherlands

Rating
Aaa (99%)
Aaa(99.1%)

18.4 U.S. (51.1%), Global
(14.9%), UK (10.1%), Spain
(6.3%), Various (17.5%),

Aaa (99.8%)

Atalantis One

Rabobank
(Netherlands)

Thames Asset No1

Royal Bank of
Scotland (UK)

Solitaire Funding

HSBC (UK)

15.4 U.S. (68.9%), UK (24.9%),
Germany (3.3%), Europe
(0.9%), Netherlands (0.7%),
Australia (0.5%), Global
(0.5%), Portugal (0.2%)

Stanfield Victoria

Stanfield and
Deutsche Bank
(UK/Germany)
Lloyds (UK)

21.9 U.S. (96%), UK (2%),
Netherlands (1%), Others
(1%)
15.3 USA (76%), UK (19%),
Netherlands (5%)

Cullinan Finance
Limited

HSBC (UK)

13.4 U.S. (62%), UK (23%),
Japan (3%), Germany (3%),
Others (9%)

Ormond Quay

Sachsen
Landesbank
(Germany)

12.1 U.S. (38%), UK (22%),
Europe (11%), Italy (9%),
Spain (8%)

Cancara Asset
Securitisation

15.7 U.S. (40.5%), Netherlands
(27.1%), Australia (9.1%),
Great Britain (5.4%),
Switzerland (2.9%), New
Zealand (2.6%), Others
(12.4%)
17.9 UK (57.8%), U.S. (35.8%)
Global (3.5%), Germany
(2.5%), Spain (0.4%)

-56-

Aaa (100%)

Table 6: Investor Characteristics
Panel A shows commercial paper holdings by investor class. Commercial paper holdings include
both ABCP and other commercial paper. The analysis is based on the Flow of Funds data
provided by the Federal Reserve Board. Panel B shows holdings of Asset-Backed Commercial
paper by the 20 largest prime funds with non-zero ABCP holdings. The analysis is based on
iMoneyNet holdings data.
Panel A: Commerical Paper Holdings by Investor Class
Investor
Holdings
Money Market Funds
608.4
Mutual Funds
114.1
Funding Corporations
584.3
Household Sector
187.7
Non-financial Corporate
122.6
State Government
186.2
Foreign Investors
226.5
Other Investors
186.1
Total
2215.9

%
27.5%
5.1%
26.4%
8.5%
5.5%
8.4%
10.2%
8.4%

Panel B: Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Holdings by 20 Largest Prime Funds
Fund
Assets
ABCP
%
Fidelity Cash Reserves
89,088
12,472 14.0%
Columbia Cash Reserves/Class A
62,519
3,751
6.0%
Schwab Value Adv MF/Instit Prime
43,498
13,919 32.0%
Bear Stearns TempFund/PremierChoice
37,273
13,418 36.0%
Fidelity Instit MMF II
27,736
5,270 19.0%
Goldman Sachs FS Prime Oblig/Adm
27,113
13,285 49.0%
Morgan Stanley Inst Liq/Prime/Part
26,261
12,080 46.0%
Reserve Primary Fund/Inv II
25,622
512
2.0%
Dreyfus Instit Cash Adv/Adm
25,482
5,606 22.0%
Centennial Money Market Trust
25,106
8,285 33.0%
Columbia MM Reserves/Trust
22,923
2,522 11.0%
Federated/Prime Oblig Fund/Inst Svc
21,985
5,276 24.0%
Schwab Money Market Fund
21,634
6,058 28.0%
AIM STIT Liquid Assets/Reserve
21,460
4,507 21.0%
DWS MM Series/Premium/Cl S
19,447
194
1.0%
Citi Cash Reserves
18,891
189
1.0%
Northern Instit Divsfd Assets/Cl C
17,302
5,364 31.0%
First Amer Prime Oblig/Cl I
16,695
1,503
9.0%
Fidelity Prime Fund/Cap Reserves
16,690
3,338 20.0%
Schwab Cash Reserves
16,642
5,325 32.0%

-57-

Table 7: The effect of bank observables on exposure to ABCP conduits
This table analyzes the decision to sponsor asset-backed commercial paper conduits. The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one
if ABCP relative to bank equity is larger than 10% or zero otherwise. The sample is restricted consolidated banks with total assets of at least $10
billion in 2006. The country variables are indicator variable equal to one if bank is headquartered in that country and zero otherwise. The control
variables are the natural logarithm of assets, the natural logarithm of equity, the ratio of equity to assets, the ratio of pretax profits to equity, and
the ratio of deposits to assets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

Assets ($bn)
U.S. Bank
UK Bank
German Bank
Dutch Bank
French Bank
Log(Assets)
Log (Equity)
Capital Ratio
Profitability

(1)
>10
0.226
(0.083)**
0.440
(0.126)**
0.501
(0.097)**
0.501
(0.194)*
0.187
(0.122)

Dependent Variable: Indicator Variable (ABCP/Equity>10%)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
>10
>10
>10
>10
>10
0.288
0.279
0.280
0.262
0.272
(0.071)**
(0.078)**
(0.078)**
(0.080)**
(0.080)**
0.282
0.282
0.287
0.282
0.276
(0.109)*
(0.112)*
(0.113)*
(0.113)*
(0.113)*
0.427
0.431
0.441
0.464
0.460
(0.084)**
(0.093)**
(0.095)**
(0.096)**
(0.096)**
0.296
0.296
0.300
0.320
0.333
(0.167)
(0.169)
(0.170)
(0.170)
(0.171)
-0.026
-0.027
-0.022
-0.029
-0.029
(0.108)
(0.110)
(0.110)
(0.110)
(0.110)
0.196
0.186
0.155
0.152
0.185
(0.025)**
(0.059)**
(0.082)
(0.082)
(0.086)*
0.012
0.042
0.041
0.015
(0.059)
(0.080)
(0.080)
(0.083)
-0.372
-0.225
0.057
(0.691)
(0.701)
(0.742)
0.436
0.454

(7)
>100
0.394
(0.129)**
0.379
(0.143)**
0.544
(0.118)**
0.342
(0.189)
0.020
(0.123)
0.006
(0.193)
0.24
(0.181)
-4.769
(3.430)
0.248

(0.373)

0.099
(0.050)*

-0.895
(0.133)**

-0.865
(0.198)**

-0.752
(0.288)**

-0.823
(0.294)**

(0.373)
0.178
(0.153)
-1.052
(0.354)**

N
132
0.138

N
132
0.386

Y
132
0.386

Y
132
0.387

Y
132
0.394

Y
132
0.395

Share Deposits

Observations
R-squared

-59-

(0.519)
0.07
(0.243)
-0.34
(0.871)
Y
92
0.412

Table 8: Impact of ABCP on Stock Returns at the start of the financial crisis
This table shows the effect of conduit exposure on stock return in the month of August 2007. The sample is restricted to consolidated banks with
total assets of at least $10 billion in 2006 that have stock returns available. The dependent variable is the total stock return in August 2007. We
measure ‘Conduit Exposure’ as bank-sponsored ABCP outstanding relative to equity. Columns (2) to (6) include control variables for the ratio of
short-term assets to debt, the ratio of equity to assets, log(Assets) and log(Equity). All control variables are measured on 1/1/2007. Column (6)
includes country fixed effect. Robust standard errors are in parentheses below coefficients. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Exposure

(1)
-0.018
(0.004)**

Log(Assets)
Log(Equity)
Capital ratio
Short term debt (%)
Deposits share (%)
Constant
Country FE
Observations
R-squared

-0.014
(0.005)**
N
93
0.045

Dependent Variable: Stock return
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.016
-0.015
-0.011
-0.012
(0.004)**
(0.005)**
(0.004)**
(0.004)**
-0.011
-0.044
-0.033
-0.041
(0.011)
(0.036)
(0.033)
(0.032)
0.016
0.049
0.044
0.051
(0.013)
(0.037)
(0.034)
(0.033)
-0.514
-0.408
-0.516
(0.545)
(0.497)
(0.485)
-0.149
-0.172
(0.046)**
(0.048)**
-0.043
(0.025)
0.007
0.134
0.098
0.154
(0.033)
(0.135)
(0.124)
(0.122)
N
N
N
N
93
93
93
93
0.068
0.079
0.15
0.175

-60-

(6)
-0.024
(0.006)**
-0.049
(0.045)
0.052
(0.045)
-0.757
(0.601)
-0.054
(0.059)
0.003
(0.029)
0.175
(0.170)
Y
93
0.431

