NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE EFFECTS OF R&D ON
BELL SYSTEM PRODUCTIVITY:
A MODEL OF EMBODIED TECHNICAL CHANGE

Roger H. Gordon
Mark Schankerman
Richard H. Spady

Working Paper No. 1607

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1985

This research was supported financially by Bell Laboratories. Much
of the work was done while the first and last authors were employed
at Bell Laboratories, and while the middle author was a consultant
there. We would like to thank Zvi Griliches and especially Peter
Linhart for useful discussion, and Rainer Feldman for assistance
with the computations. We also thank many employees at AT&T for
aiding us in finding data needed in the project. Finally, we also
would like to acknowledge our debt to William Bauznol, on whose ideas
about the telecommunications industry and productivity growth this

paper builds. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Productivity and project in Productivity and
Industrial Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of AT&T Bell
Laboratories, AT&T, Bell Communications, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #1607
April 1985

Estimating the Effects of R&D on
Bell System Productivity:
A Model of Embodied Technical Change

ABSTRACT

This paper develops an econometric model of the effects of
R&D effort on the magnitude and characteristics of technical change in
the Bell system. We estimate simultaneously a vintage capital production
function, embodying several distinct types of capital, and various factor
demand functions for the Bell system during the post—war period. Each
vintage of capital is assumed to differ in productivity according to a
parametric function of R&D effort embodied in that vintage of capital.
Allowance is also made for augmenting technical change in the non—capital
inputs. The model is estimated on a new, extensive data set which contains detailed information on the vintage structure of investment in
different types of capital in the Bell system.
Most previous papers in the field have assumed that technical change
is disembodied. However, we find that a model assuming capital—embodied
technical change fits the data much better than one making the traditional
assumption that technical change is disembodied. We use the parameter
estimates to calculate the ex post rate of return earned on R&D expenditures at Bell Laboratories and the improvements in the productivity
of specific capital inputs which are due to those R&D expenditures. The
results suggest not only that the return to R&D expenditures has been
very high, but also that it has been growing over time. In addition,
the rate of increase in the productivity of capital inputs has risen
over tine. The model fails to produce a plausible estimate for the
degree of returns to scale, but the results on the return to R&D effort
are reasonably insensitive to what we assume about the degree of economies
of scale.

Roger H. Gordon
Department of Economics
University of Michigan

Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109

Richard H. Spady
Bell Communications Research
435 South Street
Morristown, NJ 07960—1961

Mark Schankerrnan

Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003

-1-

This paper develops an ecaiometric model ci the effects of R&D effort on the

magnitude and the characteristics of technical change in the Bell System. To do
this, we estimnte simultaneously a vintage capital production function and various
factor drniand fuathzis for the Bell Systan during the post-war period. Each
vintage of capital is assumed to differ in productivity — the degree to which later
vintages are more productive than earlier vintages is measured by a parametric
function of R&D effort embodied in One vintage and not the other.

We therefore assume in our analysis that technica] improvements are embodied

in new capital equipment Since almost all previous studies have assumed, by
contrast, that technical change is entirely disembodied, we also estimate for

comparison a model with disembodied technical change. The model with
embodied technical change proves to be much more successful in fitting the data.

We use the parameter estimates to calculate, under various assumptions, the

a

post rate of return earned on R&D expenditures at Bell Laboratories and the
improvements in the productivity of specific capital inputs which are due to those

R&D expenditures. The results suggest not only that the return to R&D
expenditures has been very high, but also that it has been growing over time. In

addition, we find that the increase in the productivity of capital inputs has itself
risen over time. In this sense, there is no evidence of a productivity slowdown in
theBell System.'
The key advantage that we had over past studies of technical chAnge is that we
had access to a data set that was far more extensive and detailed than those used
in previous studies. Having available such a rich data set allowed us to avoid
many of the aroximations which plague other studies in the field.

The first section ci this papa develops in stages the specification of the model

to be estimated. Our specification differs in many ways from those used in
previous studies, and the motivation for each change is discussed in turn. The
second section of the paper presents and intawcts the coefficient estimates derived
when the model is estimated using annual post-war data for the Bell System. The
paper ends with a summary of our principal conclusions.

1. For eid Il a pralucthity slowdown in other industries, see Baily [192j or Kaxfrick
[1979].

-2-

I. Specification of the Model
Technical change results in increased output relative to the amount of inputs
needed to product the output, and perha different and mat attractive forms of
output. In the telecommunication_s industry during our sample period, however,
the form of output, principally transmitted telephone calls, changed little. As a
result, our study, thong with past studies of the industry, focuses on at-redudng
forms of technical change.

A. Measures of Productivity Growth
In measuring the degree of azt reduction in producing a given t3pe of output
the basic problem is to control for changing quantities of inputs when
examining
the degree to which output changes over time. A common procedure for doing
this is to compare at each date t a measure of real output with a measure of the
real cost of the inputs, capital and labor, used in production.2 In particular, if in
year t output, measured by real revenues,3 is Q,, the quantity of labor input is 4,
hired at wage w1, the real capital stock is K,, generating annual costs of r, per unit
real capital, and if real quantities are measured in dollars of year s, then the
proposed procedure involves comparing Qt, the measure of real output, with
w,L + rK, the real at of inputs. Productivity change is then measured by

changes in the ratio Q,1(w3L1 + r,Kj. Kendrick [1973], Kendrick and
Grossman [1980], among other, have calculated such figures for many industries
over an cxtcuded period of time. The Bell System Productivity Stue, 1947-1979,
hereafter denoted by BSPS, reports equivalent figures, calculated with
great care,
for the Bell Systa

2.

To in1rJify the discussion, we assume there are only these two inputs, thaigh in actual
alailations, many other inputs may ae&.
3. Qiality knprovataits in the form of output, to the degree to whith they do ottur, wcsld not
normally be aphired in real revmues. flit to regulation, mitt of the gain would be passedon
to the aistanen, leaving real revenues unaffected. Even if prices of aisting servis were
allowed to inorease sancwhat in resjnse to quality improvanaits, this inaeasc waild not

show up in the measure of real revenues, as the prcredure for arreciing nrr'nRl rev ames for
price thanges due to inflation wand also eliminate the effect of pit thanges due to quality
improvannits. Csality improvants thraigli the prosision of new savices may affect real
revenues, however.

-3-

B. More General Specifications of the Production Function
This measure of productivity change implicitly nx,dels the production function
in year t by

=

(w4L,

+ r,Kjg(N,),

(1)

where N, represents fit state of technical know-how in year t, and g(N,) indicates
the value in production of knowledge N,. Here, WI and t, now play the role of
technological parameters as well as market pricts. Cat mininth'aticm in year s

implies that the technological parameter for factor i must equal the real at of
hiring factor 1.

Viewed as a description of the production function, however, this specification

is very unattractive. It assumes that capital and labor are perfect substitutesn

production, and that there are constant returns to scale, given N,. The general class
of production functions, of which equation (1) is a special case, is

Q,=f(Lj4,PJj.

Tothedegreethatf( )displayseconomiesofscajeata

given N,, equation (1) overestimates the contribution of R&D to increasing
productivity since productivity improvements arising solely from expansion in the
size of the company arc inappropriately attributed to increasing technological
know-how. In contrast, use of equation (1) underestimates the contribution of

research in any year after year s (and overestimates it in earlier years) to the
extent that f( ) is a concave function of capital and labor, as normally assumed.
To sec this, note that in period s, at miniminition implies that (w,L, + rK) is
minimbr4 given Q,. However, in any other year, (w,L, + r,K,) is no: minimi7rd,
given Q,; instead, (w,L, + r,K,) is mininiwM. After year $ as a result, measured
inputs, (w3L, + r1Kj, increase relative to output to the extent that input prices

change, a change that the BSPS procedure would attribute to technical
deterioration.

Several parametric specifications of the function f( ) have been estimated in
the economies literature, both with firm and industry data, to identify the role of

R&D in the production process.

For example, Griliches [1980] and

Mansfield [1980] assume that the production function is Cobb-Dmg1n. Nadiri and
Schankerman [1981], and Schankerman and Nadiri [1985] have estimated more
general specifications of f( ) using Bell System data.4

.4-

The objective of this papa is not to tat a yet more general functional form fir

f(). We assume that f( ) is CS in the non R&D inputs, so that, given
N,,f(L,K) = (aiL? + a2KY)1'Y. This functional form is a more restrictive
specification than that used in sane previous studies of the Bell System, though
more general than a Cobb-Thrnglas specification.

C. Embodied

vs. Disembodied Technical Change

Our focus is instead cm how R&D enters the production function. One
characteristic of all the specifications discussed above is that technical chnnge is
assumed to be discmhodie& These past studies assume that R&D effort, perhaps
after a lag, results in improved productivity equally for all inputs-.caiital vs. labor,
different types of capital, and new vs. old capital. The time needed to translate
R&D into productivity gains is assumed to be flied, and so is independent of the
rate at which new invatrrv-nt occurs.

We feel that each of these implicit assumptions is a poor description of how
technological change occurs, at least in the Bell System. Until the recent emphasis
on software development, almost all technical change in the Bell System involved
improved designs for capital items serving a particular function in production.

Technical change could occur only to the degree that capital using the new
technology was purchased and put into place. Older technological vintages of
capital remaining in — would not normally change in productivity as a result of
new technological vintages being used elsewhere in the network. Under this
description, if each capital item is a perfect substitute after adjusting for quality,
then the capital stock at date t, measured in efficiency units and denoted by Kf,
can be represented by
Ky =

g(N),

(2)

where K1 is the amount of capital of technological vintage v in place in year t, and

4. In

a Iranslog kmg run cat fun. A
Coth-Da1glas F)dJ function is a sjta] se of this spedfktica Sithankerman and
Nadiri [1985] study a slat nm cat functicxi in whith caçital and R&D are quasi-fixed inpits.

5. iüng the prcxiucticn Amthcm as f(I.,K,,T1), whac T, resenb the state of knowledge in
year t, disathodied tethnical dun2e implies that R&D (cx other fa.las) leads to disng in T,
itfxmt the requirnat of intervening investment in the new tedinolog.

-5-

N is the accumulated state of knowledge as of the date when vintage t'

was

designed.

This representation of the capital stock probably captures well the shift in
transmission technology from apper wire to microwave and satellite and now to
fiber optics. It probably captures less well the shift from analogue to digital
transmission, where investment in a device which translates a voice signal between

analogue and digital representation improves dramatically the productivity of
existing axper wire. While not modeling well all technological change, we feel
that this açproach provides a much better characterization than those used in
previous studies.

While previous studies have been forced to assume that capital can be
represented by a single number, it is dearly the case that each capital item is not a
perfect substitute, and in addition that rates of technical change differ dramatically
between types of capital, e.g. transmission equipment vs. switching vs. station
equipment (primarily telephones). For example, while 35% of the capital stock of
the Bell System is station equipment, only 12% of the R&D effort historically has
focused on it design. Having much more detailed data than were available to past
researchers, we decomposed the capital stock into four types: transmission capital,
switching capital, station equipment, and everything else. For the first three types
of capital, capital of type i was measured in efficiency units, demoted by K5, where
Kf, = EKuge(NJ,

(2a)

Here Ku,, is the amount of capital of type i of vintage v in place in year t, while
N1 represent the accumulated R&D effort focused on capital of type i up through
the date of vintage v. No embodied technical chnrige was allowed for in the last
type of capital, a category including mainly land and buildings.

Output was then assumed to be a (IS function of the three types of capital
measured in efficiency units, other capital, labor, and a sixth residual input which
includes materials plus real expenditures on services and rent. In particular, the
production function was specified as

=

(±1(ai K&YY

where M1 denotes materials.

+ (a4 K4,Y

+ (a MYY + (a6 )v)&/

(3)

-6-

For simplicity, we defined vintage v to equal that capital put into place in year

v. lmplidtly,allcapitagiveepitinopthagivnyearisassun

to be equally productive. Using information about the basic technological design,
as well as the date of investment, when defining vintage proved to require more
data than were available.

This specification assumes embodied factor-augmenting technical change,
though at different rates for each farm of capital. However, R&D might also
affect production in a variety of other ways. For trample, at various times
research has focused on labor saving techniques, e.g. research on direct dialing.
Such research should change the shape of the production function f(K,L), and not
merely involve an augmentation of the effective capital stock. There would be
many ways to parameterize such changes over time in the shape of the production

function. We chcze a very simple one. In particular, we allowed the weights
a1, I = 4,5,6 to change exponentially over the course of the sample period, so
that, for example, u was replaced by a, e. We did not attemjl to explain what
research or what capital investment might have caused any estimated changes in
the shape of the production function. The data were inadequate to allow us to
differentiate among many competing explanations.

For purpaes of comparison with previous studies, we also estimate below a
specification assuming solely disembodied technical change. In this specification,
we assume that R&D increases the productivity of existing capital to the same
degree that it increases the productivity of new investment

D. Capacity Utilization of Capital
Capital stock figures, as maintained internally by the Bell System, are based on
gras investment and retirement of capital figures for each type of capital at each
date. They do in take into account how much of the capital is actually in use in

the network at any date. Due to economies of scale in installation, often much
more capacity is added at any date than is needed at that time. Also, since the
desired configuration of the network changes in unexpected ways over time,
(because of changing technology and population movement), spare capacity is
intentionally kept available to handle these unexpected events.

In describing the production technology, however, it would be desirable to have
a measure of the capital in use at each date, and not the capital available for use.

Fortunately, the Bell System has kept some measures for recent years of the
percent of available capital that is being used in the network. However, these data
do not cover our entire sample period, and do not have the detail, either by type

-7-

ci capital or by vintage ci capital, that would be desirable. In using these data, we
were therefore forced to tnake several simplifying assumptions. In particular, we
assumed 1) that prior to air earliest available capacity utiliv2tion data, the capacity
utilization was equal to its first observed value, and 2) the capacity utilizationwas
the same for all vintages of capital covered by each available data series. We
therefore multiplied air measures ci the effective capital stocks of trans mission
and switching equipment by a utilization factor Uj=1,2. For purposes of
comparison, we also estimated the model omitting this correction.

E. Measurcmcnt of Output and Inputs
Following the BSPS and Nadiri and Schankerman [1981], we measure the
output and inputs ci Long Lines (ILL) plus the twenty-two Bell operating
companies (BOC's). As a result, we make no attempt to measure technical change
in production at Western Electric or at Bell Laboratories. Since process innovation

in manufacturing at Western ElectS is a major focus of R&D effort in the
company, this is an important omission, but an unavoidable one.

Inevitably, there were conceptual difficulties in measuring each of the needed
data series. In this section, we describe how each data series was constructed, and
what some of the implications are of the specific measures chosen.

To begin with, we measure output by real revenues, as did BSPS and Nadiri
and Schankerman [1981J. By doing so, we measure what was actually produced
rather than what the system was capable of producing. Fortunately, there is very

little variation in measured real revenues over the business cycle. Another
problem with revenues is that the relative prices charged for different forms of

output do not correspond to their relative cats. As a result, when output
composition changes, the implied change in revenues does not correspond to the
implied change in cats.6 Unfortunately, we could not find any better measure of
output which was available for the entire sample period.

6. What hazes this atata in our study are unclear. The relative increase in lcmg distance calls

over time probably was givas too muds weight, as long distaia rates are normally viewed to
be 112)1 relative to ofl. This should lead measured outpst to grow too quickly. Ikwevu,
new hCIISChOIdS are tharged a relatively low prior for a aiuwctkm to the network, so that the

increase in new households Mdi the baby tmn would be givas too little weight, thaeby
undaeatimating the growth in output.

Labor input was measured by a weighted sum of man-hours for each of 22
categories ci workers, where their relative wage rates in 1967 were used as
weights. This meas we ought to correct for the effects ci a changing aznpition
of the labor force, but may not adequately correct for changing quality of workers
within any given category.

As in Nadiri and Schankerman [1981], we measure the quantity of materials,
rents, and services, by real expenditures on these activities. In averting nominal
expenditures to real expenditures, we used the producer price index for materials

and components in manufacturing, taken from the Economic Repon of the
President.

In order to measure the effective capital stock, data are needed for each value
of
Such a decompition of the capital stock at each date by type of capital
and date of investment is rarely available. For the Bell System, it was available in
just this form for 1959, 1966, 1972, and yearly since 1977. In other years, grcss

investment and grs retirements as well as total capital by type of capital were
available, but not broken down by calendar vintage.

In order to fill in the data set for missing years, we estimated a survival
probability curve for each of five types of capital (switching, transmission,
buildings, telephones, and other) using the available data, lit parametric
specification chosen for the survival probability curve was

F(t) =

s'h"'

(4)

where P® is the fraction surviving to age t, and s, h, and c are the parameters to

be estimated. This functional form, taken from the demography literature,
provides a very flexible approximation to actual survival curves. The estimated
survival curves were then used to forecast how much capital from each calendar
vintage would still be in use in each year, given the initial investment in that
vintage. For further details on our procedure, see the appendix.
This procedure provides us with a measure of the historic ut of the capital of
each age still in use at a given date. We calculated their real cat using a set of
very detailed price indices for Western Electric products?
7. Most czqitai acquired by Long Unes and the oçcating canpanies durin this pahxJ was

purthased fran West Eectric. To the degree that czçital was aczpnred frr ciitide
vendors, air procedure may improperly attrihste any quality thange in this caçital relative to

its price to R&D done in the Bell tan. Fcrtunately, relatively little was purthased fran

-9-

Real capital purchases in any year in principle equal dollar payments for each
type of capita], divided by the rice index for that type of capital, summed over
types of capital. As a result, real capital purchases of existing Products change
over time in principle solely due to changes in the number of items purchased of
each product, and not due to changes in the price of each product (resulting for
example from at reductions in manufacturing).8
New and improved products lower the effective at of capital inputs purchased
by the BOC's and LL, but only to the degree that the initial price set for that new
product is such as to mnke it a better "buy" than previous products. If the initial
price is set so high as to offset the benefits dl the technical change, then the BOCs
and IL gain nothing at that date from the availability of the new product. While
the price of the new product may drop later, perhaps dramatically, however, we

have just argued that a price drop for an existing product will not lower the
measure of real capital inputs. Therefore, new and improved products will result
in observed productivity gains only to the degree that the initial price for the new
product makes it a better "buy" at that date.9

Given how we measure capital inputs, we should therefore observe
technological change only when a new product is introduced and when the initial
price for that new product is favorable. Fortunately, any nonnegligible change in
the design of a Western Electric product results in a new product classification. In
addition, Western Electric prices, due to regulation, are set primarily to reflect

manufacturing ats, and not what the market will bear. Therefore, the value of
technological improvements embodied in new products is matly passed on to the
BOC's and IL, and so should show up as increased productivity. Our procedure
should therefore capture mat all the technological gains front new product
designs, though none of the gains through at reductions in manufacturing

existing —.
outside vendors.

8. 1..e d a few price indices icr many heterogaieais products, rather than separate price indices
icr eath product, mak these assertions only aroximately frue.

9. In i"S the c*nnodity tzindle used in calcuiating eadi price inda icr Western Etic
products is not revised annually, itt only liea the sales pattern of the product appearing in
the handle has thanged significantly. The "initial" price icr a new product therefcrerqresaiis
the iiic prevailing at the first data the canmodity handle is revised 1o1l'ing the introduction
of the new product, whith may

several years later.

- 10 -

Manufacturing cats do include amortized R&D expenses paid fir by Western

Electric, however. Since R&D cats are passed through to the BOC's and LL,
jroductivity change will be cterved in our data only to the degree that new
capital increases the value of output by more than the cat of the associated
R&D.'°

F. Specification of the State of Knowledge
In the above discussion, we denoted the quality of a given vintage of capital by
g1(N1), where N1 Lcptcented the state of knowledge embodied in vintage p of
capital of type i. How best to characterize this state of knowledge at any date is
not clear, however. Existing output measures from R&D, such as number of
patents or number ci published papers, are likely to be quite unreliable indicators.
The degree to which tnnnagentnt eurages patenting or publishing varies over
time and across activities. Also, patents or papas can differ dramatically in
wmmerciai value, making a simple sum unreliable.
We therefore chose to measure the state of knowledge by how much was spent
trying to produce the knowledge, rather than by sane measure of how much was
actually leaned. In particular, we gathered data on real R&D expenditures at

each date t which focused on the design of capital of each type 1,12 denoting thjs
value by R. We then assumed that the productivity of a unit of capital of type I
and vintage v can be represented by

10. Not all R&D e.ffcrt at Bell Laboratories is paid 1x by Western Ecic. Hstcnically, alnxt

40% ci nonmilitary R&D, primarily sic research and reseaxth on nhI,inn tethnologies7
was paid for through the license intract, a dirat payment fran the BOC's and IL to Bell
Laboratories. Oily the batfits, and not the asts, ci this fraction ci the R&D effort affect
the price of eajtal equipment sold by Western Eectic.

11. R&D ajtres paid for by Western Eectric are unmrrrly amortized ova abont five yen,
rather than over the life of the new product. Therefore, the initial price of a new product

indudes a disjrcçatiaate share of the R&D ccts. Measured prtiity gains resulting

fran a new jroduct re tiased downwards as a result. Measures ci
thange, as
argued above, dq,aid an the initial price ci a new pr(uct, and the five year amortization
leads to an unduly high initial it.
12. We included all R&D erpaiditures at Bell LaS, but omitted R&D ape ätures at Westc
Eectiic, since R&D there fcnises solely on prrss iimovaticn. In canverting ncntinal into

real R&D apenditures, we usa! the C?4P pice deilater. The Lxeakdown of R&D
expenditures between categories was not available prior to 1937. We therefore assumed that

the antage tirakdown nved in 1937 applied as well to all earlier years.

- 11 -

g1(N0)

(1 + 0

(5)

where the O, and a, are parameters to be estimated. Here, we assume a three
year lag between research and embodiment of the results in the manufactured
13

We chose such a cccnplicated specification for two reasons. First, unless we
allowed for diminishing returns to R&D effort lfl each YC& (i.e. P
<1), the
qimal level of R&D effort implied by our estimates would fluctuate wildly and in
some circumstances would Nt even be finite. Second, we wanted to allow for

secular diminishing returns to R&D effort (a ci), to test whether technological
change has been getting more difficult ova time. Several commonly used

specifications of R&D effort, e.g. ap(01R...3) are special cases of this
specification)4

G. Implications of Cost-Minimizing Behavior
So far, our specification is nonstochastic. Many sources of stochastic variation
are possible, including for example random suss in R&D, measurement error,
and specification air. We assumed that the primary source of stochastic
variation in equation (4) is simply measurement error in Qt. Several reasons far
expecting measurement error in Q to be important were described in the previous

section. In particular, we multiplied the right hand side of equation (4) by an

Ca term e'.

Altogether, there are sixteen parameters in this specification, including the

parameters implicit in the gj(.) functions, too large a number to be estimated
reliably given only thirty-five annual observations. However, bow much of each
factor input was chosen by the firm at each dare, given input prices, provides more
information about the form of the production function. Prh factor demand
equations ought to depend on the same underlying parameters, so aid in estimating
these parameters.
12. A three year lag fit marginally bett& than other lap we tied, and seems reascmable frcxn
anecdot aincathng eanhodimait.
14. As a grows without baind, holding stant 81a, the spedfiatha amverg to an aptmenfi&

fmwithjmrametao4 = 8a

12-

In particular, we assumed that the company chooses factor inputs a ante
(before taving c, ) so as to minimize costs subject to the regulatory uinsflaint
that capacity must be sufficient to successfully satisfy realized demand without
undue delays, for example, in completing a call or in getting a new line installed.'5
If the level of capacity needed at date: to obtain this quality of service, given the
distribution of pcsible demands, is Q, then the firm is assumed to choose input
quantities so as to satisfy

F—

— Qfl].

rr$ji [±1Pu

(6)

Here, F11, I = 1,6, rqresents the six factor inputs, p represents the implicit real

cost of hiring a unit of factor i in year t, while Qc(.) represents capacity output,
given inputs, which we assume equals the nonstochastic ccnponent of the
production function in equation (3).16 With respect to capital inputs, marginal
decisions are assumed to involve solely the latest vintage of each type —earlier
vintages of capital, net of depreciation, are taken as given.

The first-order didons characterizing relative factor demands can be
expressed as follows:

-1

tog

—

'y—i

'

to

aaptJgg(N4)

(7a)

for each of the first three types of capital, and
log

X11

-i;-

—1
—

y—1

log

Fapa

15. Avth-John.scm [1962] argued to the contrary that a regulated firm will not use a antminimizing tatnology. Ibwtver, Bawa-Sibley [1980] showed that if regulators set the price

rather than the rate ci return, thai a regulated firm wc*zld thcose a at-ninimtring

tno1o.

16. ?te generally, Qc(-) is assumed to be proçErtional to the apression appearing in equadcm

(3), sira any
Q;.

a suitalt raidithtion of ).. and

- 13 -

for 1=4,5 where X4=K41 and X51=M. To complete the specification of these
equations, we neal data cm each of the factor prices. The materials jrice, P5t, was
set equal to the real price of materials in manufacturing in each year, while the
labor price, p, was set equal to the real wage in each year.

In constructing a measure for the cat of each of the four types of capital, we
used a modified version of the cat of capital developed by Hall-Jorgenson [1967].
In particular, we set p equal to:

= [(r1 + 4 + bj(1
where P equals the

—

14z1 — kjjf(1

—

u) + xjPfi

(8)

price icr capital of type I in each year; u1 equals the
tax
rate
in each year; r equals the real discount rate used by
statutory corporate
shareholders, arbitrarily set to a constant value of o.o4;'7 the parameters k, Zj,,
and x, equal the investment tax credit rate, the present value of depreciation
deductions, and the indirect rate of tax on capital, respectively, each measured
asset

using the figures employed by Nadiri and Schankerman [1981]; and d1 equals the

depreciation rate for each type of capital, measured using an exponential
ajçroximation to the retirement schedule that we estimated for each type of capital
using company data.

The onc new element in equation (8) is b1, the obsolescence rate for each type
of capital. While prior research on investment uniformly ignored obsolescence
when measuring the cat of capital, we could not since obsolescence was the focus
of our study. In consmacting a measure of the rate of obsolescence, we assumed
that the firm antici pates obsolescence
- to oceur at a rate constant over time and

equal to the rate of improvement in technology that ear18 This rate of

improvement in technology equals the percent change in g(N) that year, which,
given our specification of technological change, equals awroximately

17. Measuring how shartholder disaxint rat vary over time wc*j]d be diffiailt and problematic.
18. The marginal product ci the new vintage ci caçital rises by the rate ci improvanait thattar.
If the prict ci the new caita1 does not reflect this productivity improvemait, then the value ci

jitth ci the previxis vintage must decline by that ncaflage, whith rq..caaib the rate ci

oesa. This argument waild not be arect if the price of new jitth re to reflect the
productivity improvanent, tLt as we argued earlier, Western Eectic pts generally do not
reflect productivity improvanaits in new product dign.

- 14•

a0

(1 +

011R9_1)

This expression was substituted for b and estimated simultaneously with the rest

of the model.

The factor demand equations, as written, are nonstochastic. We assumed that
the actual relative factor demands are stochastic, given observed prices, and in
particular added a residual to the right-hand side of each of the relative factor
demand equations. Specifically, new investment in the latest vintage of each type

of capital, and demand for materials, were viewed to be endogenous. One
justification for this a,roach is that our information about input aEts captures
only some components of these asts, whereas actual demand depends also on
many unobserved factors such as risk, time variation in interest rates, deviations
hum myopic expectations, etc. Obviously, other stories for why the data do not
satisfy the specified factor demand equations exactly could be told.
In total, therefore, there are six random variables in the model: c, and the five
factor demand residuals. We allowed in the estimation for an arbitrary pattcau of

covariarKes among these residuals. We also explored for the presne of firstorder autocorrelation in each residual.

We did not attempt to include first-order conditions for optimal R&D
expenditures. Since our ultimate aim is to test whether R&D earns an adequate

return in each area of research, it would be inappropriate to constrain our
coefficients to guarantee this result. However, we do attempt to calculate in each

case the nomic return from spending an extra dollar on R&D implied by our
estimates.

II. Estimation Results
We first attempted to estimate equations (3) and (7a-b) by maximum likelihood
techniques, assuming that the six residuals were jointly normally distributed, had
an arbitrary variance-covariarre matrix, and had first-order autocorrelation. (To

limit the number of parameters, we assumed that each of the factor demand
residuals had the same degree of autocorrelation.) In doing so, we immediately
faced three separate problems. First, the estimate of the elasticity of substitution
in the production function moved as close to zero as numerical stability would
allow without converging. This result does not seem grossly inconsistent with what
we were told about the technology of the company. While, for example, operators

- 15 -

can substitute for switching capital, and more sophisticated
switching capital can

make more efficient use of the transmission network, and so substitute for

frnncniissicxj capital, such possibilities for sultitution among factors are normally

very limited. Yet fewer alternative technologies are close to being economically
attractive.
When the elasticity ci substitution is zero, the production function simplifies to
a Leontief specification, where

=

min({a1F11},

I = 1,6).

We attempted to estimate this Leontief specification directly, but found doing
so very difficult since the first derivatives of the implied likelihood function are
discontinuous in the parameters. The best strategy we could find for estimating
the model was to return to the CS specification, but constrain the elasticity of
substitution to a very low value (we chose the value 0.1), though not so low as to
cause numeaical Stability, then estimate the other parameters. At this low an

elasticity of substitution, the CBS function provides a reasonably dose
agruzimation to the Leontief specification, but one whose likelihood function
possesses continuous first derivatives.

The smd problem we encountered was that the parameters in the
specification of the R&D technology failed to converge. In particular, the
parameter a keep growing without bound, while the 0's kept shrinking in an
offsetting fashion towards zero. it as a increases, the specification of the
technology converges towards

eq (aO,

(9)

We therefore adopted the limiting exponential specification
e.q (0

ft R,_)

(9a)

where, with a slight abuse of notation, we have replaced the term a01 in (9) with
0 in (9a). Under the exponential specification, a given level of expenditures will
produce the same percent improvement in the productivity of new capital in each
year of our sample. The data, therefore, suggest that technological change is no
more difficult now than it was at the beginning of our sample - we find no
evidence of a technological slowdown.

- 16 -

In order to get parameters to converge, we therefore adopted equation (9a) as
our specification ci embodied technological change and reestimated the model.
The third problem we encountered is that we were unable to obtain a plausible
estimate of returns to scale. In particular, without ccnstraint, the data suggested
sharply declining returns to scale and correspondingly large rates of technical
change. We have been unable to discern why this should be so. But this result is
so implausible that we have estimated our model at a variety of fixed returns to
scale, i.e., 8=.8, 1.0, and 1.25. Below, we examine the results for amstant
returns to scale rather exhaustively, but report some estimates for the other cases
as well.

A. Analysis of Results for the Basic Model
The coefficient estimates and log-likelihood function value (IL?) that result

whcnô=1.OarelistedintheflrstcolumnofTablel;piandp2arethe
autocorrelation coefficients for the production and input equations, respectively.
Asymptotic standard errors are computed using the procedure derived in White
[1982]. The estimated values of all the coefficients are very plausible, and all but
the three 0 are very tightly estimated. The reason for these large standard errors
is that the data are not rich enough to allow us to differentiate clearly the values of

the 0 relative to the value of .

When

we constrain the value of

to its

estimated value and reestimate, the reported standard errors for the 0, drop to less
than one-tenth their previous size.

The three 0, coefficients are not directly comparable to the other R&D
coefficients. The values of
for other capital, labor, and materials, measure the
fraction by which the productivity of that factor improves each year. For example,
the estimates suggest that labor has been increasing in productivity by 5.3% per
year. New investment in one of the first three factors increases in productivity
each year by apprntimately 0,fl3, a fraction which grows throughout the sample
period since R&D erpenditures grow throughout the period. These coefficients
imply that at the beginning of our sample period, productivity of new investment
in these factors was growing at between one and two per eent per year, while at the
end of our sample period, productivity was growing between 4.6% and 6.2% per
year.
These estimates imply that during most of the sample period technical change

has been increasing the productivity of labor relative to that of other factors.
Given a Leontief production function, this implies that the forecasted demand for
labor dropa during the sample period relative to that for other factors as a result of
technical change -- technical change does appear to have been labor saving in

Table 1
Parameter Estimates foe Models with Embodied TechnICal Change

PARA?vlEl'ER

acoE

8=1

8.8

1.053

2.386

.564

(.401)

(.018)

.428

.897

.252

(.052)

(.153)

(.015)

1.040

2.309

.571

(.101)

(.322)

(.027)

.708

1.209

.496

(.074)

(.165)

(.055)

4.612

8.026

3.445

(.548)

(1.192)

(.447)

.222

.392

.164

(.021)

(.043)

(.019)

(0.97)

asE

ROTH

°coE

•°SE

+0TH

8=1.25

.980 cr03

6.270 e-03

.113 cr04

(.986 cr03)

(3.922 cr03)

(.074 e-04)

1.598 cr03

8.598 cr03

.294 cr04

(1.532 cr03)

(5.074 cr03)

2.384 cr03
(1.743 cr03)

10.527 cr03

.728 cr04

(4.605 cr03)

(.397 cr04)

(1.92 cr04)

.0241

.0428

.0106

(.0023)

(.0030)

(.0024)

PARAMETER

P1

P2

LLF

8=1

8=.8

8=1.25

.0118

.0303

-.0032

(.0024)

(.0030)

(.0027)

.0526

.0707

.0380

(.0021)

(.0022)

(.0026)

.669

.400

1.390

(.202)

(.125)

(.121)

.666

.682

.713

(.080)

(.088)

(.056)

.829

.850

.825

(.046)

(.039)

(.055)

-1043.92

-1028.82

-1061.80

17 -

ffl
Various procedures can be used to estimate what the marginal rate of return

was to tha R&D expenditures, based on our coefficient estimates. To begin
with, let us ignore any role of R&D in the productivity changes in labor, materials,
and other capital, and measure just the value of the increase in productivity of new
investment in the first three forms of capital. if an extra dollar is spent on R&D
in year t, focusing cm the technology of capital of type i, then the productivity of

investtnent in this type of capital increases by aroximately •fl-1 percent
starting in three years. If new capital is a% more productive, then a% less need be
invested, at a saving of a% of the expenditures on this new capital. These savings
continue indefinitely, making the calculation of the total savings very difficult.
However, if R&D expenditures were simultaneously reduced in year t+1 by the
"right" amount, then the productivity of new investment in years starting in t+4

would be left nnnffected. Simple algebra shows that the right amount is
(R1IR11i)'-B. With this — of thanges in R&D, new investment improves in
productivity by the above a% only in year t+3. The at of this savings is the
dollar extra spent on R&D in year r, less the present value of the amount less
spent on R&D in year t+1. If the real rate of interest is r, then the ratio of
savings relative to cost for extra expenditures on R&D, (i.e., the benefit/cost ratio
for the marginal R&D expenditure), can be cqacssed as:
(OiK,+3,i.r+3)
[(1+r)3Rg—B —

10

where Kt+31t÷3 is fir amount of vintage r+3 type i capital surviving at t+3, i.e.

the new investment made at t+3. If this ratio is above one, then the expenditure
is dearly worthwhile.

if we assume that the firm carries out R&D until the benefits of the last dollar
spent equal the at evaluated at some value far, we can equate (10) to unity and
solve for r to obtain the internal rate of return to R&D expenditures. In Table 2,
we report the results of this exercise averaged over three sample periods for R&D
expenditures on each of the three types of telephone-specific capital. The fourth
row reports the average of the weighted mean of the capital-specific returns, with
the weights being the proportion of total R&D expenditures specific to each capital
type.
Examining Table 2, we find that rates of return to R&D have been increasing

over time, and that the rank order of rates of return is station equipment,

Table 2
Real Rates of Return to R&D
Assuming Embodied Technical Change and

Constant Returns to Scale (Patent)

Central Office

1947-56

1957-66

1967-78

3.63

4.98

8.34

Equipment

Transmission

15.6

20.4

22.8

Station

29.7

38.0

43.4

11.5

15.4

18.1

Equipment

Avenge

- 18-

ansmission, and central office equipment. We also find there that the weighted
average (real) rate of return to R&D is well above the rate generally prevailing in
the economy. For example, the risk-free real rate is at best 4%; while the average
return to corporate capital has been csthnated by Fe.ldstein and &ntnnen [1977] to
be about 1O.5%-12%. In comparison, the weighted average rate of return to R&D

is estimated to be 18%. Since R&D is arguably riskier than mct capital
investment activities, 18% may well be ajiprriate after adjusting for risk.'9

The figures in Table 2, however, ignore the productivity gain in labor,
materials, and other capital. Presumably these gains were also the result of the
same R&D effort, though we have not attempted to parametezize this relationship.
To indicate the import axa of including the effect of these productivity gains in the
last three factors in any measure of the return to R&D effort we present in Table 3
average annual increases in productivity for each of the six inputs, as well as the
proportion of total cats accounted for by each. For each of the last three inputs--

other capital, materials, and labor—a constant percentage annual increase in
productivity is directly estimated by the model (i.e. *j). For the telephonespecific capital inputs, productivity is given by the function g(N11) defined in (9a),
which is dependent on the history of R&D expenditures. However, for purposes

of comparison, we can convert figures of the latter type to (average) percentage
annual increases in input productivity. (To do this, suppose z is the productivity
of new capital at tint t0, and; the productivity at t; then the value we seek is 4>
satisfying; = z0

Pxatnining Table 3, we see that there has been a distinct acceleration of

technical progress in the telephone-specific capital inputs, but that technical
progress in labor has been equally large.2° Since labor is an important input
(accounting for 30.5% of cats), our figures in Table 2 substantially underestimate
the return earned on R&D effort. We have no direct evidence on how to attribute

this other prodctivity gain to each of the three categories of R&D effort.
19. This finding is quite a,nsistent with the estimated rate of return to R&D in &hankerman and

Nadiri [1985]. Uing a model ct disanbodied techniS change and a snwbat different
concq,t of the rate of return, they estimate the average return to R&D over the period 19471976 at atnit lO%-15%.
20.

Recall frcxn Secthn 1 that the rat of jxoducfisity irease reported in Table 3 for the first
three categories of jital represent the rate of tholescne induced by tthinical change.
These rates of ethnological tdesct a*npare with the
dqredaticm rates of 6.9%,
5.8%, and 12.5%, for the three types of cajital, respectively.

Table 3
Annual Rates of Productivity Increase,
by Input (Cost Shares In Parentheses)

1947-1981

1971-1981

Central Office equipment

2.49 (.114)

4.07 (.110)

Traxismission equipment

3.76 (.227)

5.58 (.244)

Station equipment

2.26 (.143)

3.67 (.141)

Other capital

2.41 (.070)

2.41 (.072)

Materials

1.18 (.115)

1.18 (.127)

Lalxr

5.26 (.332)

5-26 (.305)

- 19 -

However, casual evidence suggests that labor savings may have been due jriinarily

to R&D in switching technologies,2' so that the relative rates of return to the
different categories of R&D may have been more equal that the figures in Table 2
suggest.

A rough idea ci the size of this effect can be derived as follows. Using the

second column ci Table 3, one can calculate an overall annual productivity
increase of about 4.25% (the summation of the products of the at shares and

productivity increases). Of this, about 1.6% is due to increases in labor
productivity, and about .45% due to embodied productivity gains in central office
equipment. If we arbitrarily assume, for example, that half of the 1.6% gain in
labor productivity is in fact due to improvements in central office equipment, and
the other half is due to labor quality improvements relative to wage rates, then the
estimated benefits of central office equipment research would about triple. Thus,
an important soiree of the returns to R&D in central office equipment research is
likely to take the form ci labor-saving rather than capacity-improving technical
change. Making this assumption and recalculating Table 2, we find that the rate
of return to central office equipment R&D becomes, by decade, 10.5, 14.0, and
21.4 percent (as qpot.ed to 3.63, 4.98, and 8.34 percent), respectively. Similarly,
the average returns to R&D become 14.6, 19.5, and 24.5 percent (compared to

11.5, 15.4, and 18.1 percent), respectively. Thus, if improvements in cent-al
office equipment are largely responsible for the labor savings the Bell System
experienced, rates of return to central office equipment R&D are axnparable to
those for transmission R&D.

Finally, it should be recognized that even these estimates of the return to R&D
are likely to be underestimates, to the degree that Western Eectric funded R&D
expenditures at Bell Labs. To the degree that Western recovered its expenditures
through increased prices for its equipment (as discussed in section 1), air figures
measure surplus return over costs on R&D, rather than total return. Since about
60% of Bell Labs' research was funded by Western, our rates of return should be
increased by about halt22
21. For nmiij,le, direct dialing led to a reduction in cçtrators, and stcad program controlled
electronic switthing led to a reduction in mthntaiancc lain.

22. As argued in fonote 11, ev these figures 4ll be a slight underestimate, sir Western
flectnc ainorlizes R&D vy quickly.

-20-

B. Results for Alternaff ye Models
In addition to the above specification, we also estimated several variations on
it. For example, if we assume that all capital is utilized, ignoring our data to the
contrary, then the coefficient estimates hardly change at all, though the value of
the likelihood function is slightly worse. (The value of the log likelihood function
falls by 4.1) We also tested the sensitivity of our results to channg the assumed
degree of eamomies to scale. In the second and third columns of Table 1, we
report summary results when we set the economies to scale parameter to either 0.8
or 1.25. As reported earlier, the value of the likelihood function is larger the
lower the degree of economies to scale. Not only is the value of the likelihood
function smaller, however, when we assume econcvnies to scale, but also the value

ofisnolongerplausible-wheneverisaboveone,jtjspreferaJ)leto

concentr ate R&D effort in one year rather than doing it steadily over time. Taken
together, this provides weak evidence against important economies to scale in the

Bell System. However, the calculated benefit-ant ratios and rates of return for
marginal R&D expenditures do not change markedly as the assumed economies to

scale varies. In Table 4 we report average rates of return for 1967-1978 for the
three models reported in Table 1. There we find that estimated returns to R&D
increase as the assumed returns to scale increase. This is due to the higher

estimates of

wrinponding to higher values of 8. For the more plausible

estimates of coresponding to B's of .8 and 1.0, the estimated rates of return are
quite similar. Thus, even if we remain uncertain about the degree of economies to
scale, we can be reasonably confident about the general magnitude of the return to
R&D effort.

In the final specification that we report, we assume that technical change is
entirely disembodied. In particular, we assume that R&D effort on capital of type
i in year t increases the productivity of all capital of type i in place in year t+3,
and not just the productivity of new investment Summary results are reported in

Table S. The value of the likelihood function is sttantially worse here than
previously. Otherwise, the results continue to look very plausible.

The procedure for calculating the benefit-cost ratio for R&D expenditures with
this specification is slightly different than before. As before, if a dollar more is

spent on R&D of type i in year t, and (R1a+1)'B dollars less is spent in year

t+1, then productivity changes only in year t+3. Now, however, the entire capital
stock of type I increases in productivity. The resulting measure of benefits relative

to cats would be

Table 4
Real Rates of Return to R&D 1967-1978
Assnming Embodied Technical Change Under
Alternative Assumptions on 8

8=.8
Central Office

8=1.0 8=1.25

6.7

8.3

12.1

Transmission

18.1

22.8

36.2

Station
Equipment

39.2

43.4

50.4

Average

15.0

18.1

25.6

Equipment

Table 5

Parameter Fsflmat for Model with
Disembodied Technical Change and

Constant Returns to Scale

PALAMErER

VALUE STANDARD ERROR

°COE

2.078 e-04

1.753 e-04

°TR

3.333 e-04

2.654 c-04

OSE

7.906 e-04

4.861 e-04

+0TH

.0222

.0018

+MAT

.0126

.0019

.0542

.0020

.887

.157

Pi

.589

.064

P2

.797

.060

LLF = -1066.31

- 21-

0(+
[(1+r)3R4— (1+r)2R4;]

(11)

The internal rates of return implied by setting this ratio to unity are reported in
Table

6 for the sant tint periods as previously. While the figures for the first

two decades are smaller than the equivalent figures in Table 2, those for the
remaining years are larger; taken together, Table 6 implies a greater acceleration
in technical progress than does Table 2. This greater acceleration arises primarily
from the higher estimate for in the disembodied model. With a higher , the
mar&nal value of catra R&D does not drop as quickly when the R&D budget is
larger.

The higher estimates of the recent rate of return to R&D with the model of
disembodied technical change do not necessarily imply more rapid rates of annual
productivity gain, however. With disembodied technical change, the benefits from
improved productivity are immediately realized on the entire capital stock (rather
than on new capital only) so the present value of the benefits can be larger evci if

the overall roductivty gain each year is not. For example, the estimates from
Table 5 imply an annual productivity gain for tncmicsion capital during the
period 1971-1981 of 4.62%, which is less than the 5.58% annual gain reported
previously in Table 3. In spite of this the estimated return to R&D implied by the
disembodied model is higher (37.4% vs. 22.8%).

The evidence of this paper suggest that the embodied model of technical
change is more consistent with the data than the disembodied model is, as a priori
considerations would suggest. However, for the Bell System, the estimated return
to R&D is high under either specification.

ilL Conclusion
This paper developed an econometric model of the effects of R&D effort on the

magnitude and the characteristics of technical change in the Bell System. Our
principal conclusions from our empirical results were:

1. The return to R&D effort has been veiy high and increasing over time.
2.

The data support our presumption that technical change has been capitalembodied rather than disembodied.

3. However, technical change is not solely capital-augmenting. There are
important improvements in labor productivity during the sample period.

Table 6
Real Rates of Return to R&D

Assnining Disembodied Teehnfrnt Change and
Constant Returns to Scale (Percent)

Central Office

1947-56

1957-66

1967-78

2.50

4.28

11.9

7.23

13.77

37.4

23.0

50.6

10.5

26.2

Eqthfl
Trancmission

Station

12.9

Equipment

Average

5.62

-22-

4. The results provide limited evidence against imprtant returns to scale in the
Bell System.

S. The estimated elasticity of sulztitution in our (IS production function is
close to zero, suggesting that a Leontief production function may be a good

araimation.

These results differ in a number of ways from those found in earlier studies.
While the finding of a Leontief or nearly Leontief techixilogy is perhaps not
surprising, it is inconsistent with most studies of the industry, iiluding Nadiri and
Schankerman [1981], Schankerman and Nadiri [1985], and Evans and Heckman
[1981]. Those models, however, did not disaggregate capital, and so are somewhat
less realistic than ours in this regard. However, we have assumed the more
restrictive CES functional form. A critical factor in estimating the elasticity of

substitution is good quality data on factor price s—random errors in the

measurembnt of factor prices should lead to a downward bias in estimates of the
elasticity. For the most part our data on factor prices were very similar to those

used in previous studies. However, unlike previous studies we allow for the

various effects of technical change on relative hedonic factor prices, that is, factor

prices adjusted for changes in the productivity of each input. Another problem
Mth our results is that our model failed to produce a plausible estimate for the
degree of economies of scale. However, our results on the return to R&D effort
are reasonably insensitive to what we assume about the degree of economies to
scale.

Even with these shortcomings, however, we believe that the models presented

here are substantial improvements aver the conventional methodology for
measuring the impact of R&D on technical progress. Our principal advantage
over previous studies was access to a much richer data base, including data on the
vintage decomposiiton of the capital stock. Our results support a presumption that
technical change is embodied in new capital, and suggests that any estimates of the
rate of return to R&D or of how it has changed over tint are likely to be very
sensitive to the way in which the process of technical change is modeled.

REFERENCES

Averch, H. and LL. Johnson. "Behavior of the Firm under
Constraint." American Economic Review 52 Qc., 1962), 1052-1069.

Regulatory

Baily, Martin N. "The Productivity Growth Slowdown by Industry." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (19822), 423-455.

Bawa, Vijay S. and David S. Sibley. "Dynamic Behavior of a Finn Subject to
Stochastic Regulatory Review." international Economic RevIew 21 (Oct., 1980),
627-642.

Evans, D. S. and J. J. Heclonan. "Multiproduct Cct Function Estimates and
Natural Monopoly Tests for the Bell System." in D. S. Evans, ed. Breaking Up
Bell: Essays on industrial Organization and Regulation. New York: North-Holland,
1983.

Feidstein, M. S. and L IL Smnmezs. "Is the Rate of Profit Falling?' Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (1977:1), 211-228.

Griliches, Zvi. "Returns to Research and Development Expenditures in the
Private Sector." In Kendrick, J.W. and B. W. Vaccara, eds. New Developments in
Productivity Measurement and AnalysLr. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1980.

Griliches Zvi and Jacques Mairesse. "Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level."
N.B.E.R. Working Paper #826, 1981.

Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson. "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior?
American Economic Review 57 (June, 1967), 391-414.

Kendrick, John. Postwar Productivity Trends Ut the United States 1948-1969. New
York, 1973.

"Productivity Trends and the Recent Slowdown." In William
FelIr, ed. Contemporary Economic Problems. Washington, 17-69

Kendrick, John W. and Elliot S. Grossman. ProthwtMty in the United States:

Trench and Cycles. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1980.

Mansfield, Edwin. "Basic Research and Productivity Inaease in Manufacturing."
American Economic Review 70 (Dcc., 1980), 863-873.

Nadiri, M.I., and M.A. Schankerman.

"The Structure of Production,

Technological Change, and the Rate of Growth of Total Factor Productivity in the
U.S. Bell System," in t Coiving and It Stevenson, eds. Prothictivity Measurement
in Regulated Inthistries. New York: ArMemic Press, 1981.
Schankerman, Mark and M.L Nadiri.

Rates of Return to Quasi-Fixed Factors,

unpublished

of Static Equilibrium Models and
with an Awlication to the Bell System,"

"A Test

paper, New York University (1985).

Halbert. "Maximum likelihood atunon of
Econometrica, 50 (1982), 1-26.
White,

Mlsspecified Models,"

Appendix

Coistruclion of Capital Stock Data

In the estimation, data were needed for each value ci

Such a
decomposition it the capital stock at each date by type ci capital and data of
investment is rarely available. For the Bell System, it was available in just this

form for 1959, 1966, 1972 and sin 1977. In other yearn, gross invesnt and
gross retirements as well as total capital, by type ci capital, were available, but not
broken dawn by calendar vintage.

In order to fill in the data set for missing years, we estimated a survival
probability curve for each ci five types of capital (switching, trancmission,
buildings, telephones, and other) using the available data. liz parametric
spedfication chosen for the survival probability curve was

PQ) = s h(t'—1),

(Al)

where PQ) is the fraction surviving to age t, and:, h, and c are the parameters to
be estimated. This functional form, taken from demography literature, provides a
very flexible approximation to actual survival curves. The three parameters were

chosen so as to minimize the sum of squared deviations of observed perts
surviving from forecasted percents surviving for investment oecurring after 1927,
as observed in any of the nine surveys of the decomposition of the capital stock,
separately for each of the five types of capital. Note that we implicitly assume that
rates of retirement ci older technologies are exogenous, atber than depending on

the relative ast advantage of later technologies. This assumption greatly
simplifies the analysis.

The estimated survival curves were then used to construct an age breakdown of
the capital stock at each date for each of the five types of capital. All designs of a
given type of capital were assigned the same survival curve. The basic approach

was to use the survival curve to forecast how much capital from each calendar
vintage would still be in use in each year, given the initial investment in that
vintage.

In constructing values for the missing oLervaticns of K, however, several
problen had to be faced. First, we had no data ai tim amount of imw investment
in each type of capital prior to 1928, though did observe tim trial capital stock of
each type in 1928. Rather than attempting to decompose this initial capital stock
into various calendar vintages by sonic procedure, we simpiy assumed that the
entire initial capital stock had been purchased in cxm particular year prior to 1928.

The particular year selected varied by type of capital, and was chosen so as to
minimize the average error in our forecast for tim aggregate capital stock of a
given type during the period 1928-1937.

Another problem faced in constructing the K1, was that the aggregate capital
stock of a given type observed in the data each year invariably differed from our
forecast for this aggregate capital stock (the sum of air forecasts for the surviving
capital ftwii each calendar vintage). Also the actual and the forecasted figures for
the surviving capital stock from each vintage differed slightly, in the years in

which actual figures were available. While all tle differorea were small,

particularly in recent years, we chose to modify our forecasts slightly so as to
match exactly both the observed surviving vintage capital stocks, where they
existed, and the observed aggregate capital stocks of each type in each year.

Our first step was to reconcile the actual figures on surviving capital 1959 With
the forecasted figures, p0(59-frK, where
is the initial investment in type i in
year t In doing so, we assigned each vintage of capital of each type a virtual age

A1 in 1959, differing from its calendar age, chosen so that at this virtual age,
actual and forecasted figures for surviving capital in 1959 match exactly. For each
year y between t and 1959, the forecasts for surviving capital were then modified
to p(A1,(Y—r)f(1959—t))K.

In order to reconcile our forecasts of the aggregate capital stocks of each type
in each year with the actual observations, we proceeded as follows. Note first that
totals match in 1959, since all figures are observed. In 1958, however, actual and
forecasted aggregate figures differed slightly. To rncile tim two, we modified
the extent of aging between 1958 and 1959 from exactly one year for all vintages,
until the actual and forecasted figures matched exactly. In particular, the vintage
capital stocks in 1958 were set equal to p(A17(59—:—X,5g)/(59—t))K, where the
tss were chosen so that the actual and the forecasted aggregate figures matched.
For 1957, the procedure was the same, now treating 1958 as if it were actual data,
so
that
stocks
in
1957
vintage
capital
equaled
p1([Ae(59—ty15g)/(59—t— 'y,g)f (58—:)][(58— t—'y1g(58—t)])K. This procedure
for constructing the
was carried back until 1947, the beginning of our

estimation samp1e
In interpolating between surveys of the vintage axnposition of the capital stock

since 1959, we used a much simpler procedure, since inconsistencies between
actual and forecasted figures were very small for the recent data. In particular, we
extrapolated forward from the last available observation on the vintage capital

stocks, for trample setting the vintage capital stocks in 1969 equal to
KP(1969— :)/P(1966—t).

23. If at any time, the atsthicted age for a unit of cajital was negative, it was assumS to have an

age of mo.

