                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DSGE MODELS FOR MONETARY POLICY ANALYSIS

                                        Lawrence J. Christiano
                                          Mathias Trabandt
                                           Karl Walentin

                                        Working Paper 16074
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16074


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




We are grateful for advice from Michael Woodford and for comments from Volker Wieland. We are
grateful for assistance from Daisuke Ikeda and Matthias Kehrig. The views expressed in this paper
are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the
European Central Bank, or of Sveriges Riksbank, or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Lawrence J. Christiano, Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
DSGE Models for Monetary Policy Analysis
Lawrence J. Christiano, Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin
NBER Working Paper No. 16074
June 2010
JEL No. E2,E3,E5,J6

                                          ABSTRACT

Monetary DSGE models are widely used because they fit the data well and they can be used to address
important monetary policy questions. We provide a selective review of these developments. Policy
analysis with DSGE models requires using data to assign numerical values to model parameters. The
chapter describes and implements Bayesian moment matching and impulse response matching procedures
for this purpose.


Lawrence J. Christiano                           Karl Walentin
Department of Economics                          Sveriges Riksbank
Northwestern University                          103 37 Stockholm
2003 Sheridan Road                               Sweden
Evanston, IL 60208                               karl.walentin@riksbank.se
and NBER
l-christiano@northwestern.edu

Mathias Trabandt
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29
60311 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
and Sveriges Riksbank
Mathias.Trabandt@ecb.int




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16074
Contents
1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .    3
2 Simple Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .    5
  2.1 Private Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .    7
       2.1.1 Households . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .    7
       2.1.2 Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .    7
       2.1.3 Aggregate Resources and the Private Sector Equilibrium Conditions               .   11
  2.2 Log-linearized Equilibrium with Taylor Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   12
  2.3 Frisch Labor Supply Elasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   16
3 Simple Model: Some Implications for Monetary Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   18
  3.1 Taylor Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   20
  3.2 Monetary Policy and Ineﬃcient Booms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   25
  3.3 Using Unemployment to Estimate the Output Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . .                .   27
       3.3.1 A Measure of the Information Content of Unemployment . . . . . .                .   27
       3.3.2 The CTW Model of Unemployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               .   28
       3.3.3 Limited Information Bayesian Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   31
       3.3.4 Estimating the Output Gap Using the CTW Model . . . . . . . . .                 .   34
  3.4 Using HP Filtered Output to Estimate the Output Gap . . . . . . . . . . .              .   37
4 Medium-Sized DSGE Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   39
  4.1 Goods Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   40
  4.2 Households . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   43
       4.2.1 Households and the Labor Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   44
       4.2.2 Wages, Employment and Monopoly Unions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               .   47
       4.2.3 Capital Accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   49
       4.2.4 Household Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   52
  4.3 Fiscal and Monetary Authorities, and Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   52
  4.4 Adjustment Cost Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   53
5 Estimation Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   53
  5.1 VAR Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   53
  5.2 Impulse Response Matching Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   55
  5.3 Computation of V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   56
  5.4 Laplace Approximation of the Posterior Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   58
6 Medium-Sized DSGE Model: Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   59
  6.1 VAR Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   59
       6.1.1 Monetary Policy Shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   60
       6.1.2 Technology Shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   62
  6.2 Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   62
       6.2.1 Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   62
       6.2.2 Impulse Responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   63
  6.3 Assessing VAR Robustness and Accuracy of the Laplace Approximation . .                 .   65
7 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   65




                                                2
1. Introduction

There has been enormous progress in recent years in the development of dynamic, stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) models for the purpose of monetary policy analysis. These
models have been shown to fit aggregate data well by conventional econometric measures.
For example, they have been shown to do as well or better than simple atheoretical statistical
models at forecasting outside the sample of data on which they were estimated. In part
because of these successes, a consensus has formed around a particular model structure, the
New Keynesian model.
    Our objective is to present a selective review of these developments. We present several
examples to illustrate the kind of policy questions the models can be used to address. We
also convey a sense of how well the models fit the data. In all cases, our discussion takes
place in the simplest version of the model required to make our point. As a result, we do
not develop one single model. Instead, we work with several models.
    We begin by presenting a detailed derivation of a version of the standard New Keynesian
model with price setting frictions and no capital or other complications. We then use versions
of this simple model to address several important policy issues. For example, the past few
decades have witnessed the emergence of a consensus that monetary policy ought to respond
aggressively to changes in actual or expected inflation. This prescription for monetary policy
is known as the ‘Taylor principle’. The standard version of the simple model is used to
articulate why this prescription is a good one. However, alternative versions of the model
can be used to identify potential pitfalls for the Taylor principle. In particular, a policy-
induced rise in the nominal interest rate may destabilize the economy by perversely giving a
direct boost to inflation. This can happen if the standard model is modified to incorporate
a so-called working capital channel, which corresponds to the assumption that firms must
borrow to finance their variable inputs.
    We then turn to the much-discussed issue of the interaction between monetary policy
and volatility in asset prices and other aggregate economic variables. Here, we explain how
vigorous application of the Taylor principle could inadvertently trigger an ineﬃcient boom
in output and asset prices.
    Finally, we discuss the use of DSGE models for addressing a key policy question, “how
big is the gap between the level of economic activity and the best level that is achievable
by policy?” An estimate of the output gap not only provides an indication about how eﬃ-
ciently resources are being used. In the New Keynesian framework, the output gap is also
a signal of inflation pressure. Informally, the unemployment rate is thought to provide a
direct observation on the eﬃciency of resource allocation. For example, a large increase in
the number of people reporting to be ‘ready and willing to work’ but not employed sug-


                                              3
gests, at least at a casual level, that resources are being wasted and that the output gap is
negative. DSGE models can be used to formalize and assess these informal hunches. We
do this by introducing unemployment into the standard New Keynesian model along the
lines recently proposed in Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2010a) (CTW). We use the
model to describe circumstance in which we can expect the unemployment rate to provide
useful information about the output gap. We also report evidence which suggests that these
conditions may be satisfied in the US data.
    Although the creators of the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) (HP) filter never intended it
to be used to estimate the New Keynesian output gap concept, it is in fact often used for
this purpose. We show that whether the HP filter is a good estimator of the gap depends
sensitively on the details of the underlying model economy. This discussion involves a careful
review of the intuition of how the New Keynesian model responds to shocks. Interestingly,
a New Keynesian model fit to US data suggests the conditions are satisfied for the HP filter
to be a good estimator of the output gap. In our discussion, we explain that there are
several caveats that must be taken into account before concluding that the HP filter is a
good estimator of the output gap.
    Policy analysis with DSGE models, even the simple analyses summarized above, require
assigning values to model parameters. In recent years, the Bayesian approach to econometrics
has taken over as the dominant one for this purpose. In conventional applications, the
Bayesian approach is a so-called full information procedure because the analyst specifies
the joint likelihood of the available observations in complete detail. As a result, many
of the limited information tools in macroeconomists’ econometric toolbox have been de-
emphasized in recent times. These tools include methods that match model and data second
moments and that match model and empirical impulse response functions. Following the
work of Chernozhukov and Hong (2003), Kim (2002), Kwan (1999) and others, we show how
the Bayesian approach can be applied in limited information contexts after all. We apply
a Bayesian moment matching approach in section 3.3.3 and a Bayesian impulse response
function matching approach in section 5.2.
    The new monetary DSGE models are of interest not just because they represent laborato-
ries for the analysis of important monetary policy questions. They are also of interest because
they appear to resolve a classic empirical puzzle about the eﬀects of monetary policy. It has
long been thought that it is virtually impossible to explain the very slow response of inflation
to a monetary disturbance without appealing to completely implausible assumptions about
price frictions (see, e.g., Mankiw (2000)). However, it turns out that modern DSGE models
do provide an account of the inertia in inflation and the strong response of real variables to
monetary policy disturbances, without appealing to seemingly implausible parameter values.
Moreover, the models simultaneously explain the dynamic response of the economy to other

                                               4
shocks. We review these important findings. We explain in detail the contribution of each
feature of the consensus medium-sized New Keynesian model in achieving this result. This
discussion follows closely the analysis in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) (CEE)
and Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2005) (ACEL).
    The econometric technique that is particularly suited to the shock-based analysis de-
scribed in the previous paragraph, is the one that matches impulse response functions esti-
mated by vector autoregressions (VARs) with the corresponding objects in a model. Using
US macroeconomic data, we show how the parameters of the consensus DSGE model are
estimated by this impulse-response matching procedure. The advantage of this econometric
approach is transparency and focus. The transparency reflects that the estimation strategy
has a simple graphical representation, involving objects - impulse response functions - about
which economists have strong intuition. The advantage of focus comes from the possibil-
ity of studying the empirical properties of a model without having to specify a full set of
shocks. As noted above, we show how to implement the impulse response matching strategy
using Bayesian methods. In particular, we are able to implement all the machinery of priors
and posteriors, as well as the marginal likelihood as a measure of model fit in our impulse
response function matching exercise.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the simple New Keynesian model
without capital. The following section reviews some policy implications of that model.
The medium-sized version of the model, designed to econometrically address a rich set of
macroeconomic data, is described in section 4. Section 5 reviews our Bayesian impulse
response matching strategy. Section 6 reviews the results and conclusions are oﬀered in
Section 7. Many algebraic derivations are relegated to a separate technical appendix.1

2. Simple Model

This section analyzes versions of the standard Calvo-sticky price New Keynesian model with-
out capital. In practice, the analysis of the standard New Keynesian model often begins with
the familiar three equations: the linearized ‘Phillips curve’, ‘IS curve’ and monetary policy
rule. We cannot simply begin with these three equations here because we also study depar-
tures from the standard model. For this reason, we must derive the equilibrium conditions
from their foundations.
    The version of the New Keynesian model studied in this section is the one considered
in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) and Woodford (2003), modified in two ways. First, we
introduce the working capital channel emphasized by CEE and Barth and Ramey (2002).2
  1
    The technical appendix can be found at
 http://www.faculty.econ.northwestern.edu/faculty/christiano/research/Handbook/technical_appendix.pdf.
  2
    The first monetary DSGE model we are aware of that incorporates a working capital channel is Fuerst

                                                 5
The working capital channel results from the assumption that firms’ variable inputs must be
financed by short term loans. With this assumption, changes in the interest rate aﬀect the
economy by changing firms’ variable production costs, in addition to operating through the
usual spending mechanism. There are several reasons to take the working capital channel
seriously. Using US Flow of Funds data, Barth and Ramey (2002) argue that a substantial
fraction of firms’ variable input costs are borrowed in advance. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (1997) provide vector autoregression evidence suggesting the presence of a working
capital channel. Chowdhury, Hoﬀmann and Schabert (2006) and Ravenna and Walsh (2006)
provide additional evidence supporting the working capital channel, based on instrumental
variables estimates of a suitably modified Phillips curve. Finally, section 4 below shows that
incorporating the working capital channel helps to explain the ‘price puzzle’ in the vector
autoregression literature and provides a response to Ball (1994)’s ‘dis-inflationary boom’
critique of sticky price models.
    We explore a second modification to the classic New Keynesian model by incorporating
the assumption about materials inputs proposed in Basu (1995). Basu argues that a large
part - as much as half - of a firm’s output is used as inputs by other firms. The working
capital channel introduces the interest rate into costs while the materials assumption makes
those costs big. In the next section of this paper we show that these two factors have
potentially far-reaching consequences for monetary policy.
    This section is organized as follows. We begin by describing the private sector of the econ-
omy, and deriving equilibrium conditions associated with optimization and market clearing.
In the next subsection, we specify the monetary policy rule and define the Taylor rule equi-
librium. The last subsection discusses the interpretation of a key parameter in our utility
function. The parameter controls the elasticity with which the labor input in our model
economy adjusts in response to a change in the real wage. Traditionally, this parameter
has been viewed as being restricted by microeconomic evidence on the Frisch labor supply
elasticity. We summarize recent thinking stimulated by the seminal work of Rogerson (1988)
and Hansen (1985), according to which this parameter is in fact not restricted by evidence
on the Frisch elasticity.
(1992). Other early examples include Christiano (1991) and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992a).




                                                  6
2.1. Private Economy
2.1.1. Households

We suppose there is a large number of identical households. The representative household
solves the following problem:
                                         Ã              !
                                  X∞
                                                  H 1+φ
                       max E0         β t log Ct − t      , 0 < β < 1, φ ≥ 0,       (2.1)
                  {Ct ,Ht ,Bt+1 }
                                  t=0
                                                  1+φ
subject to
                   Pt Ct + Bt+1 ≤ Bt Rt−1 + Wt Ht + Transfers and profitst .               (2.2)
Here, Ct and Ht denote household consumption and market work, respectively. In (2.2),
Bt+1 denotes the quantity of a nominal bond purchased by the household in period t and
Rt denotes the one-period gross nominal rate of interest on a bond purchased in period t.
Finally, Wt denotes the competitively determined nominal wage rate. The parameter, φ, is
discussed in section 2.3 below.
    The representative household equates the marginal cost of working, in consumption units,
with the marginal benefit, the real wage:
                                                    Wt
                                         Ct Htφ =      .                                   (2.3)
                                                    Pt
The representative household also equates the utility cost of the consumption foregone in
acquiring a bond with the corresponding benefit:
                                      1         1 Rt
                                         = βEt            .                                (2.4)
                                      Ct       Ct+1 π t+1
Here, πt+1 denotes the gross rate of inflation from t to t + 1.

2.1.2. Firms

A key feature of the New Keynesian model is its assumption that there are price-setting
frictions. These frictions are introduced in order to accommodate the evidence of inertia in
aggregate inflation. Obviously, the presence of price-setting frictions requires that firms have
the power to set prices, and this in turn requires the presence of monopoly power. A challenge
is to create an environment in which there is monopoly power, without contradicting the
obvious fact that actual economies have a very large number of firms. The Dixit-Stiglitz
framework of production handles this challenge very nicely, because it has a very large
number of price-setting monopolist firms. In particular, gross output is produced using a
representative, competitive firm using the following technology:
                                       µZ 1 1 ¶λf
                                              λ
                                 Yt =       Yi,tf di   , λf > 1,                            (2.5)
                                         0


                                               7
where λf governs the degree of substitution between the diﬀerent inputs. The representative
firm takes the price of gross output, Pt , and the price of intermediate inputs, Pit , as given.
Profit maximization leads to the following first order condition:
                                                    µ           ¶− λλf−1
                                                         Pi,t       f
                                     Yi,t = Yt                             .                  (2.6)
                                                         Pt
Substituting (2.6) into (2.5) yields the following relation between the aggregate price level
and the prices of intermediate goods:
                                        µZ    1           1
                                                                  ¶−(λf −1)
                                                    −λ
                                                         f −1
                                 Pt =             Pi,t          di          .                 (2.7)
                                          0

    The ith intermediate good is produced by a single monopolist, who takes (2.6) as its
demand curve. The value of λf determines how much monopoly power the ith producer has.
If λf is large, then intermediate goods are poor substitutes for each other, and the monopoly
supplier of good i has a lot of market power. Consistent with this, note that if λf is large,
then the demand for Yi,t is relatively price inelastic (see (2.6)). If λf is close to unity, so that
each Yi,t is almost a perfect substitute for Yj,t , j 6= i, then ith firm faces a demand curve that
is almost perfectly elastic. In this case, the firm has virtually no market power.
    The production function of the ith monopolist is:
                                             γ 1−γ
                                  Yi,t = zt Hi,t Iit , 0 < γ ≤ 1,                             (2.8)

where zt is a technology shock whose stochastic properties are specified below. Here, Hit
denotes the level of employment by the ith monopolist. We follow Basu (1995) in supposing
that the ith monopolist uses the quantity of materials, Iit , as inputs to production. The
materials, Iit , are converted one-for-one from Yt in (2.5). For γ < 1, each intermediate good
producer in eﬀect uses the output of all the other intermediate produces as input. When
γ = 1, then materials inputs are not used in production.
   The nominal marginal cost of the intermediate good producer is the following Cobb-
Douglas function of the price of its two inputs:
                                              µ      ¶1−γ µ ¶γ
                                                 P̄t         W̄t   1
                            marginal costt =                          .
                                                1−γ           γ    zt
Here, W̄t and P̄t are the eﬀective prices of Hit and Iit , respectively:

                               W̄t = (1 − ν t ) (1 − ψ + ψRt ) Wt                             (2.9)
                                P̄t = (1 − ν t ) (1 − ψ + ψRt ) Pt .

In this expression, ν t denotes a subsidy to intermediate good firms and the term involving
the interest rate reflects the presence of a ‘working capital channel’. For example, ψ = 1

                                                         8
corresponds to the case where the full amount of the cost of labor and materials must be
financed at the beginning of the period. When ψ = 0, no advanced financing is required. A
key variable in the model is the ratio of nominal marginal cost to the price of gross output,
Pt :                                 µ     ¶1−γ µ ¶γ
                                        1         w̄t
                     st = (1 − ν t )                   (1 − ψ + ψRt ) ,                (2.10)
                                       1−γ         γ
where w̄t denotes the scaled real wage rate:
                                                      Wt
                                          w̄t ≡       1    .                             (2.11)
                                                      γ
                                                  zt Pt
    If intermediate good firms faced no price-setting frictions, they would all set their price
as a fixed markup over nominal marginal cost:

                                             λf Pt st .                                  (2.12)

In fact, we assume there are price-setting frictions along the lines proposed by Calvo (1983).
An intermediate firm can set its price optimally with probability 1 − ξ p , and with probability
ξ p it must keep its price unchanged relative to what it was in the previous period:

                                          Pi,t = Pi,t−1 .

Consider the 1 − ξ p intermediate good firms that are able to set their prices optimally in
period t. There are no state variables in the intermediate good firm problem and all the
firms face the same demand curve. As a result, all firms able to optimize their prices in
period t choose the same price, which we denote by P̃t . It is clear that optimizing firms do
not set P̃t equal to (2.12). Setting P̃t to (2.12) would be optimal from the perspective of the
current period, but it does not take into account the possibility that the firm may be stuck
with P̃t for several periods into the future. Instead, the intermediate good firms that have
an opportunity reoptimize their price in the current period, do so to solve:
                              X
                              ∞
                                ¡ ¢j       ³                             ´
                     max Et      ξ p β υt+j P̃t Yi,t+j − Pt+j st+j Yi,t+j ,              (2.13)
                       P̃t
                              j=0

subject to the demand curve, (2.6), and the definition of marginal cost, (2.10). In (2.13),
β j υ t+j is the multiplier on the household’s nominal period t + j budget constraint. Because
they are the owners of the intermediate good firms, households are the recipients of firm
profits. In this way, it is natural that the firm should weigh profits in diﬀerent dates and
states of nature using β j υt+j . Intermediate good firms take υt+j as given. The nature of the
family’s preferences, (2.1), implies:
                                                     1
                                       υ t+j =             .
                                                 Pt+j Ct+j

                                                  9
In (2.13) the presence of ξ p reflects that intermediate good firms are only concerned with
future scenarios in which they are not able to reoptimize the price chosen in period t.
   The first order condition associated with (2.13) is:

                                P∞ ¡ ¢j             λ
                                                 − λ f−1
                              Et j=0 βξ p (Xt,j )   f    λf st+j   Ktf
                        p̃t =     P∞ ¡ ¢j             − λ 1−1
                                                                 =   f
                                                                       ,                   (2.14)
                                Et j=0 βξ p (Xt,j )      f         Ft


where Ktf and Ftf denote the numerator and denominator of the ratio after the first equality,
respectively. Also,                       ½         1
                                P̃t          π t+j ···π t+1
                                                            j>0
                           p̃t ≡ , Xt,j ≡                       .
                                Pt                 1        j=0
Not surprisingly, (2.14) implies P̃t is set to (2.12) when ξ p = 0. When ξ p > 0, optimizing
firms set their prices so that (2.12) is satisfied on average. It is useful to write the numerator
and denominator in (2.14) in recursive form. Thus,
                                                                 λf
                                                                λf −1
                               Ktf                           f
                                     = λf st + βξ p Et πt+1 Kt+1 ,                         (2.15)
                                                             1
                                                           λf −1
                               Ftf = 1 + βξ p Et π t+1 Ft+1
                                                         f
                                                            .                              (2.16)

    Expression (2.7) simplifies when we take into account that (i) the 1 − ξ p intermediate
good firms that set their price optimally all set it to P̃t and (ii) the ξ p firms that cannot
reset their price are selected at random from the set of all firms. Doing so,
                                       ⎡              1     ⎤−(λf −1)
                                                    λf −1
                                           1 − ξ pπt
                                 p̃t = ⎣                    ⎦           .                  (2.17)
                                              1 − ξp

It is convenient to use (2.17) to eliminate p̃t in (2.14):
                                           ⎛              1     ⎞−(λf −1)
                                                        λf −1
                                               1 − ξ pπt
                              Ktf = Ftf ⎝                       ⎠           .              (2.18)
                                                  1 − ξp

   When γ < 1, cost minimization by the ith intermediate good producer leads it to equate
the relative price of its labor and materials inputs to the corresponding relative marginal
productivities:
                              W̄t   Wt      γ Iit        γ It
                                  =    =            =           .                         (2.19)
                              P̄t   Pt    1 − γ Hit    1 − γ Ht
Evidently, each firm uses the same ratio of inputs, regardless of its output price, Pit .



                                                   10
2.1.3. Aggregate Resources and the Private Sector Equilibrium Conditions

A notable feature of the New Keynesian model is the absence of an aggregate production
function. That is, given information about aggregate inputs and technology, it is not possible
to say what aggregate output, Yt , is. This is because Yt also depends on how inputs are
distributed among the various intermediate good producers. For a given amount of aggregate
inputs, Yt is maximized by distributing the inputs equally across producers. An unequal
distribution of inputs results in a lower level of Yt . In the New Keynesian model with Calvo
price frictions, resources are unequally allocated across intermediate good firms if, and only
if, Pit diﬀers across i. Price dispersion in the model is caused by the interaction of inflation
with price-setting frictions. With price dispersion, the price mechanism ceases to allocate
resources eﬃciently, as too much production is done in firms with low prices and too little
in the firms with high prices. Yun (1996) derived a very simple formula that characterizes
the loss of output due to price dispersion. We rederive the analog of Yun (1996)’s formula
that is relevant for our setting.
    Let Yt∗ denote the unweighted integral of gross output across intermediate good produc-
ers:                  Z 1           Z 1 µ      ¶γ             µ ¶γ
                                          Hit                  Ht
                  ∗
                Yt ≡      Yi,t di =    zt         Iit di = zt      It = zt Htγ It1−γ .
                        0            0     Iit                 It

Here, we have used linear homogeneity of the production function function, as well as the
result in (2.19), that all intermediate good producers use the same labor to materials ratio.
An alternative representation of Yt∗ makes use of the demand curve, (2.6):
                 Z 1µ          ¶− λλf−1             λf         Z   1               λf               λf             λ
                        Pi,t       f               λf −1                        −λ                 λf −1         − f
    Yt∗   = Yt                            di = Yt Pt                   (Pi,t )     f −1   di = Yt Pt       (Pt∗ ) λf −1   .   (2.20)
                 0      Pt                                     0

Thus,
                                                  Yt = p∗t zt Htγ It1−γ ,
where
                                                               µ         ¶ λλf−1
                                                                   Pt∗      f
                                                  p∗t      ≡                         .                                        (2.21)
                                                                   Pt
Here, p∗t ≤ 1 denotes Yun (1996)’s measure of the output lost due to price dispersion. From
(2.20),
                                    ∙Z 1          λf
                                                         ¸− λfλ−1
                                                −              f
                              Pt∗ =      (Pi,t ) λf −1 di         .                   (2.22)
                                                       0

                           p∗t
According to (2.21), is a monotone function of the ratio of two diﬀerent weighted averages
of intermediate good prices. The ratio of these two weighted averages can only be at its



                                                                   11
maximum of unity if all prices are the same.3
   Taking into account observations (i) and (ii) after (2.16), (2.22) reduces (after dividing
by Pt and taking into account (2.21)) to:
                           ⎡         ⎛           1   ⎞λf        λf
                                                                     ⎤−1
                                               λf −1           λf −1
                           ⎢¡       ¢ 1 − ξpπt
                                                     ⎠ + ξ p πt      ⎥
                     p∗t = ⎣ 1 − ξ p ⎝                         ∗     ⎦ .               (2.23)
                                          1 − ξp              pt−1

According to (2.23), there is price dispersion in the current period if there was dispersion
in the previous period and/or if there is a current shock to dispersion. Such a shock must
operate through the aggregate rate of inflation.
    We conclude that the relation between aggregate inputs and gross output is given by:

                                           Ct + It = p∗t zt Htγ It1−γ .                                    (2.24)

Here, Ct + It represents total gross output, while Ct represents value added.
    The private sector equilibrium conditions of the model are (2.3), (2.4), (2.10), (2.15),
(2.16), (2.18), (2.19), (2.23) and (2.24). This represents 9 equations in the following 11
unknowns:
                                                                        Wt
                            Ct , Ht , It , Rt , π t , p∗t , Ktf , Ftf ,    , st , ν t . (2.25)
                                                                        Pt
As it stands, the system is underdetermined. This is not surprising, since we have said
nothing about monetary policy or how ν t is determined. We turn to this in the following
section.

2.2. Log-linearized Equilibrium with Taylor Rule

We log-linearize the equilibrium conditions of the model about its nonstochastic steady
state. We assume that monetary policy is governed by a Taylor rule which responds to the
deviation between actual inflation and a zero inflation target. As a result, inflation is zero in
the nonstochastic steady state. In addition, we suppose that the intermediate good subsidy,
ν t , is set to the constant value that causes the price of goods to equal the social marginal
cost of production in steady state. To see what this implies for ν t , recall that in steady state
firms set their price as a markup, λf , over marginal cost. That is, they equate the object in
(2.12) to Pt , so that
                                            λf s = 1.
   3
     The distortion, p∗t , is of interest in its own right. It is a sort of ‘endogenous Solow residual’ of the kind
called for by Prescott (1998). Whether the magnitude of fluctuations in p∗t are quantitatively important
given the actual price dispersion in data is something that deserves exploration. A diﬃculty that must be
overcome, in such an exploration, is determining what the benchmark eﬃcient dispersion of prices is in the
data. In the model it is eﬃcient for all prices to be exactly the same, but that is obviously only a convenient
normalization.

                                                        12
Using (2.10) to substitute out for the steady state value of s, the latter expression reduces,
in steady state, to:
                                             "µ       ¶1−γ µ ¶γ #
                                                  1           w̄
                     λf (1 − ν) (1 − ψ + ψR)                         = 1.
                                                1−γ           γ

Because we assume competitive labor markets, the object in square brackets is the ratio of
social marginal cost to price. As a result, it is socially eﬃcient for this expression to equal
unity. This is accomplished in the steady state by setting ν as follows:
                                                               1
                                             1−ν =                     .                               (2.26)
                                                       λf (1 − ψ + ψR)
    Our treatment of policy implies that the steady state allocations of our model economy
are eﬃcient in the sense that they coincide with the solution to a particular planning problem.
To define this problem, it is convenient to adopt the following scaling of variables:
                                                       Ct                  It
                                              ct ≡     1/γ
                                                             , it ≡        1/γ
                                                                                 .                     (2.27)
                                                      zt               zt
The planning problem is:
                                         "                     #
                                 X
                                 ∞
                                                      Ht1+φ
                   max E0              β t log ct −                , subject to ct + it = Htγ i1−γ
                                                                                               t   .   (2.28)
                 {ct ,Ht ,it }
                                 t=0
                                                      1+φ

The problem, (2.28), is that of a planner who allocates resources eﬃciently across interme-
diate goods and who does not permit monopoly power distortions. Because there is no state
variable in the problem, it is obvious that the choice variables that solve (2.28) are constant
over time. This implies that the Ct and It that solve the planning problem are a fixed pro-
             1/γ
portion of zt over time. It turns out that the allocations that solve (2.28) also solve the
Ramsey optimal policy problem of maximizing (2.1) with respect to the 11 variables listed
in (2.25) subject to the 9 equations listed before equation (2.25).4
    Because inflation, π t , fluctuates in equilibrium, (2.23) suggests that p∗t fluctuates too. It
turns out, however, that p∗t is constant to a first order approximation. To see this, note that
the absence of inflation in the steady state also guarantees there is no price dispersion in
steady state in the sense that p∗t is at its maximal value of unity (see (2.23)). With p∗t at its
maximum in steady state, small perturbations have a zero first-order impact on p∗t . This can
be seen by noting that πt is absent from the log-linear expansion of (2.23) about p∗t = 1:

                                                     p̂∗t = ξ p p̂∗t−1 .                               (2.29)
   4
    The statement in the text is strictly true only in the case where the initial distortion in prices is zero,
that is p∗t−1 = 1. If this condition does not hold, then it does hold asymptotically and may even hold as an
approximation after a small number of periods.

                                                             13
Here, a hat over a variable indicates:
                                                      d    t
                                             ˆt =              ,

where denotes the steady state of the variable, t , and d t = t − denotes a small
perturbation in t from steady state. We suppose that in the initial period, p̂∗t−1 = 0, so
that, to a first order approximation, p̂∗t = 0 for all t.
   Log-linearizing (2.15), (2.16) and (2.18) we obtain the usual representation of the Phillips
curve:                             ¡        ¢¡        ¢
                                    1 − βξ p 1 − ξ p
                            π̂ t =                      ŝt + βEt π̂ t+1 .              (2.30)
                                            ξp
Combining (2.3) with (2.10), taking into account (2.27) and our the setting of ν in (2.26),
real marginal cost is:
                                           µ      ¶1−γ Ã         !γ
                            1 1 − ψ + ψRt      1          ct Htφ
                       st =                                         .
                            λf 1 − ψ + ψR 1 − γ              γ

Then,
                                    ³          ´                ψ
                             ŝt = γ φĤt + ĉt +                       R̂t .              (2.31)
                                                          (1 − ψ) β + ψ
Substituting out for the real wage in (2.19) using (2.3) and applying (2.27),
                                                       γ
                                        Htφ+1 ct =        it .                             (2.32)
                                                      1−γ

Similarly, scaling (2.24):
                                         ct + it = Htγ i1−γ
                                                        t   .
Using (2.32) to substitute out for it in the above expression, we obtain:
                                              ∙         ¸1−γ
                              1 − γ φ+1     γ 1−γ  φ+1
                         ct +      Ht ct = Ht     Ht ct      .
                                γ               γ

Log-linearizing this expression around the steady state implies, after some algebra,

                                              ĉt = Ĥt .                                  (2.33)

Substituting the latter into (2.31), we obtain:

                                                            ψ
                              ŝt = γ (1 + φ) ĉt +                 R̂t .                  (2.34)
                                                      (1 − ψ) β + ψ

In (2.34), ĉt is the percent deviation of ct from its steady state value. Since this steady state
value coincides with the constant ct that solves (2.28) for each t, ĉt also corresponds to the

                                                 14
output gap. The notation we use to denote the output gap is xt . Using this notation for the
output gap and substituting out for ŝt into the Phillips curve, we obtain:
                           ∙                                  ¸
                                                  ψ
                  π̂ t = κp γ (1 + φ) xt +                 R̂t + βEt π̂t+1 ,          (2.35)
                                            (1 − ψ) β + ψ

where                                    ¡        ¢¡       ¢
                                          1 − βξ p 1 − ξ p
                                    κp ≡                     .
                                                  ξp
When γ = 1 and ψ = 0, (2.35) reduces to the ‘Phillips curve’ in the classic New Keynesian
model. When materials are an important factor of production, so that γ is small, then a
given jump in the output gap, xt , has a smaller impact on inflation. The reason is that in this
case the aggregate price index is part of the input cost for intermediate good producers. So, a
small price response to a given output gap is an equilibrium because individual intermediate
good firms have less of an incentive to raise their prices in this case. With ψ > 0, (2.35)
indicates that a jump in the interest rate drives up prices. This is because with an active
working capital channel a rise in the interest rate drives up marginal cost.5
    Now consider the intertemporal Euler equation. Expressing (2.4) in terms of scaled
variables,
                                        βct     Rt              zt+1
                             1 = Et        1         , μz,t+1 ≡      .
                                    c μ    γ   π t+1             zt
                                       t+1 z,t+1

Log-linearly expanding about steady state and recalling that ĉt corresponds to the output
gap:                           ∙                                 ¸
                                            1
                        0 = Et xt − xt+1 − μ̂z,t+1 + R̂t − π̂ t+1 ,
                                           γ
or,                               h       ³                 ´i
                                                          ∗
                                                bt+1 − R̂t ,
                           xt = Et xt+1 − R̂t − π                                    (2.36)
where
                                         1
                                         R̂t∗ ≡
                                            Et μ̂z,t+1 .                          (2.37)
                                         γ
   We suppose that monetary policy, when linearized about steady state, is characterized
by the following Taylor rule:
                               R̂t = rπ Et π̂ t+1 + rx xt .                       (2.38)
The equilibrium of the log-linearly expanded economy is given by (2.37), (2.35), (2.36) and
(2.38).
  5
   Equation (2.35) resembles equation (13) in Ravenna and Walsh (2006), except that we also allow for
materials inputs, i.e., γ < 1.




                                                   15
2.3. Frisch Labor Supply Elasticity

The magnitude of the parameter, φ, in the household utility function plays an important role
in the analysis in later sections. This parameter has been the focus of much debate in macro-
economics. Note from (2.3) that the elasticity of Ht with respect to the real wage, holding Ct
constant, is 1/φ. The condition, “holding Ct constant”, could mean that the elasticity refers
to the response of Ht to a change in the real wage that is of very short duration, so short
that the household’s wealth - and, hence, consumption - is left unaﬀected. Alternatively, the
elasticity could refer to the response of Ht to a change in the real wage that is associated with
an oﬀsetting lump sum transfer payment that keeps wealth unchanged. The debate about
φ centers on the interpretation of Ht . Under one interpretation, Ht represents the amount
of hours worked by a typical person in the labor force. With this interpretation, 1/φ is the
Frisch labor supply elasticity.6 This is perhaps the most straightforward interpretation of
1/φ given our assumption that the economy is populated by identical households, in which
Ht is the labor eﬀort of the typical household. An alternative interpretation of Ht is that it
represents the number of people working, and that 1/φ measures the elasticity with which
marginal people substitute in and out of employment in response to a change in the wage.
Under this interpretation, 1/φ need not correspond to the labor supply elasticity of any
particular person. The two diﬀerent interpretations of Ht give rise to very diﬀerent views
about how data ought to be used to restrict the value of φ.
    There is an influential labor market literature that estimates the Frisch labor supply
elasticity using household level data. The general finding is that, although the Frisch elas-
ticity varies somewhat across diﬀerent types of people, on the whole the elasticities are very
small. Some have interpreted this to mean that only large values of φ (say, larger than
unity) are consistent with the data. Initially, this intrepretation was widely accepted by
macroeconomists. However, the interpretation gave rise to a puzzle for equilibrium models
of the business cycle. Over the business cycle, employment fluctuates a great deal more
than real wages. When viewed through the prism of equilibrium models the aggregate data
appeared to suggest that people respond elastically to changes in the wage. But, this seemed
inconsistent with the microeconomic evidence that individual labor supply elasticities are in
fact small. At the present time, a consensus is emerging that what initially appeared to be
a conflict between micro and macro data is in fact no conflict at all. The idea is that the
Frisch elasticity in the micro data and the labor supply elasticity in the macro data represent
   6
    The Frisch labor supply elasticity refers to the substitution eﬀect associated with a change in the wage
rate. It is the percent change in a person’s labor supply in response to a change in the real wage, holding
the marginal utility of consumption fixed. Throughout this paper, we assume that utility is additively
separable in consumption and leisure, so that constancy of the marginal utility of consumption translates
into constancy of consumption.



                                                    16
at best distantly related objects.
    It is well known that much of the business cycle variation in employment reflects changes
in the quantity of people working, not in the number of hours worked by a typical household.
Beginning at least with the work of Rogerson (1988) and Hansen (1985), it has been argued
that even if the individual’s labor supply elasticity is zero over most values of the wage,
aggregate employment could nevertheless respond highly elastically to small changes in the
real wage. This can occur if there are many people who are near the margin between working
in the market and devoting their time to other activities. An example is a spouse who is
doing productive work in the home, and yet who might be tempted by a small rise in the
market wage to substitute into the market. Another example is teenagers who may be close
to the margin between pursuing additional education and working, who could be induced to
switch to working by a small rise in the wage. Finally, there is the elderly person who might
be induced by a small rise in the market wage to delay retirement. These examples suggest
that aggregate employment might fluctuate substantially in response to small changes in the
real wage, even if the individual household’s Frisch elasticity of labor supply is zero over all
values of the wage, except the one value that induces a shift in or out of the labor market.7
    The ideas in the previous paragraphs can be illustrated in our model. Such an illustration
obviously requires that households have several members (e.g., teenagers, elderly, middle-
aged working spouses). The realistic assumption is to suppose that ‘several’ means 3 or 4,
but this would embroil us in technical complications which would take us away from the
main idea. Instead, we adopt the technically convenient assumption that the household has
a large number of members, one for each of the points on the line bounded by 0 and 1.8 In
addition, we assume that a household member only has the option to work full time or not
at all. Their Frisch labor supply elasticity is zero for most values of the wage. Let l ∈ [0, 1]
index a particular member in the family. Suppose this member enjoys the following utility
if employed:
                                     log (Ct ) − lφ , φ > 0,
and the following utility if not employed:

                                               log (Ct ) .

Household members are ordered according to their degree of aversion to work. Those with
high values of l have a high aversion (for example, small children, and elderly or chronically
ill people) to work, and those with l near zero have very little aversion. We suppose that
household decisions are made on a utilitarian basis, in a way that maximizes the equally
   7
    See Rogerson and Wallenius (2009) for additional discussion and analysis.
   8
    Our approach is most similar to the approach of Gali (2010), though it also resembles the recent work
of Mulligan (2001) and Krusell, Mukoyama, Rogerson and Sahin (2008).

                                                   17
weighted integral of utility across all household members. Under these circumstances, eﬃ-
ciency dictates that all members receive the same level of consumption, whether employed or
not. In addition, if Ht members are to be employed, then those with 0 ≤ l ≤ Ht should work
and those with l > Ht should not. For a household with consumption, Ct , and employment,
Ht , utility is, after integrating over all l ∈ [0, 1] :

                                                     Ht1+φ
                                       log (Ct ) −         ,                              (2.39)
                                                     1+φ
which coincides with the period utility function in (2.1). Under this interpretation of the
utility function, (2.3) remains the relevant first order condition for labor. In this case, given
the wage, Wt /Pt , the household sends out a number of members, Ht , to work until the utility
cost of work for the marginal worker, Htφ , is equated to the corresponding utility benefit to
the household, (Wt /Pt ) /Ct .
    Note that under this interpretation of the utility function, Ht denotes a quantity of
workers and φ dictates the elasticity with which diﬀerent members of the households enter
or leave employment in response to shocks. The case in which φ is large corresponds to the
case where household members diﬀer relatively sharply in terms of their aversion to work.
In this case there are not many members with disutility of work close to that of the marginal
worker. As a result, a given change in the wage induces only a small change in employment.
If φ is very small, then there is a large number of household members close to indiﬀerent
between working and not working, and so a small change in the real wage elicits a large labor
supply response.
    Given that most of the business cycle variation in the labor input is in the form of
numbers of people employed, we think the most sensible interpretation of Ht is that it
measures numbers of people working. Accordingly, 1/φ is not to be interpreted as a Frisch
elasticity, which we instead assume to be zero.

3. Simple Model: Some Implications for Monetary Policy

Monetary DSGE models have been used to gain insight into a variety of issues that are
important for monetary policy. We discuss some of these issues using variants of the simple
model developed in the previous section. A key feature of that model is that it is flexible, and
can be adjusted to suit diﬀerent questions and points of view. The classic New Keynesian
model, the one with no working capital channel and no materials inputs (i.e., γ = 1, ψ = 0)
can be used to articulate the rationale for the Taylor principle. But, variants of the New
Keynesian framework can also be used to articulate challenges to that principle. The first two
subsections below describe two such challenges. The fact that the New Keynesian framework
can accommodate a variety of perspectives on important policy questions is an important

                                               18
strength. This is because the framework helps to clarify debates and to motivate econometric
analyses so that data can be used to resolve those debates.9
    The last two subsections address the problem of estimating the output gap. The output
gap is an important variable for policy analysis because it is a measure of the eﬃciency
with which economic resources are allocated. In addition, New Keynesian models imply that
the output gap is an important determinant of inflation, a variable of particular concern
to monetary policy makers. We define the output gap as the percent deviation between
actual output and potential output, where potential output is output in the Ramsey-eﬃcient
equilibrium.10
    We use the classic New Keynesian model to study three ways of estimating the output
gap. The first uses the structure of the simple New Keynesian model to estimate the output
gap as a latent variable. The second approach modifies the New Keynesian model to include
unemployment along the lines indicated by CTW. This modification of the model allows us to
investigate the information content of the unemployment rate for the output gap. In addition,
by showing one way that unemployment can be integrated into the model, the discussion
represents another illustration of the versatility of the New Keynesian framework.11 The last
section below explores the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter as a device for estimating the output
gap. In the course of the analysis, we illustrate the Bayesian limited information moment
matching procedure discussed in the introduction.
   9
      For example, the Chowdhury, Hoﬀmann and Schabert (2006) and Ravenna and Walsh (2006) papers
cited in the previous section, show how the assumptions of the New Keynesian model can be used to develop
an empirical characterization of the importance of the working capital channel.
   10
      In our model, the Ramsey-equilibrium turns out to be what is often called the ‘first-best equilibrium’,
the one that is not distorted by monopoly power (and, hence, shocks to the Phillips curve, to the extent that
they represent markup disturbances, i.e., shocks to λf in (2.5)) or flexible prices.
   11
      For an alternative recent approach to the introduction of unemployment into a DSGE model, see Gali
(2010). Gali demonstrates that with a modest reinterpretation of variables, the standard DSGE model with
sticky wages summarized in the next section contains a theory of unemployment. In the model of the labor
market used there (it was proposed by Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000)) wages are set by a monopoly
union. As a result, the wage rate is higher than the marginal cost of working. Under these circumstances, one
can define the unemployed as the diﬀerence between the number of people actually working and the number
of people that would be working if the cost of work for the marginal person were equated to the wage rate.
Gali (2010a) shows how unemployment data can be used to help estimate the output gap, as we do here. The
CTW and Gali models of unemployment are quite diﬀerent. For example, in the text we analyze a version of
the CTW model in which labor markets are perfectly competitive, so Gali’s ‘monopoly power’ concept of un-
employment is zero in this model. In addition, the eﬃcient level of unemployment in the sense that we use the
term here, is zero in Gali’s definition, but positive in our definition. This is because in our model, unemploy-
ment is an inevitable by-product of an activity that must be undertaken to find a job. For an extensive discus-
sion of the diﬀerences between our model and Gali’s see section F in the technical appendix to CTW, which
can be found at http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/~lchrist/research/Riksbank/technicalappendix.pdf.




                                                      19
3.1. Taylor Principle

A key objective of monetary policy is the maintenance of low and stable inflation. The
classic New Keynesian model defined by γ = 1 and ψ = 0 can be used to articulate the
risk that inflation expectations might become self-fulfilling unless the monetary authorities
adopt the appropriate monetary policy. The classic model can also be used to explain the
widespread consensus that ‘appropriate monetary’ policy means a monetary policy that
embeds the Taylor principle: a 1% rise in inflation should be met by a greater than 1%
rise in the nominal interest rate. This subsection explains how the classic New Keynesian
model rationalizes the wisdom of implementing the Taylor principle. However, when we
incorporate the assumption of a working capital channel - particularly when the share of
materials in gross output is as high as it is in the data - the Taylor principle becomes a
source of instability. This is perhaps not surprising. When the working capital channel
is strong, if the monetary authority raises the interest rate in response to rising inflation
expectations, the resulting rise in costs produces the higher inflation that people expect.12
    It is convenient to summarize the linearized equations of our model here:
                                      1
                            R̂t∗ = Et μ̂z,t+1                                                          (3.1)
                                      γ
                                      h                     i
                             π̂ t = κp γ (1 + φ) xt + αψ R̂t + βEt π̂ t+1                              (3.2)
                                      h       ³                 ´i
                             xt = Et xt+1 − R̂t − π̂ t+1 − R̂t∗                                        (3.3)
                             R̂t = rπ Et π̂ t+1 + rx xt ,                                              (3.4)

where
                                                       ψ
                                          αψ =                 .
                                                 (1 − ψ) β + ψ
The specification of the model is complete when we take a stand on the law of motion for
the exogenous shock. We do this in the following subsections as needed.
    We begin by reviewing the case for the Taylor principle using the classic New Keynesian
model, with γ = 1, ψ = 0. We get to the heart of the argument using the deterministic
version of the model, in which R̂t∗ ≡ 0. In addition, it is convenient to suppose that monetary
policy is characterized by rx = 0. Throughout, we adopt the presumption that the only valid
equilibria are paths for π̂ t , R̂t and xt that converge to steady state, i.e., 0.13 Under these
  12
      Bruckner and Schabert (2003) make an argument similar to ours, though they do not consider the impact
of materials inputs, which we find to be important.
   13
      Although our presumption is standard, justifying it is harder than one might have thought. For example,
Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2002) have presented examples in which some explosive paths for the
linearized equilibrium conditions are symptomatic of perfectly sensible equilibria for the actual economy
underlying the linear approximations. In these cases, focusing on the non-explosive paths of the linearized
economy may be valid after all if we imagine that monetary policy is a Taylor rule with a particular escape


                                                     20
circumstances, (3.2) and (3.3) can be solved forward as follows:

                π̂t = κp γ (1 + φ) xt + βκp γ (1 + φ) xt+1 + β 2 κp γ (1 + φ) xt+2 + ...              (3.5)

and                      ³           ´ ³              ´ ³              ´
                   xt = − R̂t − π̂t+1 − R̂t+1 − π̂ t+2 − R̂t+2 − π̂ t+3 − ...                         (3.6)
In (3.6) we have used the fact that in our setting a path converges to zero if, and only if, it
converges fast enough so that a sum like the one in (3.6) is well defined.14 Equation (3.5)
shows that inflation is a function of the present and future output gap. Equation (3.6) shows
that the current output gap is a function of the long term real interest rate (i.e., the sum on
the right of (3.6)) in the model.
    Under the Taylor principle, the classic New Keynesian model implies that a rise in infla-
tion expectations launches a sequence of events which ultimately leads to a moderation in
actual inflation. Seeing this moderation in actual inflation, people’s higher inflation expec-
tations would quickly dissipate before they can be a source of economic instability. The way
this works is that the rise in the real rate of interest slows spending, causing the output gap
to shrink (see (3.6)). The fall in actual inflation occurs as the reduction in output reduces
pressure on resources and drives down the marginal cost of production (see (3.2)). Strictly
speaking, we have just described a rationale for the Taylor principle that is based on learning
(for a formal discussion, see McCallum (2009)). Under rational expectations, the posited
rise in inflation expectations would not occur in the first place if policy obeys the Taylor
principle.
    A similar argument shows that if the monetary authority does not obey the Taylor
principle, i.e., rπ < 1, then a rise in inflation expectations can be self-fulfilling. This is not
surprising, since in this case the rise in expected inflation is associated with a fall in the
real interest rate. According to (3.6) this produces a rise in the output gap. By raising
marginal cost, the Phillips curve, (3.5), implies that actual inflation rises. Seeing higher
actual inflation, people’s higher inflation expectations are confirmed. In this way, with
rπ < 1 a rise in inflation expectations becomes self-fulfilling by triggering a boom in output
and actual inflation. It is easy to see that with rπ < 1 many equilibria are possible. A drop
in inflation expectations can cause a fall in output and inflation. Inflation expectations could
clause. The escape clause specifies that in the event the economy threatens to follow an explosive path, the
monetary authority commits to switch to a monetary policy of targeting the money growth rate. There are
examples of monetary models in which the escape clause monetary policy justifies the type of equilibrium
selection we adopt in the text (see Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2002), and Christiano and Rostagno
(2001) for further discussion). For a more recent debate about the validity of the equilibrium selection
adopted in the text, see McCallum (2009) and Cochrane (2009) and the references they cite.
  14
     The reason for this can be seen below, where we show that the solution to this equation is a linear
combination of terms like aλt . Such an expression converges to zero if, and only if, it is also summable.


                                                    21
be random, causing random fluctuations between booms and recessions.15
    In this way, the classic New Keynesian model has been used to articulate the idea that the
Taylor principle promotes stability, while absence of the Taylor principle makes the economy
vulnerable to fluctuations in self-fulfilling expectations.
    The preceding results are particularly easy to establish formally under the assumption
of rational expectations. We continue to maintain the simplifying assumption, rx = 0. We
reduce the model to a single second order diﬀerence equation in inflation. Substitute out for
R̂t in (3.2) and (3.3) using (3.4). Then, solve (3.2) for xt and use this to substitute out for
xt in (3.3). These operations result in the following second order diﬀerence equation in π̂t :

         π̂ t + [κp γ (1 + φ) (rπ − 1) − (κp αψ rπ + β) − 1] π̂t+1 + (κp αψ rπ + β) π̂ t+2 = 0.

The general set of solutions to this diﬀerence equation can be written as follows:

                                             π̂ t = a0 λt1 + a1 λt2 ,

for arbitrary a0 , a1 . Here, λi , i = 1, 2, are the roots of the following second order polynomial:

             1 + [κp γ (1 + φ) (rπ − 1) − (κp αψ rπ + β + 1)] λ + (κp αψ rπ + β) λ2 = 0.

Thus, there is a two dimensional space of solutions to the equilibrium conditions (i.e., one
for each possible value of a0 and a1 ). We continue to apply our presumption that among
these solutions, only the ones in which the variables converge to zero (i.e., to steady state)
correspond to equilibria. Thus, uniqueness of equilibrium requires that both λ1 and λ2 be
larger than unity in absolute value. In this case, the unique equilibrium is the solution
associated with a0 = a1 = 0. If one or both of λi , i = 1, 2 are less than unity in absolute
value, then there are many solutions to the equilibrium conditions that are equilibria. We
can think of these equilibria as corresponding to diﬀerent, self-fulfilling, expectations.
    The following result can be established for the classic New Keynesian model, with γ = 1
and ψ = 0. The model economy has a unique equilibrium if, and only if rπ > 1 (see, e.g.,
  15
     Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) argue that the high inflation of the 1970s in many countries can be
explained as reflecting the failure to respect the Taylor principle in the early 1970s. Christiano and Gust
(2000) criticize this argument on the ground that one did not observe a boom in employment in the 1970s.
Christiano and Gust argue that even if one thought of the 1970s as also a time of bad technology shocks (fuel
costs and commodity prices soared then), the CGG analysis predicts that employment should have boomed.
Christiano and Gust present an alternative model, a ‘limited participation’ model, which has the same
implications for the Taylor principle that the CGG model has. However, the Christiano and Gust model has
a very diﬀerent implication for what happens to real allocations in a self-fulfilling inflation episode. Because
of the presence of an important working capital channel, the self-fulfilling inflation episode is associated with
a recession in output and employment. Thus, Christiano and Gust conclude that the 1970s might well reflect
the failure to implement the Taylor principle, but only if the analysis is done in a model diﬀerent from the
CGG model.


                                                       22
Bullard and Mitra (2002)). This is consistent with the intuition about the Taylor principle
discussed above.
     We now re-examine the case for the Taylor principle when there is a working capital
channel. The reason the Taylor principle works in the classic New Keynesian model is that
a rise in the interest rate leads to a fall in inflation by curtailing aggregate spending. But,
with a working capital channel, ψ > 0, an increase in the interest rate has a second eﬀect.
By raising marginal cost (see (3.2)), a rise in the interest rate places upward pressure on
inflation. If the working capital channel is strong enough, then monetary policy with rπ > 1
may ‘add fuel to the fire’ when inflation expectations rise. The sharp rise in the nominal
rate of interest in response to a rise in inflation expectations may actually cause the inflation
that people expected. In this way the Taylor principle could actually be destabilizing. Of
course, for this to be true requires that the working capital channel be strong enough. For a
small enough working capital channel (i.e., small ψ) implementing the Taylor principle would
still have the eﬀect of inoculating the economy from destabilizing fluctuations in inflation
expectations.
     Whether the presence of the working capital channel in fact overturns the wisdom of
implementing the Taylor principle is a numerical question. We must assign values to the
model parameters and investigate whether one or both of λ1 and λ2 are less than unity in
absolute value. If this is the case, then implementing the Taylor principle does not stabilize
inflation expectations. Throughout, we set

                                    β = 0.99, ξ p = 0.75, rπ = 1.5.

The discount rate is 4 percent, at an annual rate and the value of ξ p implies an average time
between price reoptimization of one year. In addition, monetary policy is characterized by
a strong commitment to the Taylor principle. We consider two values for the interest rate
response to the output gap, rx = 0 and rx = 0.1. For robustness, we also consider a version
of (3.4) in which the monetary authority reacts to current inflation.
    We do not have a strong prior about the parameter, φ, that controls the disutility of
labor (see section 2.3 above), so we consider two values, φ = 1 and φ = 0.1. To have a sense
of the appropriate value of γ, we follow Basu (1995). He argues, using manufacturing data,
that the share of materials in gross output is roughly 1/2. Recall that the steady state of
our model coincides with the solution to (2.28), so that
                                               i
                                                  = 1 − γ.
                                              c+i
Thus, Basu’s empirical finding suggests a value for γ in a neighborhood of 1/2.16 The
  16
    Actually, this is a conservative estimate of γ. Had we not selected ν to extinguish monopoly power in
the steady state, our estimate of γ would have been lower. See Basu (1995) for more discussion of this point.

                                                     23
instrumental variables results in Ravenna and Walsh (2006) suggests that a value of the
working capital share, ψ, in a neighborhood of unity is consistent with the data.
     Figure 1 displays our results. The upper row of figures provides results for the case in
(3.4), in which the policy authority reacts to the one-quarter-ahead expectation of inflation,
Et π̂ t+1 . The lower row of figures corresponds to the case where the policy maker responds
instead to current inflation, π̂ t . The horizontal and vertical axes indicate a range of values
for γ and ψ, respectively. The grey areas correspond to the parameter values where one
or both of λi , i = 1, 2 are less than unity in absolute value. Technically, the steady state
equilibrium of the economy is said to be ‘indeterminate’ for parameterizations in the grey
area. Intuitively, the grey area corresponds to parameterizations of our economy in which
the Taylor principle does not stabilize inflation expectations. The white areas in the fig-
ures correspond to parameterizations where implementing the Taylor principle successfully
stabilizes the economy.
     Consider the upper two left sets of graphs in Figure 1 first. Note that in each case, ψ = 0
and γ = 1 are points in the white area, consistent with the discussion above. However, a
very small increase in the value of ψ puts the model into the grey area. Moreover, this is
true regardless of the value of γ. For these parameterizations the aggressive response of the
interest rate to higher inflation expectations only produces the higher inflation that people
anticipate. We can see in the right two figures of the first row, that rx > 0 greatly reduces
the extent of the grey area. Still, for γ = 0.5 and ψ near unity the model is in the grey area
and implementing the Taylor principle would be counterproductive.
     Now consider the bottom row of graphs. Note that in all cases, if γ = 1 then the model is
always in the determinacy region. That is, for the economy to be vulnerable to self-fulfilling
expectations, it must not only be that there is a substantial working capital channel, but
it must also be that materials are a substantial fraction of gross output. The second graph
from the left shows that with γ = 0.5, φ = 0.1 and ψ above roughly 0.6, the model is in
the grey area. When φ is substantially higher, the first graph from the left indicates that
the grey area is smaller. Note that with rx > 0, the grey area has almost shrunk to zero,
according to the two last graphs.
     We conclude from this analysis that in the presence of a working capital channel, sharply
raising the interest rate in response to higher inflation could actually be counterproductive.
This is more likely to be the case when the share of materials inputs in gross output is
high. When this is so, one cannot rely exclusively on the Taylor principle to ensure stable
inflation and output performance. In the example, responding strongly to the output gap
could restore stability. However, in practice the output gap is hard to measure.17 At best, the
policy authority can respond to variables that are correlated with the output gap. Studying
 17
      For further discussion of this point, see sections 3.3 and 3.4 below.


                                                        24
the implications for determinacy of responding to such variables would be an interesting
project, but would take us beyond the scope of this paper. Still, the discussion illustrates
how DSGE models can be useful for thinking about important monetary policy questions.

3.2. Monetary Policy and Ineﬃcient Booms

In recent years, there has been extensive discussion about the interaction of monetary policy
and economic volatility, in particular, asset price volatility. Prior to the recent financial
turmoil, a consensus had developed that monetary policy should not actively seek to stabilize
asset prices. The view was that in any case, a serious commitment to inflation targeting -
one that implements the Taylor principle - would stabilize asset markets automatically.18
The idea is that an asset price boom is basically a demand boom, the presumption being
that the boom is driven by optimism about the future, and not primarily by current actual
developments. A boom that is driven by demand should - according to the conventional
wisdom - raise production costs and, hence, inflation. The monetary authority that reacts
vigorously to inflation then automatically raises interest rates and helps to stabilize asset
prices.
    When this scenario is evaluated in the classic New Keynesian model, we find that the
boom is not necessarily associated with a rise in prices. In fact, if the optimism about the
future concerns the expectations about cost saving new technologies, forward-looking price
setters may actually reduce their prices. This is the finding of Christiano, Ilut, Motto and
Rostagno (2007), which we briefly summarize here.
    To capture the notion of optimism about the future, suppose that the time series repre-
sentation of the log-level of technology is as follows:

                                log zt = ρz log zt−1 + ut , ut = εt + ξ t−1 ,                 (3.7)

so that the steady state of zt is unity. In (3.7), ut is an iid shock, uncorrelated with past
log zt . The innovation in technology growth, ut , is the sum of two orthogonal processes, εt
and ξ t−1 . The time subscript on these two variables represents the date when they are known
to private agents. Thus, at time t − 1 agents become aware of a component of ut , namely
ξ t−1 . At time t they learn the rest, εt . For example, the initial ‘news’ about ut , ξ t−1 , could
in principle be entirely false, as would be the case when εt = −ξ t−1 .
     Substituting (3.7) into (3.1):

                            R̂t∗ = Et [log zt+1 − log zt ] = (ρz − 1) log zt + ξ t ,          (3.8)
  18
       See Bernanke and Gertler (2000).




                                                      25
where γ = 1 since we now consider the classic New Keynesian model.19 Our system of
equilibrium conditions is (3.8) with (3.2), (3.3) and (3.4). We set ψ = 0 (i.e., no working
capital channel) and rx = 0. We adopt the following parameter values:

                         β = 0.99, φ = 1, rx = 0, rπ = 1.5, ρz = 0.9, ξ p = 0.75.

      We perform a simulation in which news arrives in period t that technology will jump one
percent in period t + 1, i.e., ξ t = 0.01. The value of εt is set to zero. We find that hours
worked in period t increases by 1 percent. This rise is entirely ineﬃcient because in the first
best equilibrium hours does not respond at all to a technology shock, whether it occurs in
the present or it is expected to occur in the future (see (2.28)). Interestingly, inflation falls in
period t by 10 basis points, at an annual rate.20 Current marginal cost does rise (see (2.34)),
but current inflation nevertheless falls because of the fall in expected future marginal costs.
      The eﬃcient monetary policy sets R̂t = R̂t∗ which, according to (3.8), means the interest
rate should rise when a positive signal about the economy occurs. A policy that applies the
Taylor principle in this example moves policy in exactly the wrong direction in response to
ξ t . By responding to the fall in inflation, policy not only does not raise the interest rate
- as it should - but it actually reduces the interest rate in response to the fall in inflation.
By reducing the interest rate in the period of a positive signal about the future, policy over
stimulates the economy and thereby creates excessive volatility.
      So, the classic New Keynesian model can be used to challenge the conventional wisdom
that an inflation-fighting central bank automatically moderates economic volatility. But, is
this just an abstract example without any relevance? In fact, the typical boom-bust episode
is characterized by low or falling inflation (see Adalid and Detken (2007)). For example,
during the US booms of the 1920s and the 1980s and 1990s, inflation was low. This fact
turns the conventional wisdom on its head and leads to a conclusion that matches that of
our numerical example: an inflation-fighting central bank amplifies boom/bust episodes.
      A full evaluation of the ideas in this subsection requires a more elaborate model, prefer-
ably one with financial variables such as the stock market. In this way, one could assess the
impact on a broader set of variables in boom/bust episodes. In addition, one could evaluate
  19
       To see why we replaced μ̂z,t+1 in (3.1) by log zt+1 − log zt , note first
                                                       μz,t − μz
                                             μ̂z,t =             = μz,t − 1,
                                                           μz
because in steady state μz ≡ zt /zt−1 = 1/1 = 1. Then,

                                                 1 + μ̂z,t = μz,t .
                                                     ¡         ¢
Take the log of both sides and note, log μz,t = log 1 + μ̂z,t ' μ̂z,t . But, log μz,t = log zt − log zt−1 .
  20
     Because inflation is zero in steady state, π̂t = π t − 1. This was converted to annualized basis points by
multiplying by 40,000.

                                                            26
what other variables the monetary authority might look at in order to avoid contributing
to the type of volatility described in this example. We presume that it is not helpful to
simply say that the monetary authority should set R̂t = R̂t∗ , because in practice this may
require more information than is actually available. A more fruitful approach may be to find
variables that are correlated with R̂t∗ , so that these may be included in the monetary policy
rule. For further discussion of these issues, see Christiano, Ilut, Motto and Rostagno (2007).

3.3. Using Unemployment to Estimate the Output Gap

Here, we investigate the use of DSGE models to estimate the output gap as a latent variable.
We explore the usefulness of including data on the rate of unemployment in this exercise.
The first subsection describes a scalar statistic for characterizing the information content
of the unemployment rate for the output gap. The second subsection describes the model
used in the analysis. As in the previous subsection, we work with a version of the classic
New Keynesian model. In particular, we assume intermediate good producers do not use
materials inputs or working capital.21 We introduce unemployment into the model following
the approach in CTW.
    The third subsection below describes how we use data to assign values to the model
parameters. This section may be of independent interest because it shows how a moment
matching procedure like the one proposed in Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) can be
recast in Bayesian terms. The fourth subsection presents our substantive results. Based on
our simple estimated model with unemployment, we find that including unemployment has
a substantial impact on our estimate of the output gap for the US economy. We summarize
our findings at end of this section, where we also indicate several caveats to the analysis.

3.3.1. A Measure of the Information Content of Unemployment

As a benchmark, we compute the projection of the output gap on present, future and past
observations on output growth:
                                    X∞
                               xt =      hj ∆yt−j + εyt ,                         (3.9)
                                                 j=−∞

where hj is a scalar for each j and        εyt
                                      is uncorrelated with ∆yt−s for all s.22 The projection
that also involves unemployment can be expressed as follows:
                                 X
                                 ∞              X∞
                           xt =     hj ∆yt−j +      huj ut−j + εy,u
                                                                t .
                                     j=−∞                    j=−∞

  21
     That is, we set γ = 1 and ψ = 0.
  22
     In practice only a finite amount of data is available. As a result, the projection involves a finite number
of lags where the number of lags varies with t. The Kalman smoother solves the projection problem in this
case.

                                                        27
Here, huj is a scalar for each j and εy,u
                                      t   is uncorrelated with ∆yt−s , ut−s for all s. We define
the information content of unemployment for the output gap by the ratio,
                                                                    2
                                             two-sided     E (εy,u
                                                               t )
                                         r               ≡            .
                                                           E (εyt )2
The lower the ratio, the greater the information in unemployment for the gap. We also
compute the analogous variance ratio, rone-sided , corresponding to the one-sided projection
involving only current and past observations on the explanatory variables.23 The one-sided
projection is the one that is relevant to assess the information content of unemployment
for policy makers working in real time. Our measure of information does not incorporate
sampling uncertainty in parameters. The variances used to construct rtwo-sided and rone-sided
assume the parameters are known with certainty and that the only uncertainty stems from
the fact that the gap cannot be constructed using the data available to the econometrician.

3.3.2. The CTW Model of Unemployment

We convert the usual three equation log-linear representation of the New Keynesian model
into a model of unemployment by adding one equation. This reduced form log-linear system
is derived from explicit microeconomic foundations in CTW. That paper also shows how our
model of unemployment can be integrated into a medium-sized DSGE model such as the one
in section 4.
    In the CTW model, finding a job requires exerting eﬀort. Because eﬀort only increases
the probability of finding a job, not everyone who looks for a job actually finds one. The
unemployed are people who look for a job without success. The unemployment rate is the
number unemployed, expressed as fraction of the labor force. As in the oﬃcial definition,
the labor force is the number of people employed plus the number unemployed.
    Since eﬀort is unobserved and privately costly, perfect insurance against idiosyncratic
labor market outcomes is not possible. As a result, the unemployed are worse oﬀ than the
employed. In this way, the model captures a key reason that policymakers care about unem-
ployment: a rise in unemployment imposes a direct welfare cost on the families involved. In
this respect, our model diﬀers from other work that integrates unemployment into monetary
DSGE models.24 In those models, individuals have perfect insurance against labor market
outcomes.
  23
     In the analysis below, we compute the projections in two ways. When we apply the filter to the data to
extract a time series of xt , we use the Kalman smoother. To compute the weights in the infinite projection
problem, we use standard spectral methods described in, for example, Sargent (1979, chapter 11). The
spectral weights can also be computed by numerical diﬀerentiation of the output of the Kalman smoother
with respect to the input data. We verified that the two methods produce the same results as long as the
number of observatoins is large and t lies in the middle of the data set.
  24
     For a long list of references, see Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2010a).

                                                         28
   We now describe the shocks and the linearized equilibrium conditions of the model. In
previous sections of this paper, the eﬃcient level of hours worked is constant, and so the
output gap can be expressed simply as the deviation of the number of people working from
that constant (see (2.33)). In this section, the eﬃcient number of people working is stochastic.
We denote the deviation of this number from steady state by h∗t . We continue to assume that
the steady state of our economy is eﬃcient, so that Ĥt and h∗t represent percent deviations
from the same steady state values. The output gap is now:

                                              xt = Ĥt − h∗t .

The object, h∗t , is driven by disturbances to the disutility of work, as as well as by disturbances
to the technology that converts household eﬀort into a probability of finding a job. These
various disturbances to the eﬃcient level of employment cannot be disentangled using the
data we assume is available to the econometrician. We refer to h∗t as a labor supply shock.
We hope that this label does not generate confusion. In our context this shock summarizes a
broader set of disturbances than simply the one that shifts the disutility of labor. We adopt
the following time series representation for the labor supply shock:
                                                                  ∗
                                            h∗t = λh∗t−1 + εht ,                                      (3.10)
         ∗                                                                 ¡ ∗ ¢2
where εht is a zero mean, iid process uncorrelated with h∗t−s , s > 0 and E εht   = σ 2h∗ . In
the version of the CTW model studied here, h∗t is orthogonal to all the other shocks.
   We assume the technology shock is a logarithmic random walk:

                                               ∆ log zt = εzt ,                                       (3.11)

where ∆ denotes the first diﬀerence operator. The object, εzt , is a mean-zero, iid disturbance
that is not correlated with log zt−s , s > 0. We denote its variance by E (εzt )2 = σ 2z . The
empirical rationale for the random walk assumption is discussed in section 4.1 below.25
   According to CTW, the interest rate in the first-best equilibrium is given by:
                                            £                        ¤
                                   R̂t∗ = Et ∆ log zt+1 + h∗t+1 − h∗t .                               (3.12)

Log consumption in the first best equilibrium is (apart from a constant term) the sum of
log zt and h∗t . So, according to (3.12), R̂t∗ corresponds to the anticipated growth rate of (log)
  25
     Another way to assess the empirical basis for the random walk assumption exploits the simple model’s
implication that the technology shock can be measured using labor productivity. One measure of labor
productivity is given by the ratio of real US GDP to a measure of total hours. The first order autocorrelation
of the quarterly logarithmic growth rate of this variable for the period, 1951Q1 to 2008Q4 is −0.02. The same
first order autocorrelation is 0.02 when calculated using output per hour for the nonfarm business sector.
These results are consistent with our random walk assumption.


                                                     29
consumption. This reflects the CTW assumption that utility is additively separable and
logarithmic in consumption. We also suppose there is a disturbance, μt , that enters the
Phillips curve as follows:
                               π̂ t = κp xt + βEt π̂ t+1 + μt ,                   (3.13)
where κp > 0. Here, κp denotes the slope of the Phillips curve in terms of the output gap.
This is not to be confused with κp in (3.2) and (2.35), which is the slope of the Phillips curve
in terms of marginal cost. Our representation of the Phillips curve shock is given by

                                       μt = χμt−1 + εμt ,                                (3.14)

where E (εμt )2 = σ 2μ . The intertemporal equation, (3.3), is unchanged from before. Finally,
we suppose that there is an iid disturbance, Mt , that enters the monetary policy rule in the
following way:
                          R̂t = ρR R̂t−1 + (1 − ρR ) [rπ Et π̂ t+1 + rx xt ] + Mt ,    (3.15)
          ¡ ¢2
where E εM  t   = σ 2M . The four exogenous shocks in the model are orthogonal to each other
at all leads and lags.
    Let the unemployment gap, ugt , denote the deviation between actual unemployment and
eﬃcient unemployment, when both are expressed in percent deviation from their (common)
nonstochastic steady state. The CTW model implies

                                     ugt = −κg xt , κg > 0,                              (3.16)

where κg is a function of underlying structural parameters. The previous expression resem-
bles ‘Okun’s law’. If actual unemployment is one percentage point higher than its eﬃcient
level, then output is 1/κg percent below its eﬃcient level. Discussions of Okun’s law often
suppose that 1/κg lies in a range of 2 to 3 (see, e.g., Abel and Bernanke (2005)). The
unemployment rate in the eﬃcient equilibrium, u∗t , has the following representation:

                                      u∗t = −ωh∗t , ω > 0.

In the CTW model, the factors that increase labor supply also increase the intensity of job
search, and this is the reason unemployment in the eﬃcient equilibrium falls. The harder
people look for a job, the sooner they find what they are looking for. According to the
previous two equations, the actual unemployment rate, ut , satisfies the following equation:

                                     ut = − [κg xt + ωh∗t ] .                            (3.17)

Absent the presence of the labor supply shock, the eﬃcient level of unemployment would
be constant and the actual unemployment rate would represent a direct observation on the
output gap.

                                               30
    In sum, the log-linearized equations of the CTW model consist of the usual three equa-
tions of the standard New Keynesian model, (3.3), (3.13) and (3.15), plus an equation that
characterizes unemployment, (3.17). In addition, there are the equations that characterize
the laws of motion of the exogenous shocks and of the eﬃcient rate of interest.

3.3.3. Limited Information Bayesian Inference

To investigate the quantitative implications of the model, we must assign values to its para-
meters. We set values of the economic parameters of the model,

                                            κp , ω, κg , φπ , φx , ρR , β,

as indicated in Table 1a. Let θ denote the 6 × 1 column vector consisting of the parameters
governing the stochastic processes:

                                         θ = (λ, χ, σz , σ h∗ , σ M , σ μ )0 .                               (3.18)

We use data on output growth and unemployment to select values for the elements of θ.26
We do this using a version of the limited information Bayesian procedure described in Kim
(2002) and in section 5.2 below.27 Let γ denote the 11 × 1 column vector of the j th order
autocovariance matrix of output growth and unemployment, for j = 0, 1, 2. Let γ̂ denote the
corresponding sample estimate based on T = 232 quarterly observations, 1951Q1-2008Q4.
Hansen (1982)’s generalized method of moments analysis (GMM) establishes that for suﬃ-
ciently large T, γ̂ is a realization from a Normal distribution with mean equal to the true
value of the second moments, γ 0 , and variance, V /T. The results also hold when V is replaced
by a consistent sample estimate, V̂ .28 Our model provides a mapping from θ to γ, which we
  26
      The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for people 16 years and older was obtained from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics and has mnemonic LNS14000000. We use standard real per capita GDP data, as described
in section A of the technical appendix.
   27
      The procedure is the Bayesian analog of the moment matching estimation procedure described in Chris-
tiano and Eichenbaum (1992).
   28
      We compute V̂ as follows. Let θ0 denote the true, but unknown, values¡ of the¢ model parameters.
Let h (γ, wt ) denote the 11 × 1 GMM error vector having the property, Eh γ 0 , wt = 0, where wt =
¡            ¢0                             P                                                 √ ¡        ¢
   ∆yt ut . Let gT (γ) ≡ (1/T ) t h (γ, wt ) and define γ̂ by gT (γ̂) = 0. Then, T γ̂ − γ 0 converges
                                                                  −1
in distribution as T¡ → ∞¢to N (0, V ) . Here, V = (D0 ) SD−1 , where S denotes the spectral density at
frequency zero of h γ , wt , and D = limT →∞ ∂gT (γ) /∂γ 0 , where the derivative is evaluated at γ = γ̂ (for
                           0                0

a discussion of these convergence results of GMM see, for example, Hamilton 1994.) Our estimator of V
                    ³ ´−1                                                   ³         ´           ³          ´
is given by V̂ = D̂0            Ŝ D̂−1 . We estimate Ŝ by Γ̂0 + (1 − 1/3) Γ̂1 + Γ̂01 + (1 − 2/3) Γ̂2 + Γ̂02 , where
       £P                             0¤
Γ̂j =     t h (γ̂, wt ) h (γ̂, wt−j ) / (T − j) , j = 0, 1, 2. Also, D̂ is D with unknown true parameters replaced
by consistent estimates. An alternative version of our limited information Bayesian strategy, which we did
not explore, works with V (θ) , which is the V matrix constructed with the D and S matrices implied by the
model when its parameter values are given by θ.



                                                         31
denote by γ (θ) . Hansen’s result suggests that, for suﬃciently large T, the likelihood of γ̂
conditional on θ and V̂ is given by the following multivariate Normal distribution:29
          Ã         !           ¯ ¯− 1     ½                               ¾
                           1 ¯¯ V̂ ¯¯
                                      2
                 V̂                            T           0 −1
        p γ̂|θ;       =         ¯ ¯ exp − (γ̂ − γ (θ)) V̂ (γ̂ − γ (θ)) .              (3.19)
                 T      (2π)6/2 ¯ T ¯          2

Given a set of priors for θ, p (θ) , the posterior distribution of θ conditional on γ̂ and V̂ is,
for suﬃciently large T ,                          ³         ´
                                  Ã         !            V̂
                                         V̂     p  γ̂|θ; T
                                                              p (θ)
                                p θ|γ̂;       =       ³       ´     .
                                         T          p γ̂; V̂         T
                          ³       ´
The marginal density, p γ̂; V̂ /T , as well as the marginal posterior distribution of indi-
vidual elements of θ can be computed using a standard random walk metropolis algorithm
or by using the Laplace approximation.30 In the present application, we use the Laplace
approximation. Our moment-matching Bayesian approach has several attractive features.
First, it has the advantage of transparency because it focuses on a small number of features
of the data. Second, it does not require the assumpion that the underlying data are real-
izations from a Normal distribution, as is the case in conventional Bayesian analyses.31 The
Normality in (3.19) depends on the validity of the central limit theorem, not on Normality
of the underlying data. Third, the method has the advantage of computational speed. The
matrix inversion and log determinant in (3.19) need only be computed once. In addition,
evaluating a quadratic form like the one in (3.19) is computationally very eﬃcient. These
  29
      We performed a small Monte Carlo experiment to investigate whether Hansen’s asymptotic results
are likely to be a good approximation with a sample size, T = 232. The results of the experiment make us
cautiously optimistic. Our Monte Carlo study used the classic New Keynesian model without unemployment
(i.e., equations (3.3), (3.11), (3.12) with h∗t ≡ 0, (3.13), (3.14) and (3.15)). With one exception, we set the
relevant economic parameters as in Table 1a. The exception is ρR , which we set to zero. In addition,
the parameters in θ were set as in the posterior mode for the partial information procedure in Table 1b.
With this parameterization, the model implies (after rounding) σ y = 0.021, ρ1 = ρ2 = −0.039. Here,
          h            i1/2
σ y ≡ E (∆yt )2             , ρi ≡ E (∆yt ∆yt−i ) /σ 2y , i = 1, 2. We then simulated 10,000 data sets, each with
T = 232 artificial observations on output growth, ∆yt . The mean, across simulated samples, of estimates of
σ y , ρ1 , ρ2 , is, respectively, 0.021, -0.039, and -0.033. Thus, the results are consistent with the notion that our
second moment estimator is essentially unbiased. To investigate the accuracy of Hansen’s Normality result,
we examined the coverage of 80 confidence intervals computed in the usual way (i.e., the point estimate plus
and minus 1.28 times the corresponding sample standard deviation computed in exactly the way specified
in the previous footnote). In the case of σ y , ρ1 , ρ2 the 80 confidence interval excluded the true values of the
parameters 22.35, 21.87 and 21.39 percent of the time, respectively. We found these to be reasonably close
to the 20 percent numbers suggested by the asymptotic theory. Related to this, we found little bias in our
estimator of the sample standard deviation estimator. In particular, the actual standard deviation of the
estimator of σ y , ρ1 , ρ2 across the 10,000 samples is 0.00098, 0.064, 0.065. The mean of the corresponding
sample estimates is 0.00095, 0.062, 0.064, respectively. Evidently, the estimator of the sampling standard
deviation is roughly unbiased.
   30
      For additional discussion of the Laplace approximation, see section 5.4 below.
   31
      Failure of Normality in aggregate macroeconomic data is discussed in Christiano (2007).

                                                         32
computational advantages are likely to be important when searching for the mode of the
posterior distribution. Moreover, the advantages may be overwhelmingly important when
computing the whole posterior distribution using a standard random walk Metropolis al-
gorithm. In this case, (3.19) must be evaluated on the order of hundreds of thousands of
times.
     Because our econometric method may be of independent interest, we compare the results
obtained using it with results based on a conventional full information Bayesian approach.
In particular, let Y denote the data on unemployment and output growth used to compute
γ̂ for our limited information Bayesian procedure. In this case, the posterior distribution of
θ given Y is:
                                              p (Y |θ) p (θ)
                                   p (θ|Y ) =                ,
                                                  p (Y )
where p (Y |θ) is the Normal likelihood function and p (Y ) is the marginal density of the data.
The priors, p (θ) , used in the two econometric procedures are the same and they are listed
in Table 1b.
    Table 1b reports posterior modes and posterior standard deviations for the parameters,
θ. Note how similar the results are between the full and limited information methods. The
one diﬀerence has to do with λ, the autoregressive parameter for the labor supply shock.
The posterior mode for this parameter is somewhat sensitive to which econometric method
is used. The standard deviation of the posterior mode of λ is more sensitive to the method
used. In all but one case, there appears to be substantial information in the data about
the parameters, as measured by the reduction in standard deviation from prior to posterior.
The exception is λ. Under the limited information procedure, there is little information in
the data about this parameter.
    We analyze the properties of the model at the mode of the posteriors of θ. Because the
Table 1b results are so similar between limited and full information methods, the correspond-
ing model properties are also essentially the same. As a result, we only report properties
based on the posterior mode implied by the limited information procedure.
    Table 1c reports γ̂, the empirical second moments underlying the limited information
estimator, as well as the corresponding second moments implied by the model. The empirical
and model moments are reasonably close. The variance decomposition implied by the model
is reported in Table 1d. Most of the variance in output is due to technology shocks and to the
disturbance in the Phillips curve. Note that technology shocks have no impact on any of the
other variables. This reflects that with our policy rule, the economy’s response to a random
walk technology shock is eﬃcient and involves no response in the interest rate, inflation or
any labor market variable. The economics of this result is discussed in section 3.4 below.
In the case of unemployment, the disturbance to the Phillips curve is the principle source


                                              33
of fluctuations. Labor supply shocks turn out to be relatively unimportant as a source of
fluctuations. The implications of the latter finding for our results are discussed below.

3.3.4. Estimating the Output Gap Using the CTW Model

The implications of our model for the information in the unemployment rate for the output
gap is displayed in Table 1e. The row called ‘posterior mode’ reports

                                 rtwo-sided = 0.11 and rone-sided = 0.09.

Thus, in the case of the two-sided projection, the variance of the projection error in the
output gap is reduced by 89 percent when the unemployment rate is included in the data
used to estimate the output gap. The 95 percent confidence interval for the percent output
gap is the point estimate plus and minus 4.4 percent when the estimate is based only on the
output growth data. That interval shrinks by over 60 percent, to plus and minus 1.5 percent
with the introduction of unemployment.32 Figure 2 displays observations 475 to 525 in a
simulation of 1,000 observations from our model. The figure shows the actual gap as well as
estimates based information sets that include only output growth and output growth plus
unemployment. In addition, we display 95 percent confidence tunnels corresponding to the
two information sets.33 Note how much wider the tunnel is for estimates based on output
growth alone.
    Our optimal linear estimator of the output gap based on output growth alone (see (3.9))
is directly comparable to the HP filter as an estimator of the gap.34 The latter is also based
on output data alone. The information in Figure 3 allows us to compare these two filters.
The 1,1 panel shows the filter weights as they apply to the level of output, yt .35 Note how
similar the pattern of weights is, though they certainly are not identical. The filter weights
for the HP filter are known to be exactly symmetric. This is not a property of the optimal
weights. However, the 1,1 panel of Figure 3 shows that the optimal filter weights are very
  32
      These observations are based on the following calculations: 1.5 = 0.0074 × 1.96 × 100 and 4.4 = 0.0226 ×
1.96 × 100 using the information in Table 1e. Here, 1.96 is the 2.5 percent critical value for the standard
Normal distribution.
   33
      The confidence tunnels are constructed by adding and subtracting 1.96 times the standard deviation of
the projection error standard deviation implied by the Kalman smoother to the smoothed estimates of the
gap. The assumption of Normality implicit in multiplying by 1.96 is justified here because the disturbances
in the underlying simulation are drawn from a Normal distribution.
   34
      We set the smoothing parameter in the HP filter to 1600.
   35
      We computed the filter weights for the HP filter as well as for (3.9) by expressing the filters in the
frequency domain and applying the inverse Fourier transform. In the case of (3.9), we compute the h̃j ’s in
                                      ∞
                                      X                         ∞
                                                                X
                               xt =          hj ∆yt−j + εyt =          h̃j yt−j + εyt .
                                      j=−∞                      j=−∞

We use the result in King and Rebelo (1993) to express the HP filter in the frequency domain.

                                                       34
nearly symmetric. So, while the phase angle of the HP filter is exactly zero, the phase
angle of the optimal filter implied by our model is nearly zero. The 1,2 panel in Figure 3
compares the gain of the two filters over a subset of frequencies that includes the business
cycle frequencies, whose boundaries are indicated in the figure by stars. Evidently, both are
approximately high pass filters. However, the optimal filter lets through lower frequency
components of the output data and also slightly attenuates the higher frequencies. The
1,3 panel displays the cross correlations of the actual output gap with the HP and optimal
filters, respectively. This was done in a sample of 1,000 artificial observations on output
simulated from our model (the optimal filter in a finite sample of data is obtained using the
Kalman smoother). Note that both estimates are positively correlated with the actual gap.
Of course, the gap is more highly correlated with the optimal estimate of that gap than with
the HP filter estimate. The bottom panel of Figure 3 displays our artificial data sample. We
can see directly how similar the two filters are. However, note that there is a substantial low
frequency component in the actual gap and this low frequency component is better tracked
by the optimal filter. This is consistent with the result in the 1,2 panel, which indicates that
the optimal filter allows lower frequency components of output to pass through.
     Next, we applied the same statistical procedure to the US data that we used to estimate
the output gap in the artificial data. The results are displayed in Figure 4. That figure
displays HP filtered, log, real, per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP), as well as the
two-sided estimate of the output gap when unemployment is and is not included in the data
set used in the projections.36 We have not included confidence tunnels, to avoid further
cluttering the diagram. In addition, the grey areas in the figure brackets the start and
end date of recessions, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
Several observations are worth making about the results in Figure 4. First, the estimated
output gap is always relatively low in a neighborhood of NBER recessions. Second, the
gap shows a tendency to begin falling before the onset of an NBER recession. This is to be
expected. The NBER typically dates the start of a recession by the first quarter in which the
economy undergoes two quarters of negative growth. Given that growth in the US economy
is positive on average, the start date of an NBER recession occurs after economic activity
has already been winding down for at least a few quarters. This also explains why the HP
filter estimate of the gap also typically starts to fall one or two quarters before an NBER
recession. Third, consistent with the results in the previous paragraph, the gap estimates
based on the HP filter and our estimate based on output data alone produce very similar
results. Fourth, the inclusion of unemployment in the data used to estimate the output gap
has a quantitatively large impact on the results. The estimated gap is substantially more
volatile when unemployment is used and it is also more volatile than the HP filter gap.
 36
      Our calculations for Figure 4 are based on the Kalman smoother.


                                                    35
That the incorporation of unemployment has a big impact is perhaps not surprising, given
the posterior mode of our parameters, which implies that labor supply shocks are relatively
unimportant. As a result, the eﬃcient unemployment rate, u∗t , is not very volatile and the
actual unemployment rate is a good indicator of the output gap (see (3.16)).
    We gain additional insight into our measures of the gap by examining the implied es-
timates of potential output. These are presented in Figure 5. That figure displays actual
output, as well as our measures of potential output based on using just output and using
output and unemployment. Not surprisingly, in view of the results in Figure 4, the estimate
of potential that uses unemployment is the smoother one of the two. Our results are similar
to the results presented by Justiniano and Primiceri (2008), who also conclude that potential
output is smooth.37
    Our model is well suited to shed light on the question, “Under what circumstances
can we expect unemployment to contain useful information about the output gap?” The
general answer is that if the eﬃcient level of unemployment is constant, then the actual
unemployment rate is highly informative because in this case it represents a direct observation
on the output gap. This is documented in three ways in Table 1e. First, we consider the case
where the total variance in the labor supply shock, h∗t , is kept constant, but is reallocated
into the very low frequencies. A motivation for this is the finding in Christiano (1988, pp.
266-268) that a low frequency labor supply shock is required to accommodate the behavior
of aggregate hours worked. We set λ = 0.99999 and adjust σ 2h∗ so that the variance of h∗t is
equal to what is implied by the model at the posterior mode. In this case, the eﬃcient level
of employment is a variable that evolves slowly over time.38 As a result, the eﬃcient rate of
unemployment itself is slow-moving, so that most of the short-term fluctuations in the actual
unemployment rate correspond to movements in the unemployment gap, ugt , and, hence in
the output gap (recall (3.16).) Consistent with this intuition, Table 1e indicates that the
increase in λ causes rtwo-sided and rone-sided to fall to 0.09 and 0.07, respectively. Similarly,
Table 1e also shows that if we reduce the magnitude of ω or of the variance of the labor
supply shock itself, then the use of unemployment data essentially removes all uncertainty
about the output gap. Finally, the table also shows what happens when we increase the
importance of the labor supply shock. In particular, we increased the innovation variance in
h∗t by a factor of 4, from 0.24 percent to 1.0 percent. The result of this change on the model
is that labor supply shocks now account for 10 percent of the variance of output growth and
41 percent of the variance of unemployment. With the eﬃcient level of unemployment more
volatile, we can expect that the value of the unemployment rate for estimating the output
  37
     Estimates of potential GDP reported in the literature are often more volatile than what see find. See, for
example, Walsh (2005)’s discussion of Levin, Onatski, Williams and Williams (2005). See also Kiley (2010)
and the sources he cites.
  38
     This capures the view that the evolution of h∗t represents demographic and other slowly-moving factors.

                                                      36
gap is reduced. Interestingly, according to Table 1e, unemployment is still very informative
for the output gap. Despite the relatively high volatility in the labor supply shock, the
unemployment rate still reduces the variance of the prediction error for the output gap by
over 45 percent.
     In sum, the results reported here suggest the possibility that the unemployment rate
might be very useful for estimating the output gap. We find that this is likely to be par-
ticularly true if the eﬃcient level of unemployment evolves slowly over time. In addition,
we found in our estimated model that the HP filter estimate of the gap closely resembles
the estimate of the gap that is optimal conditional on our model. All these observations
ought to be viewed as suggestive at best. Because part of our objective here is pedagogic,
the observations were made in a very simple setting. It would be interesting to investigate
whether they are also true in more complicated environments with more shocks, in which
more data are available to the econometrician. The next subsection shows that the optimal
filter for extracting the output gap is very sensitive to the details of the underlying model.
As a consequence, the similarity between the HP filter and the optimal filter found in this
section ought to only be treated as suggestive. A final assessment of the relationship between
the two filters requires additional experience with a variety of models.

3.4. Using HP Filtered Output to Estimate the Output Gap

The previous subsection displayed a model environment with the property that the HP filter
is nearly optimal as a device for estimating the output gap. This section shows that the
accuracy of the HP filter for extracting the output gap is very sensitive to the details about
the underlying model. We demonstrate this point in a simple version of the classic New
Keynesian model (i.e., γ = 1, ψ = 0) in which there is only one shock, the technology shock.
We show that the HP filter may be positively or negatively correlated with the true output
gap, depending on the time series properties of the shock. When the shock triggers strong
wealth eﬀects, then output overreacts to the shock, relative to the eﬃcient equilibrium. In
this case, the HP filtered estimate of the gap is positively correlated with the true output
gap. If the shock triggers only a weak wealth eﬀect, that correlation is negative.
    Our analysis requires a careful review of the economics of the response of employment
and output to a technology shock. This is a topic that is of independent interest because it
has attracted widespread attention, primarily in response to the provocative paper by Gali
(1999).
    The linearized equilibrium conditions of the model are given by (3.1)-(3.4), with ψ = 0,




                                             37
γ = 1. We consider the following two laws of motion for technology:

                       ∆ log zt = ρz ∆ log zt−1 + εzt ‘AR(1) in growth rate’
                          log zt = ρz log zt−1 + εzt ‘AR(1) in levels’.

These two laws of motion have the same implication for what happens to zt in the period
of a positive realization of εzt . But, they diﬀer sharply in their implications for the eventual
impact of a shock on zt . In the AR(1) in growth rate, a 0.01 shock in εzt drives up zt by 1
percent, but creates the expectation that zt will eventually rise by 1/(1 − ρz ) percent. In
the AR(1) in levels representation, a jump in zt is associated with the expectation that zt
will be lower in later periods. We adopt the following parameterization:

               β = 0.99, ρz = 0.5, ρR = 0, rx = 0.2, rπ = 1.5, φ = 0.2, ξ p = 0.75.

     In the case of the AR(1) in growth rate, a one percent shock up in technology is followed
by additional increases, with technology eventually settling at a level that is permanently
higher by 2 percent (see the 2,1 panel in Figure 6). The response of the eﬃcient level of con-
sumption coincides with the response of the technology shock. Households in this economy
experience a big rise in wealth in the moment of the shock. The motive to smooth consump-
tion intertemporally makes them want to set their consumption to its permanently higher
level right away. The rise in the rate of interest in the eﬃcient equilibrium is designed to re-
strain this potential surge in consumption. This is why it is that in the eﬃcient equilibrium,
output (see the 2,2 panel of the figure) rises by the same amount as the technology shock,
while employment remains unchanged. Now consider the actual equilibrium. According to
the 1,3 panel of the figure, the interest rate rule generates an ineﬃciently small rise in the
rate of interest. As a result, monetary policy fails to fully reign in the surge in consumption
demand triggered by the shock. Employment rises and so output itself rises by more than the
technology shock. The increase in employment leads to an increase in costs and, therefore,
inflation. The output gap responds positively to the shock and so the potential output (i.e.,
the eﬃcient level of output) is less volatile than the actual level. We can expect that the
output gap estimated by the HP filter, which estimates potential output smoothing actual
output, will at least be positively correlated with the true output gap.
     We simulated a large number of artificial observations using the model and we then HP
filtered the output data.39 Figure 7a displays actual, potential and HP smoothed output.
We can see that the HP filter substantially oversmooths the data. However, consistent with
the presumption implicit in the HP filter, the actual level of output is (somewhat) more
volatile than the corresponding eﬃcient level. Figure 7b displays the actual gap and the
 39
      We used the usual smoothing parameter value for quarterly data, 1,600.


                                                    38
HP-estimated gap. Note that they are positively correlated, though the HP filtered gap is
too volatile.
    Now consider the AR(1) in levels specification of technology. The dynamic response of
technology to a one percent disturbance in εzt is displayed in the 2,1 panel of Figure 8. The
state of technology is high in the period of the shock, compared to its level anticipated
for later periods. As before, the eﬃcient level of consumption mirrors the time path of the
technology shock. In the eﬃcient equilibrium, agents expect lower future consumption and so
intertemporal smoothing motivates them to cut current consumption relative to its eﬃcient
level. The drop in the interest rate in the eﬃcient equilibrium is designed to resist this relative
weakness in consumption (see the 1,3 panel). Put diﬀerently, a sharp drop in the interest rate
is needed in order to ensure that demand expands by enough to keep employment unchanged
in the face of the technology improvement. In the actual equilibrium, the monetary policy
rule cuts the interest rate less aggressively than in the eﬃcient equilibrium. The relatively
small drop in the interest rate fails to reverse the weakness in demand. As a result, the
response of output is relatively weak and employment falls. The fall in employment is
associated with a fall in marginal production costs and this explains why inflation falls in
response to the technology shock. Figure 9a displays the implications of the AR(1) in levels
specification of technology for the HP filter as a way to estimate the output gap. Note
how potential output is substantially more volatile than actual output. As an estimator of
potential output, the HP filter goes in precisely the wrong direction, by smoothing. Figure
9b compares the HP filter estimate of the output gap with the corresponding actual value.
Note how the two are now negatively correlated.
    A by-product of the above discussion is an exploration of the economics of the response
of hours worked to a technology shock in the classic New Keynesian model. In that model,
hours worked rise in response to a technology shock that triggers a big wealth eﬀect, and
falls in response to a technology shock that implies a weak wealth eﬀect. The principle that
the hours worked response is greater when a technology shock triggers a large wealth eﬀect
survives in more complicated New Keynesian models such as the one discussed in the next
section.

4. Medium-Sized DSGE Model

A classic question in economics is, “why do prices take so long to respond to a monetary
disturbance and why do real variables react so strongly?” Mankiw writing in the year 2000,
maintained that an empirically successful explanation of monetary non-neutrality has con-
founded economists at least since David Hume wrote ‘Of Money’ in 1752. Moreover, at the
time that Mankiw was writing, it looked as though the question remained unanswered. A


                                                39
reason that monetary DSGE models have been so successful in the past decade is that, with
a combination of modest price and wage stickiness and various ‘real frictions’, they roughly
reproduce the evidence of monetary non-neutrality that had seemed so hard to match. The
purpose of this section and the next two is to spell out the basis for this observation in detail.
Inevitably, doing so requires a model that is more complicated than the various versions of
the simple model studied in the previous sections. In describing the model in this section,
we explain the rationale for each departure from the simple model.
    The model developed here is a version of the one in CEE. We describe the objectives and
constraints of the agents in the model, and leave the derivation of the equilibrium conditions
to the technical appendix. The model includes monetary policy shocks, so that it can be
used to address the monetary non-neutrality question. In addition, the model includes two
technology shocks. A later section studies the model’s quantitative implications for monetary
non-neutrality. As a further check on the model, that section follows ACEL in also evaluating
the model’s ability to match the estimated dynamic response of economic variables to the
two technology shocks.

4.1. Goods Production

An aggregate homogeneous good is produced using the technology, (2.5). The first order
condition of the representative, competitive producer of the homogeneous good is given by
(2.6). Substituting this first order condition back into (2.5) yields the restriction across
prices, (2.7). Each intermediate good, i ∈ (0, 1) , is produced by a monopolist who treats
(2.6) as its demand curve. The intermediate good producer takes the aggregate quantities,
Pt and Yt as exogenous.
    We use a production function for intermediate good producers that is standard in the
literature. It does not use materials inputs, but it does use the services of capital, Ki,t :

                                 Yi,t = (zt Hi,t )1−α Ki,t
                                                       α
                                                           − zt+ ϕ.                         (4.1)

Here, zt is a technology shock whose logarithmic first diﬀerence has a positive mean and ϕ
denotes a fixed production cost. The economy has two sources of growth: the positive drift
in log (zt ) and a positive drift in log (Ψt ) , where Ψt is the state of an investment specific
technology shock discussed below. The object, zt+ , in (4.1) is defined as follows:
                                                     α
                                          zt+ = Ψt1−α zt .

Along a non-stochastic steady state growth path, Yt /zt+ and Yi,t /zt+ converge to constants.
   The two shocks, zt and Ψt , are specified to be unit root processes in order to be consistent
with the assumptions we use in our VAR analysis to identify the dynamic response of the

                                                40
economy to neutral and investment specific technology shocks. We adopt the following time
series representations for the shocks:

                      ∆ log zt = μz + εzt , E (εzt )2 = σ 2z                                        (4.2)
                                                               ³ ´2
                      ∆ log Ψt   = μψ + ρψ ∆ log Ψt−1 + εψt , E εψt = σ 2ψ .                        (4.3)

Our assumption that the neutral technology shock follows a random walk with drift matches
closely the finding in Smets and Wouters (2007) who estimate log zt to be highly autocorre-
lated. The direct empirical analysis of Prescott (1986) also supports the notion that log zt is
a random walk with drift. Finally, Fernald (2009) constructs a direct estimate of total fac-
tor productivity growth for the business sector. The first order autocorrelation of quarterly
observations covering the period 1947Q2 to 2009Q3 is 0.0034, consistent with the idea of a
random walk.
    We assume that there is no entry or exit by intermediate good producers. The no entry
assumption would be implausible if firms enjoyed large and persistent profits. The fixed cost
in (4.1) is introduced to minimize the incentive to enter. We set ϕ so that intermediate good
producer profits are zero in steady state. This requires that the fixed cost grows at the same
rate as the growth rate of economic output, and this is why ϕ is multiplied by zt+ in (4.1). A
potential empirical advantage of including fixed costs of production is that, by introducing
some increasing returns to scale, the model can in principle account for evidence that labor
productivity rises in the wake of a positive monetary policy shock.
    In (4.1), Hi,t denotes homogeneous labor services hired by the ith intermediate good
producer. Firms must borrow the wage bill. We follow CEE in supposing that firms borrow
the entire wage bill (i.e., ψ = 1 in (2.9)) so that the cost of one unit of labor is given by

                                                 Wt Rt .                                            (4.4)

Here, Wt denotes the aggregate wage rate and Rt denotes the gross nominal interest rate on
working capital loans. The assumption that firms require working capital was introduced by
CEE as a way to help dampen the rise in inflation after an expansionary shock to monetary
policy. An expansionary shock to monetary policy drives Rt down and - other things the
same - this reduces firm marginal cost. Inflation is dampened because marginal cost is the key
input into firms’ price-setting decision. Indirect evidence consistent with the working capital
assumption includes the frequently-found VAR-based results, suggesting that inflation drops
for a little while after a positive monetary policy shock. It is hard to think of an alternative
to the working capital assumption to explain this evidence, apart from the possibility that
the estimated response reflects some kind of econometric specification error.40
  40
    This possibility was suggested by Sims (1992) and explored further in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans
(1999). See also Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005).

                                                   41
    Another motivation for treating interest rates as part of the cost of production has to
do with the ‘dis-inflationary boom’ critique made by Ball (1994) of models that do not
include interest rates in costs. Ball’s critique focuses on the Phillips curve in (2.30), which
we reproduce here for convenience:

                                             π̂ t = βEt π̂ t+1 + κp ŝt ,

where π̂t and ŝt denote inflation and marginal cost, respectively. Also, κp > 0 is a reduced
form parameter and β is slightly less than unity. According to the Phillips curve, if the
monetary authority announces it will fight inflation by strategies which (plausibly) bring
down future inflation more than present inflation, then ŝt must jump. In simple models ŝt
is directly related to the volume of output (see, e.g., (2.34)). High output requires more
intense utilization of scarce resources, their price goes up, driving up marginal cost, ŝt . Ball
criticized theories that do not include the interest rate in marginal cost on the grounds that
we do not observe booms during disinflations. Including the interest rate in marginal cost
potentially avoids the Ball critique because the high ŝt may simply reflect the high interest
rate that corresponds to the disinflationary policy, and not higher output.
    We adopt the Calvo model of price frictions. With probability ξ p , the intermediate good
firm cannot reoptimize its price, in which case it is assumed to set its price according to the
following rule:41
                                          Pi,t = πPi,t−1 .                                   (4.5)
Note that in steady state, firms that do not optimize their prices raise prices at the general
rate of inflation. Firms that optimize their prices in a steady state growth path raise their
prices by the same amount. This why there is no price dispersion in steady state. According
to the discussion near (2.29), the fact that we analyze the first order approximation of DSGE
model in a neighborhood of steady state means that we can impose the analog of p∗t = 1.
    With probability 1 − ξ p the intermediate good firm can reoptimize its price. Apart from
the fixed cost, the ith intermediate good producer’s profits are the analog of (2.13):

                                  X
                                  ∞
                             Et         β j υt+j [Pi,t+j Yi,t+j − st+j Pt+j Yi,t+j ] ,
                                  j=0

where st denotes the marginal cost of production, denominated in units of the homogeneous
good. The object, st , is a function only of the costs of capital and labor, and is described
in section C of the technical appendix. Marginal cost is independent of the level of Yi,t
because of the linear homogeneity of the first expression on the right of (4.1). The first order
  41
    Equation (4.5) excludes the possibility that firms index to past inflation. We discuss the reason for this
specification in section 6.2.2 below.


                                                         42
necessary conditions associated with this optimization problem are reported in section E of
the technical appendix.
    Goods market clearing dictates that the homogeneous output good is allocated among
alternative uses as follows:
                                    Yt = Gt + Ct + I˜t .                              (4.6)
Here, Ct denotes household consumption, Gt denotes exogenous government consumption
and I˜t is a homogenous investment good which is defined as follows:

                                             1 ¡                ¢
                                       I˜t =    It + a (ut ) K̄t .                              (4.7)
                                             Ψt
The investment goods, It , are used by households to add to the physical stock of capital,
K̄t .42 The remaining investment goods are used to cover maintenance costs, a (ut ) K̄t , arising
from capital utilization, ut . The cost function, a (·) , is increasing and convex, and has the
property that in steady state, ut = 1 and a (1) = 0. The relationship between the utilization
of capital, ut , capital services, Kt , and the physical stock of capital, K̄t , is as follows:

                                               Kt = ut K̄t .

The investment and capital utilization decisions are discussed in section 4.2. See section 4.4
below for the functional form of the capital utilization cost function. Finally, Ψt in (4.7)
denotes the unit root investment specific technology shock defined in (4.3).

4.2. Households

In the model, households supply the factors of production, labor and capital. The model
incorporates Calvo-style wage setting frictions along the lines spelled out in Erceg, Henderson
and Levin (2000). Because wages are an important component of costs, wage setting frictions
help slow the response of inflation to a monetary policy shock. As in the case of prices, wage
setting frictions require that there be market power. To ensure that this market power is
suﬀused through the economy and not, say, concentrated in the hands of a single labor union,
we adopt the framework that is now standard in monetary DSGE models. In particular, we
adopt a variant of the model in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) by using the analog of
the Dixit-Stiglitz type framework used to model price-setting frictions. The assumption that
prices are set by producers of specialized goods appears here in the form of the assumption
that there are many diﬀerent specialized labor inputs, hj,t , for j ∈ (0, 1). There is a single
monopolist which sets the wage for each type, j, of labor service. However, that monopolist’s
  42
   The notation, It , used here should not be confused with materials inputs in section 2. Our medium-sized
DSGE model does not include materials inputs.



                                                    43
market power is severely limited by the presence of other labor services, j 0 6= j, that are
substitutable for hj,t .
    The variant of the Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) model that we work with follows
the discussion in section 2.3 in supposing that labor is indivisible: people work either full
time or not at all.43 That is, hj,t represents a quantity of people and not, say, the number of
hours worked by a representative worker.
    The first subsection below discusses the interaction between households and the labor
market. The next subsection discusses monopoly wage-setting problem in the model. The
third subsection discusses the representative household’s capital accumulation decision. The
final subsection states the representative household’s optimization problem.

4.2.1. Households and the Labor Market

The ‘labor’ hired by firms in the goods-producing sector is interpreted as a homogeneous
factor of production, Ht , supplied by ‘labor contractors’. Labor contractors produce Ht by
combining a range of diﬀerentiated labor inputs, ht,j , using the following linear homogeneous
technology:
                                    ∙Z 1               ¸λw
                                                  1
                              Ht =       (ht,j ) λw dj     , λw > 1.
                                            0
Labor contractors are perfectly competitive and take the wage rate, Wt , of Ht as given. They
also take the wage rate, Wt,j , of the j th labor type as given. Contractors choose inputs and
outputs to maximize profits,                   Z           1
                                          Wt Ht −              Wt,j ht,j dj.
                                                       0
The first order necessary condition for optimization is given by:
                                                  µ            ¶ 1−λ
                                                                  λw
                                                      Wt             w
                                         ht,j =                          Ht .             (4.8)
                                                      Wt,j
Substituting the latter back into the labor aggregator function and rearranging, we obtain:
                                        ∙Z 1     1
                                                     ¸λw −1
                                               λw −1
                                 Wt =        Wt,j dj        .                         (4.9)
                                                  0

    Diﬀerentiated labor is supplied by a large number of identical households. The represen-
tative household has many members corresponding to each type, j, of labor. Each worker of
type j has an index, l, distributed uniformly over the unit interval, [0, 1], which indicates
that worker’s aversion to work. A type j worker with index l experiences utility:

                                      log (cet − bCt−1 ) − lφ , φ > 0,
 43
      Our approach follows the one in Gali (2010).

                                                       44
if employed and
                                          log (cne
                                                t − bCt−1 ) ,

if not employed. When b > 0 the worker’s marginal utility of current consumption is an
increasing function of the household’s consumption in the previous period. Given the additive
separability of consumption and employment in utility, the eﬃcient allocation of consumption
across workers within the household implies44

                                            cet = cne
                                                   t = Ct .


    The quantity of the j th type of labor supplied by the representative household, ht,j , is
determined by (4.8). We suppose the household sends j−type workers with 0 ≤ l ≤ ht,j to
work and keeps those with l > ht,j out of the labor force. The equally weighted integral of
utility over all l ∈ [0, 1] workers is:

                                                              h1+φ
                                                               t,j
                                    log (Ct − bCt−1 ) − A          .
                                                              1+φ
Aggregate household utility also integrates over the unit measure of j−type workers:
                                                         Z    1   h1+φ
                                                                   t,j
                                 log (Ct − bCt−1 ) − A                 dj.                       (4.10)
                                                          0       1+φ
It remains to explain how ht,j is determined and how the household chooses Ct .
    The wage rate of the j th type of labor, Wt,j , is determined outside the representative
household by a monopoly union that represents all j-type workers across all households.
The union’s problem is discussed in the next subsection.
    The presence of b > 0 in (4.10) is motivated by VAR-based evidence like that displayed
below, which suggests that an expansionary monetary policy shock triggers (i) a hump-
shape response in consumption and (ii) a persistent reduction in the real rate of interest.45
With b = 0 and a utility function separable in labor and consumption like the one above,
(i) and (ii) are diﬃcult to reconcile. An expansionary monetary policy shock that triggers
an increase in expected future consumption would be associated with rise in the real rate
of interest, not a fall. Alternatively, a fall in the real interest rate would cause people to
rearrange consumption intertemporally, so that consumption is relatively high right after the
monetary shock and low later. Intuitively, one can reconcile (i) and (ii) by supposing the
marginal utility of consumption is inversely proportional not to the level of consumption, but
  44
   For an environment in which perfect insurance is not feasible, see CTW.
  45
   The earliest published statement of the idea that b > 0 can help account for (i) and (ii) that we are
aware of is Fuhrer (2000).




                                                  45
to its derivative. To see this, it is useful to recall the familiar intertemporal Euler equation
implied by household optimization (see, e.g., (2.4)):

                                                 uc,t+1 Rt
                                           βEt               = 1.
                                                  uc,t π t+1

Here, uc,t denotes the marginal utility of consumption at time t. From this expression, we
see that a low Rt /π t+1 tends to produce a high uc,t+1 /uc,t , i.e., a rising trajectory for the
marginal utility of consumption. This illustrates the problematic implication of the model
when uc,t is inversely proportional to Ct as in (4.10) with b = 0. To fix this implication
we need a model change which has the property that a rising uc,t path implies hump-shape
consumption. A hump-shaped consumption path corresponds to a scenario in which the
slope of the consumption path is falling, suggesting that (i) and (ii) can be reconciled if
uc,t is proportional to the slope of consumption. The notion that marginal utility is inversely
proportional to the slope of consumption corresponds loosely to b > 0.46 The fact that (i) and
(ii) can be reconciled with the assumption of habit persistence is of special interest, because
there is evidence from other sources that also favors the assumption of habit persistence, for
example in asset pricing (see, for example, Constantinides (1990) and Boldrin, Christiano
and Fisher (2001)) and growth (see Carroll et al. (1997, 2000)). In addition, there may be
a solid foundation in psychology for this specification of preferences.47
     The logic associated with the intertemporal Euler equation above suggests that there
are other approaches that can at least go part way in reconciling (i) and (ii). For example,
Guerron-Quintana (2008) shows that non-separability between consumption and labor in
(4.10) can help reconcile (i) and (ii). He points out that if the marginal utility of consumption
is an increasing function of labor and the model predicts that employment rises with a hump
shape after an expansionary monetary shock, then it is possible that consumption itself rises
with a hump-shape.
  46
     In particular, suppose first that lagged consumption in (4.10) represents aggregate, economy wide con-
sumption and b > 0. This corresponds to the so-called ‘external habit’ case, where it is the lagged consumption
of others that enters utility. In that case, the marginal utility of houeshold Ct is 1/ (Ct − bCt−1 ) , which
corresponds to the inverse of the slope of the consumption path, at least if b is large enough. In our model
we think of Ct−1 as corresponding to the household’s own lagged consumption (that’s why we use the same
notation for current and lagged consumption), the so-called ‘internal habit’ case. In this case, the marginal
utility of Ct also involves future terms, in addition to the inverse of the of the slope of consumption from
t = 1 to t. The intuition described in the text, which implicitly assumed external habit, also applies roughly
to the internal habit case that we consider.
  47
     Anyone who has gone swimming has experienced the psychological aspect of habit persistence. It is
usually very hard at first to jump into a swimming pool because it seems so cold. The swimmer who jumps
(or is pushed!) into the water after much procrastenation initially experiences a tremendous shock with the
sudden drop in temperature. However, after only a few minutes the new, lower temperature is perfectly
comfortable. In this way, the lagged temperature seems to influence one’s experience of current temperature,
as in habit persistence.



                                                      46
4.2.2. Wages, Employment and Monopoly Unions

We turn now to a discussion of the monopoly union that sets the wage of j−type workers.
In each period, the monopoly union must satisfy its demand curve, (4.8), and it faces Calvo
frictions in the setting of Wt,j . With probability 1 − ξ w the union can optimize the wage and
with the complementary probability, ξ w , it cannot. In the latter case, we suppose that the
nominal wage rate is set as follows:

                                       Wj,t+1 = π̃ w,t+1 Wj,t                                          (4.11)
                                       π̃ w,t+1 = π κt w π(1−κw ) μz+ ,                                (4.12)

where κw ∈ (0, 1) . With this specification, the wage of each type j of labor is the same
in the steady state. Because the union problem has no state variable, all unions with the
opportunity to reoptimize in the current period face the same problem. In particular, such
a union chooses the current value of the wage, W̃t , to maximize:
                                       "                    ¡ t ¢1+φ #
                          X∞
                                                             h
                       Et            i         t
                              (βξ w ) υ t+i W̃t+i htt+i − AL t+i       .            (4.13)
                          i=0
                                                             (1 + φ)

Here, htt+i and W̃t+i
                    t
                       denote the quantity of workers employed and their wage rate, in period
t + i, of a union that has an opportunity to reoptimize the wage in period t and does not
reoptimize again in periods t + 1, ..., t + i. Also, υt+i denotes the marginal value assigned by
the representative household to the wage.48 The union treats υt as an exogenous constant.
In the above expression, ξ w appears in the discounting because the union’s period t decision
only impacts on future histories in which it cannot reoptimize its wage.
    Optimization by all labor unions leads to a simple equilibrium condition, when the vari-
ables are linearized about the nonstochastic steady state.49 The condition is:
                                       ⎛scaled labor cost of marginal worker                    ⎞
                                                                               scaled real wage
                                                 z       }|       {                 z}|{
                               κ       ⎜                                                        ⎟
            ∆κw π̂ w,t =          λw ⎝
                                                 −ψ̂z+ ,t + φĤt             −        b̄ t
                                                                                      w         ⎠ (4.14)
                           1 + φ λw −1

                             +β∆κw π̂ w,t+1 ,

where
                                                (1 − ξ w ) (1 − βξ w )
                                         κ=                            .
                                                          ξw
In (4.14), π̂w,t is the gross growth rate in the nominal wage rate, expressed in percent devia-
tion from steady state. Also, ψ̂z+ ,t represents the percent deviation of the scaled multiplier,
  48
     The object, υ t , is the multiplier on the household budget constraint in the Lagrangian representation of
the problem.
  49
     The details of the derivation are explained in section G of the technical appendix.

                                                       47
ψz+ ,t , from its steady state value. The scaled multiplier is defined as follows:

                                             ψz+ ,t ≡ υ t Pt zt+ ,

where υt is the multiplier on the household budget constraint. The first two terms inside the
parentheses in (4.14) correspond to the marginal cost of labor and the third term, w    b̄ t , corre-
sponds to the real wage. Both the marginal cost of labor and the real wage have been scaled
by zt+ . Expression (4.14) has a simple interpretation. The first term in parentheses is related
to the cost of working by the marginal worker. When this (scaled) cost exceeds the (scaled)
real wage, wb̄ t , then the monopoly unions currently setting wages place upward pressure on
wage inflation. The coeﬃcient multiplying the term in parentheses is also interesting. If the
degree of wage and price stickiness are the same, i.e., ξ w = ξ p , then κ takes on the same
value as κp , the analog of κ in the price Phillips curve, (2.35). In this case, the slope of the
price Phillips curve in terms of marginal cost is bigger than the slope of the wage Phillips
curve, (4.14). This reflects that in the slope of the wage Phillips curve, κ is divided by:

                                                     λw
                                            1+φ           > 1.
                                                   λw − 1
According to this expression, the slope of the wage Phillips curve is smaller if the elasticity
of demand for labor, λw / (λw − 1) is large and/or if the marginal cost of work, MRS, is
sharply increasing in work (i.e., φ is large). The intuition for this is as follows. Suppose
the j th monopoly union contemplates a particular rise in the nominal wage, for whatever
reason. Consider a given slope of the demand for labor. The rise in the wage implies a lower
quantity of labor demanded. The steeper is the marginal cost curve, the greater the implied
drop in marginal cost. Now consider a given slope of marginal cost. The flatter is the slope
of demand for the j th type of labor, the larger is the drop in the quantity of labor demanded
in response to the given contemplated rise in the wage. Given the upward sloping marginal
cost curve, this also implies a large fall in marginal cost. Thus, the monopoly union that
contemplates a given rise in the wage rate anticipates a larger drop in marginal cost to the
extent that the demand curve is elastic and/or the marginal cost curve is steep. But, other
things the same, low marginal cost reduces the incentive for a monopolist to raise its price
(i.e., the wage in this case). These considerations are absent in our price Phillips curve,
(2.35), because marginal cost is constant (i.e., the analog of φ is zero).50
  50
    This intuition for why the slope of the wage Phillips curve is flatter with elastic labor demand and/or
steep marginal cost is the same as the intuition that firm-specific capital flattens the price Phillips curve
(see, e.g., ACEL, Christiano (2004), de Walque, Smets and Wouters (2006), Sveen and Weinke (2005) and
Woodford (2004).)




                                                     48
4.2.3. Capital Accumulation

The household owns the economy’s physical stock of capital, sets the utilization rate of capital
and rents out the services of capital in a competitive market. The household accumulates
capital using the following technology:

                            K̄t+1 = (1 − δ) K̄t + F (It , It−1 ) + ∆t ,                   (4.15)

where ∆t denotes physical capital purchased in a market with other households. Since all
households are the same in terms of capital accumulation decisions, ∆t = 0 in equilibrium.
We nevertheless include ∆t so that we can assign a price to installed capital. In (4.15),
δ ∈ [0, 1] and we use the specification suggested in CEE:
                                             µ      µ      ¶¶
                                                       It
                             F (It , It−1 ) = 1 − S           It ,                   (4.16)
                                                      It−1
where the functional form, S, that we use is described in section 4.4. In (4.16), S = S 0 = 0
and S 00 > 0 along a nonstochastic steady state growth path.
   Let Pt Pk0 ,t denote the nominal market price of ∆t . For each unit of K̄t+1 acquired in
                                   k
period t, the household receives Xt+1  in net cash payments in period t + 1 :

                              k                k       Pt+1
                             Xt+1 = ut+1 Pt+1 rt+1 −        a(ut+1 ).                     (4.17)
                                                       Ψt+1
The first term is the gross nominal period t + 1 rental income from a unit of K̄t+1 . The
second term represents the cost of capital utilization, a(ut+1 )Pt+1 /Ψt+1 . Here, Pt+1 /Ψt+1 is
the nominal price of the investment goods absorbed by capital utilization. That Pt+1 /Ψt+1
is the equilibrium market price of investment goods follows from the technology specified in
(4.6) and (4.7), and the assumption that investment goods are produced from homogeneous
output goods by competitive firms.
    The introduction of variable capital utilization is motivated by a desire to explain the slow
response of inflation to a monetary policy shock. In any model prices are heavily influenced
by costs. Costs in turn are influenced by the elasticity of the factors of production. If factors
can be rapidly expanded with a small rise in cost, then inflation will not rise much after a
monetary policy shock. Allowing for variable capital utilization is a way to make the services
of capital elastic. If there is very little curvature in the a function, then households are able
to expand capital services without much increase in cost.
    The form of the investment adjustment costs in (4.15) is motivated by a desire to re-
produce VAR-based evidence that investment has a hump-shaped response to a monetary
policy shock. Alternative specifications include F ≡ It and
                                                   µ       ¶2
                                               S 00 It
                                   F = It −            − δ Kt .                            (4.18)
                                               2 Kt

                                                49
Specification (4.18) has a long history in macroeconomics, and has been in use since at least
Lucas and Prescott (1971). To understand why DSGE models generally use the adjustment
cost specification in (4.16) rather than (4.18), it is useful to define the rate of return on
investment:
                        ∙             ³       ´              ³       ´2 ¸
                  k                00   It+1     It+1   S 00   It+1
                 xt+1 + 1 − δ + S Kt+1 − δ Kt+1 − 2 Kt+1 − δ              Pk0 ,t+1
           k
         Rt+1 =                                                                    .    (4.19)
                                             Pk0 ,t

The numerator is the one-period payoﬀ from an extra unit of K̄t+1 , and the denominator is
the corresponding cost, both in consumption units. In (4.19), xkt+1 ≡ Xt+1  k
                                                                               /Pt+1 denotes the
earnings net of costs. The term in square brackets is the quantity of additional K̄t+2 made
possible by the additional unit of K̄t+1 . This is composed of the undepreciated part of K̄t+1
left over after production in period t + 1, plus the impact of K̄t+1 on K̄t+2 via the adjustment
costs. The object in square brackets is converted to consumption units using Pk0 ,t+1 , which
is the market price of K̄t+2 denominated in consumption goods. Finally, the denominator is
the price of the extra unit of K̄t+1 .
    The price of extra capital in competitive markets corresponds to the marginal cost of
production. Thus,
                                     dCt     dCt       dIt
                      Pk0 ,t = −          =−     ×
                                   dK̄t+1    dIt      dK̄t+1
                                          (
                                   1             1          F =I
                             =   dK̄t+1
                                        =        1
                                                 
                                                   It
                                                           F in (4.18) ,                  (4.20)
                                              00
                                             1−S ×        −δ
                                   dIt               Kt



where we ignore Ψt for now (Ψt ≡ 1). The derivatives in the first line correspond to marginal
rates of technical transformation. The marginal rate of technical transformation between
consumption and investment is implicit in (4.6) and (4.7). The marginal rate of technical
transformation between It and K̄t+1 is given by the capital accumulation equation. The
relation in the second line of (4.20) is referred to as ‘Tobin’s q’ relation, where Tobin’s q here
corresponds to Pk0 ,t . This is the market value of capital divided by the price of investment
goods. Here, q can diﬀer from unity due to the investment adjustment costs.
    We are now in a position to convey the intuition about why DSGE models have generally
abandoned the specification in (4.18) in favor of (4.15). The key reason has to do with
VAR-based evidence that suggests the real interest rate falls persistently after a positive
monetary policy shock, while investment responds in a hump-shaped pattern. Any model
that is capable of producing this type of response will have the property that the real return
on capital, (4.19) - for arbitrage reasons - also falls after an expansionary monetary policy
shock. Suppose, to begin, that S 00 = 0, so that there are no adjustment costs at all and


                                               50
Pk0 ,t = 1. In this case, the only component in Rtk that can fall is xkt+1 , which is dominated
by the marginal product of capital. That is, approximately, the rate of return on capital is:
                                            α−1 1−α
                                           Kt+1 Ht+1 + 1 − δ.

In steady state this object is 1/β (ignoring growth), which is roughly 1.03 in annual terms.
At the same time, the object, 1 − δ, is roughly 0.9 in annual terms, so that the endogenous
part of the rate of return of capital is a very small part of that rate of return. As a result, any
given drop in the return on capital requires a very large percentage drop in the endogenous
          α−1 1−α
part, Kt+1      Ht+1 . An expansion in investment can accomplish this, but it has to be a very
substantial surge. To see this, note that the endogenous part of the rate of return is not
only small, but the capital stock receives a weight substantially less than unity in that
expression. Moreover, a model that successfully reproduces the VAR-based evidence that
employment rises after a positive monetary policy implies that hours worked rises. This
pushes the endogenous component up, increasing the burden on the capital stock to bring
down the rate of return on investment. For these reasons, models without adjustment costs
generally imply a counterfactually strong surge in investment in the wake of a positive shock
to monetary policy.
     With S 00 > 0 the endogenous component of the rate of return on capital is much larger.
However, in practice models that adopt the adjustment cost specification, (4.18), generally
imply that the biggest investment response occurs in the period of the shock, and not later.
To gain intuition into why this is so, suppose the contrary: that investment does exhibit a
hump-shape response in investment. Equation (4.20) implies a similar hump-shape pattern
in the price of capital, Pk0 ,t .51 This is because Pk0 ,t is primarily determined by the contem-
poraneous flow of investment. So, under our supposition about the investment response,
a positive monetary policy shock generates a rise in Pk0 ,t+1 /Pk0 ,t over at least several peri-
ods in the future. According to (4.19), this creates the expectation of future capital gains,
Pk0 ,t+1 /Pk0 ,t > 1 and increases the immediate response of the rate of return on capital. Thus,
households would be induced to substitute away from a hump-shaped response, towards one
in which the immediate response is much stronger. In practice, this means that in equi-
librium, the biggest response of investment occurs in the period of the shock, with later
responses converging to zero.
     The adjustment costs in (4.16) do have the implication that investment responds in a
hump-shaped manner. The reason is (4.16)’s implication that a quick rise in investment
  51
    Note from (4.20) that the price of capital increases as investment rises above its level in steady state,
which is the level required to just meet the depreciation in the capital stock. Our assertion that the price of
capital follows the same hump-shaped pattern as investment after a positive monetary policy shock reflects
our implicit assumption tht the shock occurs when the economy is in a steady state. This will be true on
average, but not at each date.

                                                      51
from previous levels is expensive.
    There are other reasons to take the specification in (4.16) seriously. Lucca (2006) and
Matsuyama (1984) have described interesting theoretical foundations which produce (4.16) as
a reduced form. For example, in Matsuyama, shifting production between consumption and
capital goods involves a learning by doing process, which makes quick movements in either
direction expensive. Also, Matsuyama explains how the abundance of empirical evidence
that appears to reject (4.18) may be consistent with (4.16). Consistent with (4.16), Topel
and Rosen (1988) argues that data on housing construction cannot be understood without
using a cost function that involves the change in the flow of housing construction.

4.2.4. Household Optimization Problem

The j th household’s period t budget constraint is as follows:
           µ          ¶                       Z 1
                  1
         Pt Ct + It + Bt+1 + Pt Pk0 ,t ∆t ≤        Wt,j ht,j dj + Xtk K̄t + Rt−1 Bt ,                                   (4.21)
                  Ψt                           0

where Wt,j represents the wage earned by the j th household, Bt+1 denotes the quantity of
risk-free bonds purchased by the household, and Rt denotes the gross nominal interest rate
on bonds purchased in period t − 1 which pay oﬀ in period t. The household’s problem is
                    ©                           ª
to select sequences, Ct , It , ∆t , Bt+1 , K̄t+1 , to maximize (4.10) subject to the wage process
selected by the monopoly unions, (4.15), (4.17), and (4.21).

4.3. Fiscal and Monetary Authorities, and Equilibrium

We suppose that monetary policy follows a Taylor rule of the following form:

          µ        ¶              µ          ¶                         ³π         ´              µ        ¶
              Rt                      Rt−1                                  t+1                      gdpt
    log                = ρR log                  + (1 − ρR ) [rπ log                  + ry log             ] + εR,t ,   (4.22)
              R                        R                                    π                        gdp

where εR,t denotes an iid shock to monetary policy. As in CEE and ACEL, we assume that
the period t realization of εR,t is not included in the period t information set of the agents in
our model. This ensures that our model satisfies the restrictions used in the VAR analysis to
identify a monetary policy shock. In (4.22), gdpt denotes scaled real GDP defined as follows:
                                                             Gt + Ct + It
                                                    gdpt =                .                                             (4.23)
                                                                 zt+
We adopt the model of government consumption suggested in Christiano and Eichenbaum
(1992):
                                     Gt = gzt+ .


                                                              52
In principle, g could be a random variable, though our focus in this paper is just on monetary
policy and technology shocks. So, we set g to a constant. Lump-sum transfers are assumed
to balance the government budget.
    An equilibrium is a stochastic process for the prices and quantities which has the property
that the household and firm problems are satisfied, and goods and labor markets clear.

4.4. Adjustment Cost Functions

We adopt the following functional forms. The capacity utilization cost function is:

                       a(u) = 0.5bσ a u2 + b (1 − σ a ) u + b ((σ a /2) − 1) ,           (4.24)

where b is selected so that a (1) = a0 (1) = 0 in steady state and σ a is a parameter that
controls the curvature of the cost function. The closer σ a is to zero, the less curvature there
is and the easier it is to change utilization. The investment adjustment cost function takes
the following form:
                      1n     h√                  i      h √                    i    o
         S (xt ) =        exp S 00 (xt − μz+ μΨ ) + exp − S 00 (xt − μz+ μΨ ) − 2 , (4.25)
                      2
                 = 0, x = μz+ μΨ .

where xt = It /It−1 and μz+ μΨ is the growth rate of investment in steady state. With this
adjustment cost function, S (μz+ μΨ ) = S 0 (μz+ μΨ ) = 0. Also, S 00 > 0 is a parameter having
the property that it is the second derivative of S (xt ) evaluated at xt = μz+ μΨ . Because of
the nature of the above adjustment cost functions, the curvature parameters have no impact
on the model’s steady state.

5. Estimation Strategy

Our estimation strategy is a Bayesian version of the two-step impulse response matching
approach applied by Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and CEE. We begin with a discussion
of the two steps. After that, we discuss the computation of a particular weighting matrix
used in the analysis.

5.1. VAR Step

We estimate the dynamic responses of a set of aggregate variables to three shocks, using
standard vector autoregression methods. The three shocks are the monetary policy shock,
the innovation to the permanent technology shock, zt , and the innovation to the investment
specific technology shock, Ψt . The contemporaneous and 14 lagged responses to each of N = 9
macroeconomic variables to the three shocks are stacked in a vector, ψ̂. These macroeconomic

                                                 53
variables are a subset of the variables that appear in the VAR. The additional variables in
our VAR pertain to the labor market. We use this augmented VAR in order to facilitate
comparison between the analysis in this manuscript and in other research of ours which
integrates labor market frictions into the monetary DSGE model.52 We denote the vector of
variables in the VAR by Yt , where53
                              ⎛                                          ⎞
                                 ∆ ln(relative price of investmentt )
                              ⎜        ∆ ln(real GDPt /hourst )          ⎟
                              ⎜                                          ⎟
                              ⎜          ∆  ln(GDP     deflator    )     ⎟
                              ⎜                                  t       ⎟
                              ⎜          unemployment        rate        ⎟
                              ⎜                                    t     ⎟
                              ⎜          capacity utilizationt           ⎟
                              ⎜                                          ⎟
                              ⎜                ln(hours    )             ⎟
                              ⎜                          t               ⎟
                              ⎜ ln(real GDPt /hourst ) − ln(Wt /Pt ) ⎟
                       Yt = ⎜ ⎜                                          ⎟.           (5.1)
                      |{z}         ln(nominal    C   /nominal   GDP    ) ⎟
                              ⎜                    t                 t   ⎟
                      14×1    ⎜ ln(nominal It /nominal GDPt ) ⎟
                              ⎜                                          ⎟
                              ⎜                vacancies                 ⎟
                              ⎜                            t             ⎟
                              ⎜          job  separation     rate        ⎟
                              ⎜                                   t      ⎟
                              ⎜             job finding ratet            ⎟
                              ⎜                                          ⎟
                              ⎝        log (hourst /labor forcet )       ⎠
                                         Federal Funds Ratet

An extensive general review of identification in VAR’s appears in Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Evans (1999). The specific technical details of how we compute impulse response func-
tions imposing the shock identification are reported in ACEL.54 We estimate a two-lag VAR
using quarterly data that are seasonally adjusted and cover the period 1951Q1 to 2008Q4.
Our identification assumptions are as follows. The only variable that the monetary policy
shock aﬀects contemporaneously is the Federal Funds Rate. We make two assumptions to
identify the dynamic response to the technology shocks: (i) the only shocks that aﬀect labor
productivity in the long run are the two technology shocks and (ii) the only shock that aﬀects
the price of investment relative to consumption is the innovation to the investment specific
shock. All these identification assumptions are satisfied in our model.
    Our data set extends over a long range, while we estimate a single set of impulse response
functions and model parameters. In eﬀect, we suppose that there has been no parameter
break over this long period. Whether or not there has been a break is a question that has
  52
     See Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2010a, 2010b).
  53
     See section A of the technical appendix for details about the data.
  54
     The identification assumption for the monetary policy shock by itself imposes no restriction on the
VAR parameters. Similarly, Fisher (2006) showed that the identification assumptions for the technology
shocks when applied without simultaneously applying the monetary shock identification, also imposes no
restriction on the VAR parameters. However, ACEL showed that when all the identification assumptions are
imposed at the same time, then there are restrictions on the VAR parameters. We found that the test of the
overidentifying restrictions on the VAR fails to reject the null hypothesis that the restrictions are satisfied
at the 5 percent critical level.

                                                      54
been debated. For example, it has been argued that the parameters of the monetary policy
rule have not been constant over this period. We do not review this debate here. Implicitly,
our analysis sides with the conclusions of those that argue that the evidence of parameter
breaks is not strong. For example, Sims and Zha (2006) argue that the evidence is consistent
with the idea that monetary policy rule parameters have been unchanged over the sample.
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999) argue that the evidence is consistent with the
proposition that the dynamic eﬀects of a monetary policy shock have not changed during
this sample. Standard lag-length selection criteria led us to work with a VAR with 2 lags.55
    The number of elements in ψ̂ corresponds to the number of impulses estimated. Since we
consider the contemporaneous and 14 lag responses in the impulses, there are in principle 3
(i.e., the number of shocks) times 9 (number of variables) times 15 (number of responses)
= 405 elements in ψ̂. However, we do not include in ψ̂ the 8 contemporaneous responses to
the monetary policy shock that are required to be zero by our monetary policy identifying
assumption. Taking this into account, the vector ψ̂ has 397 elements.
    According to standard classical asymptotic sampling theory, when the number of obser-
vations, T, is large, we have
                            √ ³             ´ a
                              T ψ̂ − ψ (θ0 ) ˜ N (0, W (θ0 , ζ 0 )) ,

where θ0 represents the true values of the parameters that we estimate. The vector, ζ 0 ,
denotes the true values of the parameters of the shocks that are in the model, but that we
do not formally include in the analysis. We find it convenient to express the asymptotic
distribution of ψ̂ in the following form:
                                         a
                                      ψ̂ ˜ N (ψ (θ0 ) , V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T )) ,                             (5.2)

where
                                                             W (θ0 , ζ 0 )
                                       V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) ≡                 .
                                                                T

5.2. Impulse Response Matching Step

In the second step of our analysis, we treat ψ̂ as ‘data’ and we choose a value of θ to make
ψ (θ) as close as possible to ψ̂. As discussed in section 3.3.3 and following Kim (2002), we
refer to our strategy as a limited information Bayesian approach. This interpretation uses
  55
     We considered VAR specifications with lag length 1, 2, ...., 12. The Schwartz and Hannan-Quinn criteria
indicate that a single lag in the VAR is suﬃcient. The Akaike criterion indicates 12 lags, though we discounted
that result. Later, we investigate the sensitivity of our results to lag length.




                                                       55
(5.2) to define an approximate likelihood of the data, ψ̂, as a function of θ :

        ³                       ´  µ ¶ N2
                                     1                         1
       f ψ̂|θ, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) =        |V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T )|− 2                        (5.3)
                                    2π
                                        ∙                                            ´¸
                                           1³                ´0
                                                                       −1
                                                                          ³
                                   × exp − ψ̂ − ψ (θ) V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T )    ψ̂ − ψ (θ) .
                                           2

As we explain below, we treat the value of V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) as a known object. Under these
circumstances, the value of θ that maximizes the above function represents an approximate
maximum likelihood estimator of θ. It is approximate for two reasons: (i) the central limit
theorem underlying (5.2) only holds exactly as T → ∞ and (ii) the value of V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T )
that we use is guaranteed to be correct only for T → ∞.
    Treating the function, f, as the likelihood of ψ̂, it follows that the Bayesian posterior of
θ conditional on ψ̂ and V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) is:
                                                 ³                       ´
                       ³                      ´ f ψ̂|θ, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) p (θ)
                     f θ|ψ̂, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) =     ³                    ´     ,          (5.4)
                                                   f ψ̂|V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T )
                                         ³                    ´
where p (θ) denotes the priors on θ and f ψ̂|V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) denotes the marginal density of
ψ̂ :
                     ³                    ´ Z ³                       ´
                    f ψ̂|V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) = f ψ̂|θ, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) p (θ) dθ.

As usual, the mode of the posterior distribution of θ can be computed by simply maximizing
the value of the numerator in (5.4), since the denominator is not a function of θ. The marginal
density of ψ̂ is required when we want an overall measure of the fit of our model and when
we want to report the shape of the posterior marginal distribution of individual elements
in θ. To compute the marginal likelihood, we can use a standard random walk metropolis
algorithm or a Laplace approximation. We explain the latter in section 5.4 below. The
results that we report are based on a standard random walk Metropolis algorithm resulting
in a single Monte Carlo Markov Chain of length 600,000. The first 100,000 draws were
dropped and the average acceptance rate in the chain is 27 percent. We confirmed that the
chain is long enough so that all the statistics reported in the paper have converged. Section
6.3 compares results based on the Metropolis algorithm with the results based on the Laplace
approximation.

5.3. Computation of V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T )

A crucial ingredient in our empirical methodology is the matrix, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) . The logic
of our approach requires that we have an at least approximately consistent estimator of

                                                56
V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) . A variety of approaches is possible here. We use a bootstrap approach. Using
our estimated VAR and its fitted disturbances, we generate a set of M bootstrap realizations
for the impulse responses. We denote these by ψi , i = 1, ..., M, where ψi denotes the ith
realization of the 397 × 1 vector of impulse responses.56 Consider

                                          1 X¡
                                             M
                                                       ¢¡      ¢0
                                     V̄ =       ψi − ψ̄ ψi − ψ̄ ,                                           (5.5)
                                          M i=1

where ψ̄ is the mean of ψi , i = 1, ..., M. We set M = 10, 000. The object, V̄ , is a 397 by 397
matrix, and we assume that the small sample (in the sense of T ) properties of this way (or
any other way) of estimating V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) are poor. To improve small sample eﬃciency, we
proceed in a way that is analogous to the strategy taken in the estimation of frequency-zero
spectral densities (see Newey and West (1987)). In particular, rather than working with the
raw variance-covariance matrix, V̄ , we instead work with Vb̄ :
                                                       ¡      ¢
                                                Vb̄ = f V̄ , T .

The transformation, f, has the property that it converges to the identity transform, as
T → ∞. In particular, Vb̄ dampens some elements in V̄ , and the dampening factor is removed
as the sample grows large. The matrix, Vb̄ , has on its diagonal the diagonal elements of V̄ .
The entries in Vb̄ that correspond to the correlation between the lth lagged response and the
j th lagged response in a given variable to a given shock equals the corresponding entry in V̄ ,
multiplied by
                                ∙            ¸θ
                                      |l − j| 1,T
                                 1−               , l, j = 1, ..., n.
                                         n
Now consider the components of V̄ that correspond to the correlations between components
of diﬀerent impulse response functions, either because a diﬀerent variable is involved or
because a diﬀerent shock is involved, or both. We dampen these entries in a way that is
increasing in τ , the separation in time of the two impulses. In particular, we adopt the
following dampening factors for these entries:
                                  ∙        ¸θ
                                       |τ | 2,T
                               βT 1 −           , τ = 0, 1, ..., n.
                                        n
We suppose that
                                  β T → 1, θi,T → 0, T → ∞, i = 1, 2,
  56
    To compute a given bootstrap realization, ψ i , we first simulate an artificial data set, Y1 , ..., YT . We do
this by simulating the response of our estimated VAR to an iid sequence of 14×1 shock vectors that are
drawn randomly with replacement from the set of fitted shocks. We then fit a 2-lag VAR to the artificial
data set using the same procedure used on the actual data. The resulting estimated VAR is then used to
compute the impulse responses, which we stack into the 397×1 vector, ψ i .

                                                       57
where the rate of convergence is whatever is required to ensure consistency of Vb̄ . These
conditions leave completely open what values of β T , θ1,T , θ2,T we use in our sample. At one
extreme, we have
                                   β T = 0, θ1,T = ∞,
and θ2,T unrestricted. This corresponds to the approach in CEE and ACEL, in which Vb̄ is
simply a diagonal matrix composed of the diagonal components of V̄ . At the other extreme,
we could set β T , θ1,T , θ2,T at their T → ∞ values, in which Vb̄ = V̄ . Here, we work
with the approach taken in CEE and ACEL. This has the important advantage of making
our estimator particularly transparent. It corresponds to selecting θ so that the model
implied impulse responses lie inside a confidence tunnel around the estimated impulses.
When non-diagonal terms in V̄ are also used, then the estimator aims not just to put the
model impulses inside a confidence tunnel about the point estimates, but it is also concerned
about the pattern of discrepancies across diﬀerent impulse responses. Precisely how the
oﬀ-diagonal components of V̄ give rise to concerns about cross-impulse response patterns of
discrepancies is virtually impossible to understand intuitively. This is both because V̄ is an
enormous matrix and because it is not V̄ itself that enters our criterion but its inverse.

5.4. Laplace Approximation of the Posterior Distribution

The Metropolis algorithm for computing the posterior distribution can be time intensive,
and it may be useful - at least in the intermediate stages of a research project - to use
the Laplace approximation instead. In section 6.3 below, we show that the two approaches
generate similar results in our application, though one cannot rely on this being true in
general.                                      ³                    ´
   To derive the Laplace approximation to f θ|ψ̂, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) , define
                                       ³                       ´
                          g (θ) ≡ log f ψ̂|θ, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) + log p (θ) .

Let θ∗ denote the mode of the posterior distribution and define the following Hessian matrix:
                                                 ∂ 2 g (θ)
                                       gθθ = −             |θ=θ∗ .
                                                  ∂θ∂θ0
Note that the matrix, gθθ , is an automatic by-product of standard gradient methods for
computing the mode, θ∗ . The second order Taylor series expansion of g about θ = θ∗ is:
                                                1
                            g (θ) = g (θ∗ ) −     (θ − θ∗ )0 gθθ (θ − θ∗ ) ,
                                                2
where the slope term is zero if θ∗ is an interior optimum, which we assume. Then,
   ³                      ´         ³                        ´          ∙                       ¸
                                         ∗                        ∗       1      ∗ 0          ∗
 f ψ̂|θ, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) p (θ) ≈ f ψ̂|θ , V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) p (θ ) exp − (θ − θ ) gθθ (θ − θ ) .
                                                                          2

                                                  58
Note that                                        ∙                       ¸
                               1           1       1      ∗ 0          ∗
                                   m   |gθθ | exp − (θ − θ ) gθθ (θ − θ )
                                           2

                            (2π) 2                 2
is the m−variable Normal distribution for the m random variables, θ, with mean θ∗ and
                             −1
variance-covariance matrix, gθθ . By the standard property of a density function,
                   Z                   ∙                         ¸
                        1         1       1       ∗ 0          ∗
                          n |gθθ | exp −    (θ − θ ) gθθ (θ − θ ) dθ = 1.         (5.6)
                                  2

                     (2π) 2               2

Bringing together the previous results, we obtain:
                  ³                   ´ Z ³                           ´
                f ψ̂|V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) = f ψ̂|θ, V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) p (θ) dθ
                Z ³                          ´              ∙                   ¸
                          ∗                       ∗            1        ∗ 0   ∗
             ≈     f ψ̂|θ , V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) p (θ ) exp − (θ − θ ) gθθ (θ − θ ) dθ
                                                               2
                     n        1
                                   ³                       ´
             = (2π) 2 |gθθ |− 2 f ψ̂|θ∗ , V (θ0 , ζ 0 , T ) p (θ∗ ) ,

by (5.6). We now have the marginal distribution for ψ̂. We can use this to compare the fit
of diﬀerent models for ψ̂. In addition, we have an approximation to the marginal posterior
distribution for an arbitrary element of θ, say θi :
                                                    ¡ £ −1 ¤ ¢
                                               θi ˜N θ∗i , gθθ ii
                                                                  ,
     £ −1 ¤                                                    −1
where gθθ  ii
              denotes the ith diagonal element of the matrix, gθθ .

6. Medium-Sized DSGE Model: Results

We first describe our VAR results. We then turn to the estimation of the DSGE model.
Finally, we study the ability of the DSGE model to replicate the VAR-based estimates of
the dynamic response of the economy to three shocks.

6.1. VAR Results

We briefly describe the impulse response functions implied by the VAR. The solid line in
Figures 10-12 indicate the point estimates of the impulse response functions, while the grey
area displays the corresponding 95% probability bands.57 Inflation and the interest rate are
in annualized percent terms, while the other variables are measured in percent. The solid
lines with squares and the dashed lines will be discussed when we review the DSGE model
estimation results.
  57
     The probability interval is defined by the point estimate of the impulse response, plus and minus 1.96
times the square root of the relevant term on the diagonal of V̄ reported in (5.5).


                                                       59
6.1.1. Monetary Policy Shocks

We make five observations about the estimated dynamic responses to a 50 basis point shock
to monetary policy, displayed in Figure 10. Consider first the response of inflation. Two
important things to note here are the price puzzle and the delayed and gradual response
of inflation.58 In the very short run the point estimates indicate that inflation moves in a
seemingly perverse direction in response to the expansionary monetary policy shock. This
transitory drop in inflation in the immediate aftermath of a monetary policy shock has been
widely commented on, and has been dubbed the ‘price puzzle’. Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Evans (1999) review the argument that the puzzle may be the outcome of the sort of
econometric specification error suggested by Sims (1992), and find evidence that is consistent
with that view. Here, we follow ACEL and CEE in taking the position that there is no
econometric specification error. Although the price puzzle is not statistically significant
in our VAR estimation, it nevertheless deserves comment because it has potentially great
economic significance. For example, the presence of a price puzzle in the data complicates
the political problem associated with using high interest rates as a strategy to fight inflation.
High interest rates and the consequent slowdown in economic growth is politically painful
and if the public sees it producing higher inflation in the short run, support for the policy
may evaporate unless the price puzzle has been explained.59 Regarding the slow response
of inflation, note how inflation reaches a peak after two years. Of course, the exact timing
of the peak is not very well pinned down due to the wide confidence intervals. However,
the evidence does suggest a sluggish response of inflation. This is consistent with the views
of others, arrived at by other methods, about the slow response of inflation to a monetary
policy shock. As noted in the introduction to section 4, it has been argued that this is
a major puzzle for macroeconomics. For example, Mankiw (2000) argues that with price
frictions of the type used here, the only way to explain the delayed and gradual response
of inflation to a monetary policy shock is to introduce a degree of stickiness in prices that
exceeds by far what can be justified based on the micro evidence. For this reason, when we
  58
     Here, we have borrowed Mankiw’s (2000) language, ‘delayed and gradual’, to characterize the nature of
the response of inflation to a monetary policy shock. Though Mankiw wrote 10 years ago and he cites a wide
range of evidence, Mankiw’s conclusion about how inflation responds to a monetary policy shock resembles
our VAR evidence very closely. Mankiw argues that the response of inflation to a monetary policy shock is
gradual in the sense that it does not peak for 9 quarters.
  59
     There is an important historical example of this political problem. In the early 1970s, at the start of the
Great Inflation in the US, Arthur Burns was chairman of the US Federal Reserve and Wrigth Patman was
chairman of the United States House Committee on Banking and Currency. Patman had the opinion that, by
raising costs of production, high interest rates increase inflation. Patman’s belief had enormous significance
because he was influential in writing the wage and price control legislation at the time. He threatened Burns
that if Burns tried to raise interest rates to fight inflation, Patman would see to it that interest rates were
brought under the control of the wage-price control board (see “The Lasting, Multiple Hassles of Topic A”,
Time Magazine, Monday, April 9, 1973.).


                                                      60
study the ability of our models to match the estimated impulse response functions, we must
be wary of the possibility that this is done only by making prices and wages counterfactually
sticky. In addition, we must be wary of the possibility that the econometrics leans too hard
on other features (such as variable capital utilization) to explain the gradual and delayed
response of inflation to a monetary policy shock.
    The third observation is that output, consumption, investment and hours worked all
display a slow, hump-shape response to a monetary policy shock, peaking a little over one
year after the shock. As emphasized in section 4, these hump-shape observations are the
reason that researchers introduce habit persistence and costs of adjustment in the flow of
investment into the baseline model. In addition, note that the eﬀect of the monetary shock
on the interest rate is roughly gone after two years, yet the economy continues to respond
well after that. This suggests that to understand the dynamic eﬀects of a monetary policy
shock, one must have a model that displays considerable sources of internal propagation.
    A fourth observation concerns the response of capacity utilization. Recall from the dis-
cussion of section 4 that the magnitude of the empirical response of this variable represents
an important discipline on the analysis. In eﬀect, those data constrain how heavily we can
lean on variable capital utilization to explain the slow response of inflation to a monetary
policy shock. The evidence in Figure 10 suggests that capacity utilization responds very
sharply to a positive monetary policy shock. For example, it rises three times as much as
employment. In interpreting this finding, we must bear in mind that the capital utilization
numbers we have are for the manufacturing sector. To the extent that these data are influ-
enced by the durable part of manufacturing, they may overstate the volatility of capacity
utilization generally in the economy.
    Our fifth observation concerns the price of investment. In our model, this price is,
by construction, unaﬀected by shocks other than those to the technology for converting
homogeneous output into investment goods. Figure 10 indicates that the price of investment
rises in response to an expansionary monetary policy shock, contrary to our model. This
suggests that it would be worth exploring modifications to the technology for producing
investment goods so that the trade-oﬀ between consumption and investment is nonlinear.60
Under these conditions, the rise in the investment to consumption ratio that appears to
occur in response to an expansionary monetary policy shock would be associated with an
increase in the price of investment.
  60
    For example, instead of specifying a resource constraint in which Ct + It appears, we could adopt one in
which Ct and It appear in a CES function, i.e.,
                                            h                 iρ
                                                 1/ρ      1/ρ
                                             a1 Ct + a2 It       .

The standard linear specification is a special case of this one, with a1 = a2 = ρ = 1.


                                                     61
6.1.2. Technology Shocks

Figures 11 and 12 display the responses to neutral and investment specific technology shocks,
respectively. Overall, the confidence intervals are wide. The width of these confidence
intervals should be no surprise in view of the nature of the question being addressed. The
VAR is informed that there are two shocks in the data which have a long run eﬀect on labor
productivity, and it is being asked to determine the dynamic eﬀects of these shocks on the
data. To understand the challenge that such a question poses, imagine gazing at a data plot
and thinking how the technology shocks might be detected visually. It is no wonder that in
many cases, the VAR response is, ‘I don’t know how this variable responds’. This is what the
wide confidence intervals tell us. For example, nothing much can be said about the response
of capacity utilization to a neutral technology shock.
    Though confidence intervals are often wide there are some responses that are significant.
For example, there is a significant rise in consumption, output, and hours worked in response
to a neutral shock. A particularly striking result in Figure 11 is the immediate drop in
inflation in the wake of a positive shock to neutral technology. This drop has led some
researchers to conjecture that the rapid response of inflation to a technology shock spells
trouble for sticky price/sticky wage models. We investigate this conjecture in the next
section.

6.2. Model Results
6.2.1. Parameters

Parameters whose values are set a priori are listed in Table 2. We found that when we esti-
mated the parameters κw and λw , the estimator drove them to their boundaries. This is why
we simply set λw to a value near unity and we set κw = 1. The steady state value of inflation
(a parameter in the monetary policy rule and the price and wage updating equations), the
steady state government consumption to output ratio, and the steady state growth rate of
the investment specific technology were chosen to coincide with their corresponding sample
means in our data set.61 The growth rate of neutral technology was chosen so that, condi-
tional on the growth rate of investment specific technology, the steady state growth rate of
output in the model coincides with the corresponding sample average in the data. We set
ξ w = 0.75, so that the model implies wages are reoptimized once a year on average. We did
not estimate this parameter because we found that it is diﬃcult to separately identify the
value of ξ w and the curvature parameter of household labor disutility, φ.
    The parameters for which we report priors and posteriors are listed in Table 3. Note first
  61
    In our model, the relative price of investment goods represents a direct observation of the technology
shock for producing investment goods.


                                                   62
that the degree of price stickiness, ξ p , is modest. The time between price reoptimizations
implied by the posterior mean of this parameter is a little less than 3 quarters. The amount
of information in the likelihood, (5.3), about the value of ξ p is substantial. The posterior
standard deviation is roughly one-third the size of the prior standard deviation and the
posterior 95 percent probability interval is a quarter of the width of the corresponding prior
probability interval. Generally, the amount of information in the likelihood about all the
parameters is large in this sense. An exception to this pattern is the coeﬃcient on inflation
in the Taylor rule, rπ . There appears to be relatively little information about this parameter
in the likelihood. Note that φ is estimated to be quite small, implying a consumption-
compensated labor supply elasticity for the household of around 8. Such a high elasticity
would be regarded as empirically implausible if it were interpreted as the elasticity of supply
of hours by a representative agent. However, as discussed in section 2.3 above, this is not
our interpretation. Table 4 reports steady state properties of the model, evaluated at the
posterior mean of the parameters.

6.2.2. Impulse Responses

We now comment on the DSGE model impulse responses displayed in Figures 10-12. The line
with solid squares in the figures display the impulse responses of our model, at the posterior
mean of the parameters. The dashed lines display the 95 percent probability interval for the
impulse responses implied by the posterior distribution of the parameters. These intervals
are in all cases reasonably tight, reflecting the tight posterior distribution on the parameters
as well as the natural restrictions of the model itself.
    Our estimation strategy in eﬀect selects a model parameterization that places the model-
implied impulse response functions as close as possible to the center of the grey area, while
not suﬀering too much of a penalty from the priors. The estimation criterion is less con-
cerned about reproducing VAR-based impulse response functions where the grey areas are
the widest.
    Consider Figure 10, which displays the response of standard macroeconomic variables to
a monetary policy shock. Note how well the model captures the delayed and gradual response
of inflation. In the model it takes two years for inflation to reach its peak response after the
monetary policy shock. Importantly, the model even captures the ‘price puzzle’ phenomenon,
according to which inflation moves in the ‘wrong’ direction initially. This apparently perverse
initial response of inflation is interpreted by the model as reflecting the reduction in labor
costs associated with the cut in the nominal rate of interest. The notable result here is that
the slow response of inflation to a monetary policy shock is explained with a modest degree
of wage and price-setting frictions. In addition, the gradual and delayed response of inflation
is not due to an excessive or counterfactual increase in capital utilization. Indeed, the model

                                              63
substantially understates the rise in capital utilization. While on its own this is a failure
of the model, it does draw attention to the apparent ease with which the model is able to
capture the inertial response of inflation to a monetary shock.
    The model also captures the response of output and consumption to a monetary policy
shock reasonably well. However, the model apparently does not have the flexibility to capture
the relatively sharp fall and rise in the investment response, although the model responses
lie inside the grey area. The relatively large estimate of the curvature in the investment
adjustment cost function, S 00 , suggests that to allow a greater response of investment to a
monetary policy shock would cause the model’s prediction of investment to lie outside the
grey area in the first couple of quarters. These findings for monetary policy shocks are
broadly similar to those reported in CEE and ACEL.
    Figure 11 displays the response of standard macroeconomic variables to a neutral tech-
nology shock. Note that the model is reasonably successful at reproducing the empirically
estimated responses. The dynamic response of inflation is particularly notable, in light of
the estimation results reported in ACEL. Those results suggest that the sharp and precisely
estimated drop in inflation in response to a neutral technology shock is diﬃcult to reproduce
in a model like ours. In describing this problem for their model, ACEL express a concern that
the failure reflects a deeper problem with sticky price models.62 They suggest that perhaps
the emphasis on price and wage setting frictions, largely motivated by the inertial response
of inflation to a monetary shock, is shown to be misguided by the evidence that inflation
responds rapidly to technology shocks shocks.63 Our results suggest a far more mundane
possibility. There are two key diﬀerences between our model and the one in ACEL which
allow it to reproduce the response of inflation to a technology shock more or less exactly
without hampering its ability to account for the slow response of inflation to a monetary
policy shock. First, in our model there is no indexation of prices to lagged inflation (see
(4.5)). ACEL follows CEE in supposing that when firms cannot optimize their price, they
index it fully to lagged aggregate inflation. The position of our model on price indexation
is a key reason why we can account for the rapid fall in inflation after a neutral technical
shock while ACEL cannot. We suspect that our way of treating indexation is a step in the
right direction from the point of view of the microeconomic data. Micro observations sug-
gest that individual prices do not change for extended periods of time. A second distinction
between our model and the one in ACEL is that we specify the neutral technology shock to
  62
    See Paciello (2009) for another discussion of this point.
  63
    The concern is reinforced by the fact that an alternative approach, one based on information imperfec-
tions and minimal price/wage setting frictions, seems like a natural one for explaining the puzzle of the slow
response of inflation to monetary policy shocks and the quick response to technology shocks (see Maćkowiak
and Wiederholt (2009), Mendes (2009), and Paciello (2009)). Dupor, Han and Tsai (2009) suggest more
modest changes in the model structure to accommodate the inflation puzzle.



                                                     64
be a random walk (see (4.2)), while in ACEL the growth rate of the estimated technology
shock is highly autocorrelated. In ACEL, a technology shock triggers a strong wealth eﬀect
which stimulates a surge in demand that places upward pressure on marginal cost and thus
inflation.
    Figure 12 displays dynamic responses of macroeconomic variables to an investment spe-
cific shock. The DSGE model fits the dynamics implied by the VAR well, although the
confidence interval are large.

6.3. Assessing VAR Robustness and Accuracy of the Laplace Approximation

It is well known that when the start date or number of lags for a VAR are changed, the
estimated impulse response functions change. In practice, one hopes that the width of
probability intervals reported in the analysis is a reasonable rule-of-thumb guide to the degree
of non-robustness. In Figures 13, 14 and 15 we display all the estimated impulse response
functions from our VAR when we apply a range of diﬀerent start dates and lag lengths. The
VAR point estimates used in our estimation exercise are displayed in Figures 13 - 15 in the
form of the solid line with solid squares. The 95% probability intervals associated with the
impulse response functions used in our estimation exercise are indicated by the dashed lines.
According to the figures, the degree of variation across diﬀerent samples and lag lengths
corresponds roughly to the width of probability intervals. Although results do change across
the perturbed VARs, the magnitude of the changes are roughly what is predicted by the rule
of thumb. In this sense, the degree of non-robustness in the VAR is not great.
    Finally, Figure 16 displays the priors and posteriors of the model parameters. The poste-
riors are computed by two methods: the random walk Metropolis method, and the Laplace
approximation described in section 5.4. It is interesting that the Laplace approximation
and the results of the random walk Metropolis algorithm are very similar. These results
suggest that one can save substantial amounts of time by computing the Laplace approxi-
mation during the early and intermediate phases of a research project. At the end of the
project, when it is time to produce the final draft of the manuscript, one can then perform
the time-intensive random walk Metropolis calculations.

7. Conclusion

The literature on DSGE models for monetary policy is too large to review in all its detail
in this paper. Necessarily, we have been forced to focus on only a part. Relatively little
space has been devoted to the limitations of monetary DSGE models. A key challenge is
posed by the famous statistical rejections of the intertemporal Euler equation that lies at the
heart of DSGE models (see, e.g., Hansen and Singleton (1983)). These rejections of the “IS

                                              65
equation” in the New Keynesian model pose a challenge for that model’s account of the way
shocks propagate through the economy. At the same time, the Bayesian impulse response
matching technique that we apply suggests that the New Keynesian model is able to capture
the basic features of the transmission of three important shocks.64 An outstanding question
is how to resolve these apparently conflicting pieces of information.
    Also, we have been able to do little in the way of reviewing the new frontiers for monetary
DSGE models. The recent financial turmoil has accelerated work to introduce a richer
financial sector into the New Keynesian model. With these additions, the model is able to
address important policy questions that cannot be addressed by the models described here:
“how should monetary policy respond to an increase in interest rate spreads?”, “how should
we think about the recent ‘unconventional monetary policy’ actions, in which the monetary
authority purchases privately issued liabilities such as mortgages and commercial paper?”
The models described here are silent on these questions. However, an exploding literature too
large to review here has begun to introduce the modifications necessary to address them.65
The labor market is another frontier of new model development. We have presented a rough
sketch of the approach in CTW, but the literature merging the best of labor market research
with monetary DSGE models is too large to survey here.66 Still, these new developments
ensure that monetary DSGE models will remain an active and exciting area of research for
the foreseeable future.
  64
     In our empirical analysis we have not reported our VAR’s implications for the importance of the three
shocks that we analyzed. However, ACEL documents that these shocks together account for well over 50
percent of the variation of macroeconomic time series like output, investment and employment.
  65
     For a small sampling, see, for example, Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), Christiano, Motto and
Rostagno (2003,2009), Cúrdia and Woodford (2009) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).
  66
     A small open economy model with financial and labor market frictions, estimated by full information
Bayesian methods, appears in Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2010c). Important other papers on the
integration of unemployment and other labor market frictions into monetary DSGE models include Gali
(2010), Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008) and Thomas (2009).




                                                   66
References

 [1] Abel, Andrew B. and Ben Bernanke, 2005, Macroeconomics (5th ed.), Pearson Addison
     Wesley.

 [2] Adalid, Ramon and Carsten Detken, 2007, “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price
     Boom/Bust Cycles,” European Central Bank Working Paper No. 732, February.

 [3] Altig, David, Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum and Jesper Lindé, 2005,
     “Firm-Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle,” National Bureau
     of Economic Research Working Paper 11034.

 [4] Ball, Laurence, 1994, “Credible Disinflation with Staggered Price Setting,” American
     Economic Review, Vol. 84, pages 282-289, March.

 [5] Barth, Marvin J. III and Valerie A. Ramey, 2002, “The Cost Channel of Monetary
     Transmission,” NBER Chapters, in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Vol. 16,
     pages 199-256.

 [6] Basu, Susanto, 1995, “Intermediate Goods and Business Cycles: Implications for Pro-
     ductivity and Welfare,” American Economic Review, Vol. 85(3), pages 512-531, June.

 [7] Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe, 2002, “Chaotic Interest-
     Rate Rules,” American Economic Review, Vol. 92(2), pages 72-78, May.

 [8] Bernanke, Ben, Jean Boivin and Piotr S. Eliasz, 2005, “Measuring the Eﬀects of Mone-
     tary Policy: A Factor-augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, Vol. 120(1), pages 387-422, January.

 [9] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 2000, “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility,”
     NBER Working Paper No. 7559.

[10] Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, “The Financial Accelerator in
     a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by
     John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, pages 1341-1393. Amsterdam, New York and
     Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.

[11] Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 2001, “Habit Persis-
     tence, Asset Returns, and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91(1),
     pages 149-166, March.

[12] Bruckner, Matthias and Andreas Schabert, 2003, "Supply-side eﬀects of monetary policy
     and equilibrium multiplicity," Economics Letters, Vol. 79(2), Pages 205-211.

                                           67
[13] Bullard, James and Kaushik Mitra, 2002, “Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 49, pages 1105—1129.

[14] Calvo, Guillermo A., 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12(3), pages 383-398, September.

[15] Carroll, Christopher D., Jody Overland and David N. Weil, 1997, “Comparison Utility
     in a Growth Model,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 2(4), pages 339-367, December.

[16] Carroll, Christopher D., Jody Overland and David N. Weil, 2000, “Saving and Growth
     with Habit Formation,” American Economic Review, Vol. 90(3), pages 341-355, June.

[17] Chernozhukov, Victor and Han Hong, 2003, “An MCMC Approach to Classical Esti-
     mation,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 115(2), pages 293-346, August.

[18] Chowdhury, Ibrahim, Mathias Hoﬀmann and Andreas Schabert, 2006, “Inflation Dy-
     namics and the Cost Channel of Monetary Ttransmission,” European Economic Review,
     Vol. 50(4), pages 995-1016, May.

[19] Christiano, Lawrence J., 1988, “Why Does Inventory Investment Fluctuate So Much?,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 21, pages 247-280.

[20] Christiano, Lawrence J., 1991, “Modeling the Liquidity Eﬀect of a Money Shocks,”
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 15(1), Winter.

[21] Christiano, Lawrence J., 2004, “Firm-Specific Capital and Aggregate Inflation Dynamics
     in Woodford’s Model,” Manuscript.

[22] Christiano, Lawrence J., 2007, “Discussion of Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets and
     Wouters,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 25(2), April.

[23] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum, 1992, “Current Real Business Cycle
     Theories and Aggregate Labor Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, Vol.
     82(3), pages 430-450.

[24] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum, 1992a, “Liquidity Eﬀects and the
     Monetary Transmission Mechanism, ” American Economic Review, Papers and Pro-
     ceedings, Vol. 82, pages 346-353, May.

[25] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, 1999, “Monetary
     Policy Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?,” Handbook of Macroeco-
     nomics, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, pages 65-148, Amsterdam,
     New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.

                                            68
[26] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles L. Evans, 2005, “Nominal
     Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 113(1), pages 1—45.

[27] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Christopher Gust, 2000, “The Expectations Trap Hypoth-
     esis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, Vol. 24, pages 21-39,
     May.

[28] Christiano, Lawrence J., Cosmin Ilut, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno, 2007,
     “Monetary Policy and Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles,” Manuscript, Northwestern
     University.

[29] Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno, 2003, “The Great
     Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit, and
     Banking, Vol. 35(6), December, Part 2.

[30] Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno, 2009, “Financial Fac-
     tors in Business Cycles,” Manuscript.

[31] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Massimo Rostagno, 2001, “Money Growth Monitoring and
     the Taylor Rule,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 8539.

[32] Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2010a, “Involuntary Un-
     employment and the Business Cycle,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper No. 15801.

[33] Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2010b, “A Monetary
     Business Cycle Model with Labor Market Frictions,” Manuscript, Northwestern Uni-
     versity.

[34] Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2010c, “Introducing
     Financial Frictions and Unemployment into a Small Open Economy Model,” Sveriges
     Riksbank Working Paper No. 214.

[35] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler, 1999, “The Science of Monetary Policy:
     A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 37, pages 1661-
     1707, December.

[36] Cochrane, John H., 2009, “Can Learnability Save New-Keynesian Models?,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, Vol. 56, pages 1109—1113.



                                            69
[37] Constantinides, George M., 1990, “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Pre-
     mium Puzzle,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98(3), pages 519-543, June.

[38] Cúrdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, 2009, “Credit Spreads and Monetary Policy,”
     NBER Working Paper No. 15289.

[39] de Walque, Gregory, Frank Smets and Raf Wouters, 2006, “Firm-specific Production
     Factors in a DSGE Model with Taylor Price Setting,” International Journal of Central
     Banking, Vol. 2(3), pages 107-154.

[40] Dupor, Bill, Jing Han, Yi-Chan Tsai, 2009, “What do Technology Shocks tell us about
     the New Keynesian Paradigm?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 56(4), pages
     560-569, May.

[41] Erceg, Christopher J., Henderson, Dale, W. and Andrew T. Levin, 2000, “Optimal
     Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 46, pages 281-313.

[42] Erceg, Christopher J. and Andrew T. Levin, 2003, “Imperfect credibility and inflation
     persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50, pages 915—944.

[43] Fernald, John, 2009, “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Produc-
     tivity,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

[44] Fisher, Jonas, 2006, “The Dynamic Eﬀects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technol-
     ogy Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 114(3), pages 413-451, June.

[45] Fuerst, Timothy S., 1992, “Liquidity, loanable funds, and real activity,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, Vol. 29(1), pages 3-24, February.

[46] Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C., 2000, “Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for
     Monetary Policy Models,” American Economic Review, Vol. 90 (3), pages 367-390,
     June.

[47] Gali, Jordi, 1999, “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technol-
     ogy Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89(1),
     pages 249-271.

[48] Gali, Jordi, 2010, “The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve,” Manuscript, CREI.

[49] Gali, Jordi, 2010a, “Unemployment Fluctuations and Stabilization Policies: A New Key-
     nesian Perspective,” Zeuthen lectures delivered March 19-March 20 to Zeuthen Work-
     shop on Macroeconomics, Department of Economics, University of Copenhagen.

                                            70
[50] Gertler, Mark, Luca Sala and Antonella Trigari, 2008, “An Estimated Monetary DSGE
     Model with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage Bargaining,” Journal of
     Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 40(8), pages 1713-1764, December.

[51] Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2010, “Financial Intermediation and Credit
     Policy in Business Cycle Analysis,” Manuscript.

[52] Guerron-Quintana, Pablo, 2008, “Refinements on Macroeconomic Modeling: The Role
     of Non-Separability and Heterogeneous Labor Supply,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
     and Control, Vol. 32, pages 3613-3630.

[53] Hamilton, James, 1994, “Time Series Analysis,” Princeton University Press.

[54] Hansen, Lars, Peter, 1982, “Large sample properties of generalized method of moments
     estimators,” Econometrica, 50, 1029—1054.

[55] Hansen, Gary D., 1985, “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, Vol. 16(3), pages 309-327.

[56] Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1983, “Stochastic Consumption, Risk
     Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol. 91(2), pages 249-265.

[57] Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott, 1997, “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles:
     An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 29, no. 1,
     February, pp. 1-16.

[58] Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio Primiceri, 2008, “Potential and Natural Output,”
     Manuscript, Northwestern University.

[59] Kiley, Michael T., 2010, “Output Gaps,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series
     Working Paper 2010-27, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

[60] Kim, Jae-Young, 2002, “Limited information likelihood and Bayesian analysis,” Journal
     of Econometrics, Vol. 107, pages 175-193.

[61] King, Robert G. and Sergio Rebelo, 1993, “Low Frequency Filtering and Real Business
     Cycles,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control. 17(1-2): 207-231.

[62] Krusell, Per, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson and Aysegul Sahin, 2008, “Aggre-
     gate Implications of Indivisible Labor, Incomplete Markets and Labor Market Frictions,”
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13871.


                                            71
[63] Kwan, Yum K., 1999, “Asymptotic Bayesian analysis based on a limited information
     estimator,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 88, pages 99-121.

[64] Levin, Andrew T., Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams and Noah Williams, 2005, “Mon-
     etary Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models Monetary
     Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” NBER Macro-
     economics Annual, Vol. 20, pages 229-287.

[65] Lucas, Robert E., Jr and Edward C. Prescott, 1971, “Investment Under Uncertainty,”
     Econometrica, Econometric Society, Vol. 39(5), pages 659-681, September.

[66] Lucca, David O., 2006, “Essays in Investment and Macroeconomics,” Phd dissertation,
     Northwestern University, Department of Economics.

[67] Maćkowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt, 2009, “Optimal Sticky Prices under Ratio-
     nal Inattention,” American Economic Review, Vol. 99(3), pages 769-803, June.

[68] Mankiw, N. Gregory, 2000, “The Inexorable and Mysterious Tradeoﬀ Between Inflation
     and Unemployment,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7884.

[69] Matsuyama, Kiminori, 1984, “A Learning Eﬀect Model of Investment: An Alternative
     Interpretation of Tobin’s q,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.

[70] McCallum, Bennett T., 2009, “Inflation Determination with Taylor rules: Is New-
     Keynesian Analysis Critically Flawed?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 56, pages
     1101—1108.

[71] Mendes, Rhys, 2009, “Information, Expectations, and the Business Cycle,” Manuscript,
     Bank of Canada, Research Department.

[72] Mulligan, Casey B., 2001, “Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor,” Advances in
     Macroeconomics, Vol. 1(1), Article 4.

[73] Newey, Whitney K and West, Kenneth D, 1987. “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite,
     Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica,
     Vol. 55(3), pages 703-708, May.

[74] Paciello, Luigi, 2009, “Does Inflation Adjust Faster to Aggregate Technology Shocks
     than to Monetary Policy Shocks?,” Working Paper, Einaudi Institute for Economics
     and Finance.

[75] Prescott, Edward C., 1986, “Theory Ahead of Business-Cycle Measurement,” Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Elsevier, Vol. 25(1), pages 11-44, January.

                                             72
[76] Prescott, Edward C, 1998, “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity,” Interna-
     tional Economic Review, Vol. 39(3), pages 525-551, August.

[77] Ravenna, Federico and Carl E. Walsh, 2006, “Optimal Monetary Policy with the Cost
     Channel,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 53, pages, 199—216.

[78] Rogerson, Richard, 1988, “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, Vol. 21(1), pages 3-16.

[79] Rogerson, Richard and Johanna Wallenius, 2009, “Micro and Macro Elasticities in a
     Life Cycle Model with Taxes,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 144, pages 2277-2292.

[80] Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford, 1997, “An Optimization-Based Econometric
     Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in Bernanke, B. and J. Rotemberg,
     eds., NBER, Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[81] Sargent, Thomas, 1979, Macroeconomic Theory, New York: Academic Press.

[82] Sims, Christopher A., 1992, “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The
     Eﬀects of Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review, Vol. 36(5), pages 975-1000.

[83] Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha, 2006, “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Mone-
     tary Policy?,” American Economic Review, Vol. 96(1), pages 54-81, March.

[84] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters, 2007, “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles,”
     American Economic Review, Vol. 97(3), pages 586-606.

[85] Sveen, Tommy and Weinke, Lutz, 2005, “New Perspectives on Capital, Sticky Prices,
     and the Taylor principle”, Journal of Economic Theory, Elsevier, vol. 123(1), pages
     21-39, July.

[86] Thomas, Carlos, 2009, “Search Frictions, Real Rigidities and Inflation Dynamics,” Man-
     uscript, Bank of Spain.

[87] Topel, Robert and Sherwin Rosen, 1988, “Housing Investment in the United States,”
     Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 96(4), pages 718-740, August.

[88] Yun, Tack, 1996, “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business
     Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 37(2), pages 345-370.

[89] Walsh, Carl, 2005, “Discussion of Levin, Onatski, Williams and Williams,” NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 20.


                                            73
[90] Woodford, Michael, 2003, “Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy,” Princeton University Press.

[91] Woodford, Michael, 2004, “Inflation and Output Dynamics with Firm-Specific Invest-
     ment”, Manuscript.




                                          74
                                Table 1a: Non-Estimated Parameters in Simple Model
             Parameter       Value Description
                 β           0.99    Discount factor
                rπ            1.5    Taylor rule: inflation coeﬃcient
                 rx           0.2    Taylor rule: output gap coeﬃcient
                ρR            0.8    Taylor rule: interest rate smoothing coeﬃcient
                κp           0.11    Slope of Phillips curve
                κg            0.4    Okuns law coeﬃcient
                 ω            1.0    Elasticity of eﬃcient unemployment, u∗ , w.r.t. eﬃcient hours, h∗




                      Table 1b: Priors and Posteriors for Parameters of Simple Model
                 Parameter                                  Prior                    Posterior Mode
                                              Distribution Mean, Std.Dev.              [Std. Dev.a ]
                                                [bounds]       [5% and 95%]     Limited infob Full infoc
                                Exogenous processes parameters
Autocorrelation, labor supply shock     λ          Beta           0.75, 0.15        0.71             0.83
                                                   [0,1]         [0.47, 0.95]      [0.16]           [0.08]
Autocorrelation, Phillips curve shock   χ          Beta           0.75, 0.15        0.92             0.93
                                                   [0,1]         [0.47, 0.95]      [0.01]           [0.02]
Std. Dev., Technology Shock (%)         σz    Inv. Gamma          0.50, 0.40        0.62             0.63
                                                  [0, ∞]         [0.18, 1.04]      [0.04]           [0.04]
Std. Dev., Labor supply shock (%)       σ h∗ Inv. Gamma           0.50, 0.40        0.24             0.19
                                                  [0, ∞]         [0.18, 1.04]      [0.06]           [0.03]
Std. Dev., Monetary policy shock (%) σ M Inv. Gamma               0.50, 0.40        0.13             0.11
                                                  [0, ∞]         [0.18, 1.04]      [0.01]           [0.01]
Std. Dev., Phillips curve shock (%)     σμ    Inv. Gamma          0.50, 0.40        0.24             0.25
                                                  [0, ∞]         [0.18, 1.04]      [0.03]           [0.03]
a
    Based on Laplace approximation. b Limited info refers to our Bayesian moment—matching procedure.
c
    Full info refers to standard full information Bayesian inference based on the full likelihood of the data.
                                         Table 1c: Properties of Simple Model
                                 (at Limited Information Posterior Mode) and Dataa
              Covariances (×100) Model           Data           Covariances (×100) Model     Data
              Cov. (∆yt , ∆yt )        0.0099    0.0090         Cov. (∆yt , ∆yt−2 )  0.0010  0.0017
              Cov. (ut , ut )          0.0190    0.0220         Cov. (∆yt , ut−2 )   0.0021  0.0033
              Cov. (∆yt , ut )        -0.0013 -0.0002           Cov. (ut , ∆yt−2 )  -0.0025 -0.0038
                                                                Cov. (ut , ut−2 )    0.0174  0.0201
              Cov. (∆yt , ∆yt−1 )      0.0021    0.0030
              Cov. (∆yt , ut−1 )       0.0012    0.0022
              Cov. (ut , ∆yt−1 )      -0.0021 -0.0023
              Cov. (ut , ut−1 )        0.0184    0.0215
              a
                Sample: 1951Q1 to 2008Q4. Data series: ∆y - real per capita GDP growth,
              u - unemployment rate.




        Table 1d: Variance Decomposition of Simple Model (at Limited Information Posterior Mode, in %)
         Output Growth      Unemployment Rate Nom. Interest Rate Inflation Rate          Output Gap
                                              Technology Shocks
              38.7                  0                      0                0                 0
                                            Monetary Policy Shocks
              17.7                 1.8                    0.7              0.5               1.9
                                             Labor Supply Shocks
               0.7                 3.9                    0.1               0                0.3
                                             Phillips Curve Shocks
              42.9                94.3                    99.2             99.5             97.8




              Table 1e: Information About Output Gap in Unemployment Rate, u, Simple Model
                                       Two-sided Projection                 One-sided Projection
                                  Projection Error (%)                Projection Error (%)
                                Standard Deviation×100              Standard Deviation×100
          Parameter           u Observed u Unobserved rtwo-sided u Observed u Unobserved rone-sided

Posterior mode                         0.74             2.26            0.11          0.79             2.66              0.09

Alternative parameter values
λ = 0.99999, 100σ h∗ = 0.0015              0.68            2.24           0.09          0.68            2.64             0.07
ω = 0.001                               0.00081            2.26           0.00        0.00084           2.65             0.00
100σ h∗ = 0.001                          0.0036            2.24           0.00        0.0036            2.64             0.00
100σ h∗ = 1                                1.80            2.53           0.51          2.12            2.84             0.56
            two-sided
Note: (i) r           is the ratio of the two-sided projection error variance when u is observed to what it is when it   is
not observed. rone-sided is the analogous object for the case of one-sided projections. For details, see the text.
(ii) the posterior mode of the parameters are based on our limited information Bayesian procedure.
           Table 2: Non-Estimated Parameters in Medium-sized DSGE Model
           Parameter Value Description
                      0.25  Capital share
                     0.025 Depreciation rate
                     0.999 Discount factor
                    1.0083 Gross inflation rate
                     0.2   Government consumption to GDP ratio
              0        1   Relative price of capital
                       1   Wage indexation to  −1
                     1.01  Wage markup
                     0.75  Wage stickiness
                   1.0041 Gross neutral tech. growth
                   1.0018 Gross invest. tech. growth




Table 4:    Medium-sized DSGE   Model Steady State at Posterior Mean for Parameters
Variable    Standard Model      Description
              7.73           Capital to GDP ratio (quarterly)
              0.56           Consumption to GDP ratio
              0.24           Investment to GDP ratio
                0.63           Steady state labor input
                1.014          Gross nominal interest rate (quarterly)
 real           1.006          Gross real interest rate (quarterly)
               0.033          Capital rental rate (quarterly)
               2.22           Slope, labor disutility
           Table 3: Prior and Posteriors of Parameters for Medium-sized DSGE Model
                 Parameter                                Prior                  Posteriora
                                              Distribution Mean, Std.Dev.    Mean, Std.Dev.
                                                [bounds]      [5% and 95%]    [5% and 95%]
                                     Price setting parameters
Price Stickiness                                Beta           0.50, 0.15      0.62, 0.04
                                                 [0, 0.8]       [0.23, 0.72]    [0.56, 0.68]
Price Markup                                  Gamma            1.20, 0.15      1.20, 0.08
                                               [1.01, ∞]        [1.04, 1.50]    [1.06, 1.32]
                                 Monetary authority parameters
Taylor Rule: Interest Smoothing                 Beta           0.80, 0.10      0.87, 0.02
                                                  [0, 1]        [0.62, 0.94]    [0.85, 0.90]
Taylor Rule: Inflation Coeﬃcient              Gamma            1.60, 0.15      1.43, 0.11
                                                [1.01, 4]       [1.38, 1.87]    [1.25, 1.59]
Taylor Rule: GDP Coeﬃcient                    Gamma            0.20, 0.15      0.07, 0.03
                                                  [0, 2]        [0.03, 0.49]    [0.02, 0.11]
                                      Household parameters
Consumption Habit                                Beta           0.75, 0.15      0.77, 0.02
                                                  [0, 1]        [0.47, 0.95]    [0.74, 0.80]
Inverse Labor Supply Elasticity                Gamma            0.30, 0.20      0.12, 0.03
                                                 [0, ∞]         [0.06, 0.69]    [0.08, 0.16]
Capacity Adjustment Costs Curv.               Gamma            1.00, 0.75      0.30, 0.08
                                                 [0, ∞]         [0.15, 2.46]    [0.16, 0.44]
                                         00
Investment Adjustment Costs Curv.              Gamma           12.00, 8.00    14.30, 2.92
                                                 [0, ∞]        [2.45, 27.43]    [9.65, 18.8]
                                              Shocks
Autocorr. Investment Technology               Uniform          0.50, 0.29      0.60, 0.08
                                                  [0, 1]        [0.05, 0.95]    [0.48, 0.72]
Std.Dev. Neutral Tech. Shock (%)         Inv. Gamma            0.20, 0.10      0.22, 0.02
                                                 [0, ∞]         [0.10, 0.37]    [0.19, 0.25]
Std.Dev. Invest. Tech. Shock (%)         Inv. Gamma            0.20, 0.10      0.16, 0.02
                                                 [0, ∞]         [0.10, 0.37]    [0.12, 0.20]
Std.Dev. Monetary Shock (APR)            Inv. Gamma            0.40, 0.20      0.51, 0.05
                                                 [0, ∞]         [0.21, 0.74]    [0.44, 0.58]

    Based on standard random walk metropolis algorithm. 600 000 draws, 100 000 for burn-in, acceptance rate 27%.
              Figure 1: Indeterminacy Regions for Model with Working Capital Channel and Materials Inputs

                 rc = 0, φ = 1                       rc = 0, φ = 0.1                        rc = 0.1, φ = 1                     rc = 0.1, φ = 0.1
                                                          Taylor Rule: Rt = rπ π̂t+1 + rx xt
     1                                      1                                      1                                   1


    0.8                                   0.8                                     0.8                                 0.8


    0.6                                   0.6                                     0.6                                 0.6
γ




                                                                              γ
                                      γ




                                                                                                                  γ
    0.4                                   0.4                                     0.4                                 0.4


    0.2                                   0.2                                     0.2                                 0.2


     0                                      0                                      0                                   0
          0           0.5            1          0          0.5            1             0          0.5        1             0          0.5          1
                      ψ                                    ψ                                       ψ                                    ψ

                                                            Taylor Rule: Rt = rπ π̂t + rx xt
     1                                       1                                      1                                   1


    0.8                                    0.8                                    0.8                                 0.8


    0.6                                    0.6                                γ   0.6                                 0.6




                                                                                                                  γ
γ




                                      γ




    0.4                                    0.4                                    0.4                                 0.4


    0.2                                    0.2                                    0.2                                 0.2


     0                                       0                                      0                                   0
          0           0.5            1           0         0.5            1             0          0.5        1             0           0.5         1
                      ψ                                    ψ                                       ψ                                    ψ
          Note: grey area is region of indeterminacy and white area is region of determinacy
                                    Figure 2: Actual vs. Smoothed Output Gap, Artificial Data



            5




            0
Percent




          −5




          −10

                 Smoothed Gap − Observed Unemployment 95% Probability Interval
                 Smoothed Gap − Observed Unemployment
                 Smoothed Gap − Unobserved Unemployment
                 Smoothed Gap − Unobserved Unemployment 95% Probability Interval
                 Actual Gap
           475    480       485        490       495        500        505         510   515   520   525
                                                        Quarters
                                Figure 3: HP Filter and Optimal Univariate Filter for Estimating Output Gap
                           Filter weights                                        Filter gain                                       Correlations
                                                                                                                  0.8
           1           Optimal univariate filter                 1
                       HP weights                                                                                 0.7

          0.8                                                                                                     0.6
                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                  0.5
          0.6
                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                  0.4
          0.4
                                                               0.4                                                0.3

          0.2                                                                                                     0.2
                                                               0.2                                                                   corr(hpt,gapt−j)
                                                                                  Optimal univariate filter
                                                                                                                  0.1                corr(optimalt,gapt−j)
           0                                                                      HP filter
                                                                 0
           −15      −10    −5       0       5      10                0     0.2    0.4    0.6      0.8         1          −4     −2       0        2          4
                                                                                 frequency, ω                                            j



                                                    Actual gap versus smoothed and HP estimates, simulated data

           8
                                                                                                                        HP gap
           6                                                                                                            Optimal univariate estimated gap
                                                                                                                        Actual gap
           4
Percent




           2

           0

          −2

          −4

           100                               150                         200                        250                        300                               350
                                                                                  Quarters

                Note: stars in 1,2 panel indicate business cycle frequencies corresponding to 2 and 8 years.
                                         Figure 4: Output Gap in US Data

            6



            4



            2



            0
Percent




          −2



          −4



          −6



          −8


                  Smoothed Gap (Observed Unemployment)
          −10     Smoothed Gap (Unobserved Unemployment)
                  HP−Filter Output Gap
                1955    1960    1965     1970    1975      1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005
                        Figure 5: Actual Output and Two Measures of Potential Output, US Data

          100     Potential GDP (Observed Unemployment)
                  Potential GDP (Unobserved Unemployment)
                  Actual GDP
           90

           80

           70

           60
Percent




           50

           40

           30

           20

           10

            0
                1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005
           Figure 6: Dynamic Response of Simple Model without Capital to a One Percent Technology Shock
                                        AR(1) in Growth Rate Specification
                      Inflation                         Ouput Gap                                 Nominal Interest Rate
                                                                                        0.5

 0.1                                      0.5                                          0.45             Efficient Nominal Interest Rate

                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                        Actual Nominal Interest Rate
0.08                                      0.4                                          0.35
                                                                                        0.3
0.06                                      0.3                                          0.25
                                                                                        0.2
0.04                                      0.2
                                                                                       0.15
                                                                                        0.1
0.02                                      0.1
                                                                                       0.05

       1       2         3        4   5         1   2       3          4           5          1     2          3           4              5

                   log Technology                        Output                                         Employment
 1.9
                                          1.9                                           0.5
 1.8
                                          1.8
 1.7                                      1.7                                           0.4
 1.6                                      1.6
 1.5                                                                                    0.3
                                          1.5
 1.4                                      1.4                   Potential Output
                                                                                        0.2
 1.3                                      1.3                   Actual Output
 1.2                                      1.2                                           0.1
 1.1                                      1.1
                                                                                          0
       1       2         3        4   5         1   2       3          4           5          1     2           3           4             5
                 Figure 7a: Potential Output, Actual Output and HP Trend Based on Actual Output (Simulated Data)
                                                  AR(1) in Growth Rate Specification
    −0.4
                                                                                                                     HP trend
                                                                                                                     Potential output
−0.45
                                                                                                                     Actual output

    −0.5

−0.55

    −0.6

−0.65

    −0.7
           520          530            540           550           560             570      580   590       600              610        620
                                                                                 Quarters

                              Figure 7b: HP Filter Estimate of Output Gap Versus Actual Gap (Simulated Data)
                                                     AR(1) in Growth Rate Specification
           4


           2


           0
Percent




          −2


          −4                                                                                            HP−filtered output
                 Correlation (HP−filtered output and actual output gap) = 0.45                          Actual gap
          −6     Std(actual gap) = 0.00629, Std(HP−filtered output) = 0.0227

           520          530            540           550           560             570      580   590       600              610        620
                                                                                 Quarters
        Figure 8: Dynamic Response of Simple Model Without Capital to a One Percent Technology Shock
                                         AR(1) in Levels Specification
                     Inflation                          Ouput Gap                                  Nominal Interest Rate

                                                                                       −0.05
−0.02                                    −0.1
                                                                                        −0.1
                                                                                       −0.15
−0.04                                    −0.2
                                                                                        −0.2

−0.06                                    −0.3                                          −0.25
                                                                                        −0.3
−0.08                                    −0.4                                          −0.35
                                                                                                          Efficient Nominal Interest Rate
                                                                                        −0.4
 −0.1                                    −0.5                                          −0.45              Actual Nominal Interest Rate

                                                                                        −0.5
        1     2         3        4   5          1   2       3         4         5              1     2         3            4            5

                  log Technology                          Output                                         Employment
   1                                        1                                              0

  0.9                                     0.9                   Potential Output
                                          0.8                                           −0.1
  0.8
                                                                Actual Output
  0.7                                     0.7
                                                                                        −0.2
  0.6                                     0.6

  0.5                                     0.5
                                                                                        −0.3
  0.4                                     0.4
                                          0.3                                           −0.4
  0.3
                                          0.2
  0.2
                                          0.1                                           −0.5
  0.1
        1     2         3        4   5          1   2       3          4           5           1     2          3           4               5
                          Figure 9a: Potential Output, Actual Output and HP Trend Based on Actual Output (Simulated Data)
                                                             AR(1) in Levels Specification
                                                                                                                         HP trend
                    2
                                                                                                                         Potential output
                                                                                                                         Actual output
                    1
          Percent



                    0


                −1


                −2


                −3
                 520               530           540           550           560            570      580   590   600         610            620
                                                                                          Quarters


                                      Figure 9b: HP Filter Estimate of Output Gap Versus Actual Gap (Simulated Data)
                                                                 AR(1) in Levels Specification
              1.5

                    1

              0.5
Percent




                    0

          −0.5

                −1
                                                                                                                       HP−filtered output
          −1.5            Correlation(HP−filtered output and actual output gap) = −0.94                                Actual gap
                          Std(actual gap) = 0.00629, Std(HP−filtered output) = 0.00457
                    520            530           540           550           560            570      580   590   600         610            620
                                                                                          Quarters
                    Figure 10: Dynamic Responses of Variables to a Monetary Policy Shock
              Real GDP (%)                       Inflation (GDP deflator, APR)            Federal Funds Rate (APR)
                                                                                   0.2
 0.4                                       0.2
                                                                                    0
 0.2                                       0.1
                                                                                  −0.2
                                            0                                     −0.4
  0
                                          −0.1                                    −0.6
−0.2
    0           5          10                0            5          10              0           5          10

          Real Consumption (%)                       Real Investment (%)                   Capacity Utilization (%)
                                                                                    1
 0.2                                        1

                                           0.5                                     0.5
 0.1
                                            0
  0                                                                                 0
                                          −0.5
−0.1
    0           5          10                0            5          10              0           5          10

        Rel. Price of Investment (%)             Hours Worked Per Capita (%)                   Real Wage (%)

                                           0.3
 0.2                                                                              0.05
0.15                                       0.2
                                                                                    0
 0.1                                       0.1
                                                                                 −0.05
0.05                                        0
                                                                                  −0.1
  0                                       −0.1                                   −0.15
   0            5          10                0            5          10               0          5          10
                                VAR 95%          VAR Mean         Medium−sized DSGE Model (Mean, 95%)
                   Figure 11: Dynamic Responses of Variables to a Neutral Technology Shock
             Real GDP (%)                        Inflation (GDP deflator, APR)           Federal Funds Rate (APR)

 0.6
                                         −0.2                                       0
 0.4
                                         −0.4
 0.2                                                                             −0.2
                                         −0.6
  0
                                         −0.8                                    −0.4
   0           5          10                 0            5          10              0          5          10

         Real Consumption (%)                        Real Investment (%)                  Capacity Utilization (%)
                                                                                  0.5
                                          1.5
 0.6
                                           1                                        0
 0.4                                      0.5
                                           0                                     −0.5
 0.2
                                         −0.5
   0           5          10                0             5          10              0          5          10

       Rel. Price of Investment (%)              Hours Worked Per Capita (%)                  Real Wage (%)

  0                                       0.4                                     0.4
                                          0.3                                     0.3
−0.1
                                          0.2                                     0.2
−0.2
                                          0.1                                     0.1
−0.3                                       0                                        0

   0           5          10                0             5          10              0          5          10
                               VAR 95%           VAR Mean         Medium−sized DSGE Model (Mean, 95%)
          Figure 12: Dynamic Responses of Variables to an Investment Specific Technology Shock
             Real GDP (%)                       Inflation (GDP deflator, APR)           Federal Funds Rate (APR)
 0.6                                                                             0.4
                                           0
 0.4                                                                             0.2
                                         −0.2
 0.2                                                                               0

                                         −0.4
  0                                                                             −0.2

   0           5          10                0            5          10              0          5          10

         Real Consumption (%)                       Real Investment (%)                  Capacity Utilization (%)
 0.6
                                           1                                       1
 0.4                                      0.5
                                                                                 0.5
                                           0
 0.2
                                         −0.5                                      0

                                          −1
   0           5          10                0            5          10              0          5          10

       Rel. Price of Investment (%)             Hours Worked Per Capita (%)                  Real Wage (%)
                                          0.4                                    0.2
−0.2
                                                                                 0.1
                                          0.2
−0.4                                                                               0

                                           0                                    −0.1
−0.6
                                                                                −0.2
   0           5          10                0            5          10              0          5          10
                               VAR 95%          VAR Mean         Medium−sized DSGE Model (Mean, 95%)
                 Figure 13: VAR Specification Sensitivity: Response to a Monetary Policy Shock
             Real GDP (%)                         Inflation (GDP deflator, APR)               Federal Funds Rate (APR)
 0.4
                                            0.2                                         0.2
                                                                                         0
 0.2                                        0.1
                                                                                       −0.2
  0                                          0                                         −0.4

                                           −0.1                                        −0.6
−0.2
             5          10            15                5          10             15               5          10          15

         Real Consumption (%)                         Real Investment (%)                      Capacity Utilization (%)

                                             1                                          0.8
 0.2
                                                                                        0.6
                                            0.5
 0.1                                                                                    0.4
                                             0                                          0.2
  0                                                                                       0
                                           −0.5
                                                                                       −0.2
−0.1
             5          10            15                5          10             15               5          10          15

       Rel. Price of Investment (%)               Hours Worked Per Capita (%)                      Real Wage (%)
                                            0.3
                                                                                        0.1
 0.2
                                            0.2
 0.1                                                                                     0
                                            0.1

  0                                          0                                         −0.1

−0.1                                       −0.1
             5          10        15                   5           10          15                 5          10   15
              Alternative VAR Specifications (All Combinations of:            VAR used for Estimation of the
              VAR Lags 1,..,5 and Sample Starts 1951Q1,...,1985Q4)            Medium−sized DSGE Model (Mean, 95%)
                      Figure 14: VAR Specification Sensitivity: Neutral Technology Shock
             Real GDP (%)                         Inflation (GDP deflator, APR)               Federal Funds Rate (APR)
 0.8                                        0.2
                                                                                        0.2
 0.6                                         0

 0.4                                       −0.2                                          0
                                           −0.4
 0.2                                                                                   −0.2
                                           −0.6
  0                                                                                    −0.4
                                           −0.8
             5          10            15                5          10             15               5          10          15

         Real Consumption (%)                         Real Investment (%)                      Capacity Utilization (%)

 0.6                                                                                    0.5
                                             1
 0.4
                                                                                         0
 0.2                                         0

                                                                                       −0.5
  0
                                            −1
             5          10            15                5          10             15               5          10          15

       Rel. Price of Investment (%)               Hours Worked Per Capita (%)                      Real Wage (%)

                                            0.4                                         0.4
 0.2

  0                                         0.2                                         0.2

−0.2                                         0                                           0

             5          10        15                   5           10          15                 5          10   15
              Alternative VAR Specifications (All Combinations of:            VAR used for Estimation of the
              VAR Lags 1,..,5 and Sample Starts 1951Q1,...,1985Q4)            Medium−sized DSGE Model (Mean, 95%)
                 Figure 15: VAR Specification Sensitivity: Investment Specific Technology Shock
             Real GDP (%)                         Inflation (GDP deflator, APR)               Federal Funds Rate (APR)
 0.6                                        0.4                                         0.5

 0.4                                        0.2
 0.2                                         0                                           0
  0
                                           −0.2
−0.2
                                           −0.4
−0.4                                                                                   −0.5
             5          10            15                5          10             15               5          10          15

         Real Consumption (%)                         Real Investment (%)                      Capacity Utilization (%)
 0.6
                                             2                                           1
 0.4
                                             1                                          0.5
 0.2
  0                                          0                                           0

−0.2                                        −1                                         −0.5

             5          10            15                5          10             15               5          10          15

       Rel. Price of Investment (%)               Hours Worked Per Capita (%)                      Real Wage (%)
  0                                         0.4
                                                                                        0.4

−0.2                                        0.2                                         0.2

−0.4                                         0                                           0

−0.6                                       −0.2                                        −0.2
             5          10        15                   5           10          15                 5          10   15
              Alternative VAR Specifications (All Combinations of:            VAR used for Estimation of the
              VAR Lags 1,..,5 and Sample Starts 1951Q1,...,1985Q4)            Medium−sized DSGE Model (Mean, 95%)
        Figure 16: Priors and Posteriors of Estimated Parameters of the Medium−Sized DSGE Model
                 ξp                                   σR                                   σz                             ρψ
 10                                     8
                                                                         20
                                        6                                                                     4

  5                                     4                                10                                   2
                                        2
  0                                     0                                 0                                   0
         0.2     0.4            0.6          0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8      1           0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5                  0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
                  σψ                                  ρR                                   rπ                             ry

 15                                     20                                3
                                                                                                              10
 10                                                                       2
                                        10                                                                    5
  5                                                                       1

  0                                     0                                 0                                   0
       0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5                    0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9              1.2   1.4    1.6     1.8   2    0    0.2     0.4   0.6
                 S    ”
                                                      b                                    σa                             λf
0.15
                                        20
                                                                          4                                   4
 0.1
                                        10                                2                                   2
0.05

  0                                     0                                 0                                   0
           10     20             30             0.4   0.6   0.8                      1          2     3             1.2     1.4   1.6
                  φ
 15                                                   Prior
                                                      Posterior (Laplace Approximation After Posterior Mode Optimization)
 10
                                                      Posterior Mode (After Posterior Mode Optimization)
  5                                                   Posterior (After Random Walk Metropolis (MCMC), Kernel Estimate)

  0
          0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8
