NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPOSITION OF WEALTH, CONDITIONING INFORMATION, AND THE CROSS-SECTION
OF STOCK RETURNS
Nikolai Roussanov
Working Paper 16073
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16073
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010

I am grateful to John Cochrane and Pietro Veronesi for their advice and feedback on the early drafts
of this paper. I have also benefited from conversations with and comments by Andy Abel, Federico
Bandi, Frederico Belo, David Chapman, George Constantinides, Kent Daniel, Greg Duffee, João Gomes,
Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Ravi Jagannathan, Don Keim, Mark Klebanov, Martin Lettau, Jon Lewellen,
Sydney Ludvigson, Hanno Lustig, Craig Mackinlay, Toby Moskowitz, Per Mykland, Jonathan Parker,
Ľuboš Pástor, Monika Piazzesi, Lukasz Pomorski, Scott Richard, Enrique Sentana, Ivan Shaliastovich,
Nick Souleles, Rob Stambaugh, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Jessica Wachter, Yuhang Xing, Amir
Yaron, Moto Yogo, Lu Zhang, the anonymous referee, and William Schwert (the editor), as well as
seminar participants at Chicago GSB, Northwestern (Kellogg), Virginia (McIntire), Wharton, WFA
2005 conference, NBER Summer Institute 2009 Asset Pricing meeting, 2010 Texas Finance Festival,
and Vanderbilt conference on Human Capital and Finance. I thank Ken French, Sydney Ludvigson
and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen for making their datasets available. Financial support from the Wharton
School under Cynthia and Bennett Golub Endowed Faculty Scholarship is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Nikolai Roussanov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Composition of Wealth, Conditioning Information, and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns
Nikolai Roussanov
NBER Working Paper No. 16073
June 2010, Revised February 2013
JEL No. C14,G1,G12
ABSTRACT
Value stocks covary with aggregate consumption more than growth stocks during periods when financial
wealth is low relative to consumption. However, the conditional value premium does not exhibit such
countercyclical behavior. Consequently, a one-factor conditional consumption-based asset pricing
model can be rejected without making any arbitrary assumptions on the dynamics of the price of risk
or the conditional moments. Empirical evidence is somewhat more consistent with a consumption-based
model augmented with an aggregate wealth growth factor, which can be motivated by either recursive
preferences or relative wealth concerns.
Nikolai Roussanov
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

The central prediction of the canonical consumption-based asset pricing model (e.g., Breeden, 1979) is that average return on any security is proportional to its risk, measured by
the conditional covariance of returns with aggregate consumption growth. This prediction
fails dramatically when confronted with the cross-section of unconditional expected returns,
and particularly for the equity portfolios of Fama and French (1993). In principle, the
consumption-based model could still hold conditionally, if both the price of consumption
risk and the covariances of returns with consumption growth vary over time, as argued,
for example, by Campbell and Cochrane (2000). In this paper I show that the empirical
properties of conditional moments of equity returns and aggregate consumption are inconsistent with the canonical conditional one-factor consumption-based model, without making
any assumptions on the time-series behavior of aggregate risk aversion. The observed patterns of expected returns are potentially consistent with a generalization of the conditional
consumption-based model that includes the return on the wealth portfolio as an additional
priced factor. However, statistical evidence in support of the extended model, which may be
hindered by the unobservable nature of aggregate wealth, is somewhat inconclusive.
I identify a key feature of the data that drives the rejection of standard CCAPM: “value”
stocks, which have high unconditional expected returns, typically do not exhibit a greater
increase in conditional expected returns than “growth” stocks when their relative exposure
to consumption risk rises. This fact is at odds with explanations of the value premium that
appeal to a time-varying price of consumption risk, such as Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b),
and thus underlies the economic (rather than purely statistical) rejection of the conditional
CCAPM.1 Imposing conditional moment restrictions prescribed by the theory in a flexible
way that avoids tight parametric assumptions on the dynamics of conditional moments and
1

A number of authors have argued that conditioning information substantially improves the empirical
performance of consumption-based models by allowing the price of consumption risk to vary over time, in
particular Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005), Petkova and Zhang (2005),
and Santos and Veronesi (2006). However, others have suggested that the superior performance of the
conditional models may be an illusion caused by the low statistical power of standard asset pricing tests
(e.g., Lewellen and Nagel, 2006; Ferson and Siegel, 2009, and Nagel and Singleton (2010)).

2

risk prices reveals a conditional value premium puzzle of essentially the same magnitude as
observed unconditionally.
These findings pose a challenge to some of the leading dynamic asset pricing models
that rely on time-varying price of consumption risk, driven either by habit-dependent risk
aversion, as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), or by shifts in the distribution of wealth
across heterogeneous investors, as, for example, in Chan and Kogan (2002). I explore an
extension of the standard consumption-beta framework and consider a conditional two-factor
model with contemporaneous aggregate consumption growth and aggregate wealth growth
(proxied by the stock market return) – CWCAPM. Such a model can be motivated either by
recursive preferences (Epstein and Zin, 1991; Duffie and Epstein, 1992) or by social status
concerns (Bakshi and Chen, 1996; Roussanov, 2010). In the former class of models wealth
growth is an additional state variable because it captures innovations to the continuation
utility that may not be reflected in current consumption, whereas in the latter set of models
aggregate wealth enters individual preferences directly.2 Such a conditional two-factor model
substantially reduces the magnitude of pricing errors on the benchmark book-to-market and
size portfolios, effectively eliminating the value puzzle. Nevertheless, the evidence in favor
of the model is not conclusive as some pricing errors are statistically significant (e.g., large
growth stocks actually outperform).
The key innovation in my empirical analysis is testing conditional implications of asset pricing models without specifying a particular parametric structure on the dynamics
of returns and factor risk prices.3 I develop an intuitive econometric procedure based on
2

Garleanu and Panageas (2009) build a heterogeneous-agents model with recursive preferences in which
prices of risk associated with consumption growth and with news about future utility are both functions of
the cross-sectional composition of wealth. While their explicit setup features a single source of aggregate
uncertainty and thus collapses to a conditional one-factor model, a more general version of such a model can
be a seen as an example of a two-factor CWCAPM. Such priced sources of risk that are not fully reﬂected
in contemporaneous consumption are news about long-run growth pioneered by Bansal and Yaron (2004),
investment-speciﬁc shocks introduced by Papanikolaou (2011), and innovations to uncertainty explored by
Bansal, Kiku, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2012) as well as Campbell, Giglio, Polk, and Turley (2012).
3
In early contributions to the conditional CAPM/ICAPM literature, Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge
(1988) model the dynamics of conditional covariances explicitly using GARCH methodology, Campbell (1987)
and Harvey (1989) also model conditional covariances explicitly via linear instrumental variables; Shanken
(1990) pursues a similar approach.

3

nonparametric kernel regression. I estimate the conditional market prices of risk using the
information contained in the cross section of asset returns via cross sectional regressions of
conditional expected returns on conditional covariances, both estimated nonparametrically
for each point in the state space.4 This approach is robust to misspecification of both the
conditional moments and the prices of risk. This is important, since most conditional asset
pricing models do not describe explicitly the dependence of covariances or risk prices on the
observed conditioning variables, and, as emphasized by Brandt and Chapman (2007), using
ad hoc specification (e.g., linearity) can lead to spurious rejections. I use Monte Carlo simulation analysis to demonstrate that the pricing error tests based on my estimation methodology
have sufficient power to reject a false model, yet also allow for a true conditional model to
be detected even when the unconditional tests are likely to reject it (e.g., when the wealth
portfolio return is imperfectly observed by the econometrician).
Given the difficulty of measuring the wealth portfolio, I provide additional evidence in
support of the CWCAPM that relies on the fact that total wealth returns reflect news
about future consumption growth (Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Hansen, Heaton, and Li, 2008;
Hansen, Heaton, Lee, and Roussanov, 2007). This complementary approach involves using
long-run rather than contemporaneous consumption growth to test the conditional CCAPM,
e.g. as in Parker and Julliard (2005). I show that covariances of portfolio returns with
long-run consumption growth vary less over time than the contemporaneous covariances.
Using these covariances in asset pricing tests results in small and insignificant pricing errors,
but the advantage over the standard model seems to come primarily from the differences in
unconditional rather than conditional covariances across portfolios. This result suggests that
the mixed evidence in favor of the CWCAPM may be in part due to the fact that the stock
market is a poor proxy for the total wealth portfolio, as originally pointed out by Roll (1977).
The latter is especially relevant in the presence of composition effects, whereby the relative
4

Following Pagan and Schwert (1990) it is common to use nonparametric regression to estimate conditional volatility of stock returns. For other studies that have used nonparametric techniques to identify
nonlinearities in stochastic discount factors see, for example, Gallant, Hansen, and Tauchen (1990) and
Bansal and Viswanathan (1993); Chen and Fan (1999), Wang (2003), and Chen and Ludvigson (2009)
use nonparametric methods to test conditional moment restrictions implied by asset pricing models. The
procedure developed here is also related to the conditional method of moments of Brandt (1999).

4

contributions of financial and human capital to total wealth change over time (Lustig and
Van Nieuwerburgh, 2008; Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan, 2009; Bansal, Kiku,
Shaliastovich, and Yaron, 2012).
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the class of consumption-based
conditional asset pricing models that feature composition effects. Section 3 introduces the
new econometric methodology for estimation and testing of conditional factor models. I
present the main empirical results in Section 4. In Section 5 I investigate statistical properties
of the nonparametric tests using simulation analysis. Section 6 extends the empirical analysis
by considering long-run consumption risk and incorporating a larger conditioning information
set. Section 7 concludes. Discussion of the underlying economic theory, statistical properties
of the estimators, and data description is relegated to the Appendix, as are some of the
empirical results confirming the robustness of my main findings.

2

Composition of wealth in conditional asset pricing
models

A large class of consumption-based asset pricing models implies a relationship between conditional expected returns on risky assets in excess of the risk-free rate and the conditional
covariance of excess returns with aggregate consumption growth. This relationship can be
written as


∆Ct+1
ei
ei
|It )
E Rt+1
|It = γt Cov(Rt+1
,
Ct

ei
where Rt+1
is the excess return and

∆Ct+1
Ct

(1)

is the growth rate of aggregate consumption. In

the classical setting with representative consumer who has power utility γt is constant over
time and equal to the coefficient of relative risk aversion. More generally, γt is a function of
variables contained in the information set It . This is the case in settings with time-varying
risk aversion, such as the habit formation models (Constantinides, 1990 and Campbell and
Cochrane (1999)) where γt depends on the history of past consumption. It is also consistent
with heterogeneous investor models in which the price of aggregate consumption risk depends
5

on the evolution of the joint distribution of consumption shares and risk aversion parameters
across households (e.g. Grossman and Shiller (1982); Chan and Kogan, 2002).
The possibility that the price of consumption covariance risk γt is time varying offers
some hope of rationalizing puzzling features of the cross-section of stock returns within
the consumption-based asset pricing paradigm, as emphasized by Campbell and Cochrane
(2000). Assets that have the same unconditional covariance with consumption growth can
earn different average returns if conditional covariances differ. Assets that covary more with
consumption when the price of consumption risk γt is high are riskier, and therefore will
have higher expected returns. In particular, Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) argue that the
“value premium” - the tendency of stocks with higher ratios of book to market equity to
earn higher returns than do low book to market stocks - can be explained by the fact that
“value” stocks comove more with consumption growth during “bad times” when the price of
risk is high than do growth stocks, even though the unconditional covariances are not very
different.
Generic conditional factor models are not testable using discrete-time data without imposing additional restrictions since the econometrician does not necessarily observe the entire
conditioning information set (Hansen and Richard, 1987).5 However one can test specific
versions of these models that make predictions regarding specific observable quantities that
capture time-variation in risk premia:

∆Ct+1
ei
ei
|zt ).
E Rt+1
|zt = γC (zt ) Cov(Rt+1
,
Ct

(2)

where zt ∈ It are some pre-specified variables that are thought to capture variation in the
price of consumption risk so that γt = γ (zt ).
I specify the conditioning information set zt a priori following the recent literature that
5

In continuous time the second moments can be measured arbitrarily precisely (Merton, 1980; Andersen,
Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys, 2003) and therefore no conditioning information is required. In discrete-time,
similar approach can be used under the assumption that these moments vary suﬃciently smoothly over time
(Lewellen and Nagel, 2006; Ang and Kristensen, 2009) as long as high-frequency data is available. This
approach is not applicable to testing models with factors that are not observed at high frequency, such as
consumption.

6

emphasizes the fluctuations in the composition of aggregate consumption and wealth. I
restrict it to variables that capture time variation in the shares of financial wealth and
human capital in the total aggregate wealth. Economic theory predicts that these variables
should be important for capturing time evolution in the conditional covariance between
consumption growth and stock returns, as emphasized by Duffee (2005) and Santos and
Veronesi (2006). Indeed, if stock market (or, more generally, all non-human) wealth W and
a stream of labor income y are the only state variables driving consumption, this covariance
can be expressed, for asset i, as
Covt (Rei ,

∆Wt+1
∆yt+1
∆Ct+1
ei
ei
) = εW (zt ) Covt (Rt+1
) + εy (zt ) Covt (Rt+1
),
,
,
Ct
Wt
yt

(3)

where εW (zt ) and εy (zt ) are elasticities of consumption with respect to financial wealth and
labor income (which are assumed to be the only determinants of consumption). This equality
holds exactly in continuous time if W and y follow diffusion processes (see Appendix A) but
similar expressions can be derived in discrete time, at least approximately; for example,
Duffee (2005) derives a similar expression using the log-linearized Euler equation framework
of Campbell (1996). It shows that even if conditional covariances of asset returns with the
total stock market wealth and with labor income growth are constant, the covariance of
returns with consumption growth need not be.6 For example, if stock returns and labor
income growth are uncorrelated, this covariance will be greater when consumption is more
sensitive to changes in stock market wealth.7
6

The idea that the composition of total wealth might be important for explaining asset returns goes back
at least to Roll (1977), who argued that the stock market is a poor proxy for the total wealth portfolio. Fama
and Schwert (1977) tested a version of CAPM that includes human capital return as an additional factor.
Stambaugh (1982) extended the market portfolio proxy to incorporate non-stock market assets. Ferson,
Kandel, and Stambaugh (1987) tested (and rejected) a conditional CAPM in which market betas vary due
to the changing composition of the market portfolio, even if the return covariance matrix is constant. More
recently, some of the tests of conditional factor models also included proxies for the return to human capital
- e.g. Campbell (1996), Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Jagannathan, Kubota, and Takehara (1998), Heaton
and Lucas (2000), and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b). A related, but diﬀerent, recent strand of literature
has focused on the eﬀect of consumption composition on asset returns - see Pakos (2004), Piazzesi, Schneider,
and Tuzel (2007), and Yogo (2006).
7
This decomposition relies on deliberately stark assumptions about the joint dynamics of labor income
and asset returns. If consumption reﬂects news about future growth rates (e.g., of labor income) or discount
rates, the covariances with these innovations will also enter (3).

7

In the case of time-separable preferences with constant relative risk aversion coefficient
γ the conditional moment restriction (2) is equivalent to

∆yt+1
ei
ei
eM
ei
|zt ),
E Rt+1
|zt = λW (zt ) Cov(Rt+1
, Rt+1
|zt ) + λy (zt ) Cov(Rt+1
,
yt

(4)

eM
where Rt+1
is the excess return on the total financial wealth portfolio (i.e. the market return)

and the prices of risk are given by λW (zt ) = γεW (zt ) and λy (zt ) = γεy (zt ). This observation
that the risk premia associated with assets’ covariances with the state variables are equal to
the sensitivities of consumption to the state variables scaled by the utility curvature is the
central insight of Breeden (1979), which leads to the equivalence between the multi-factor
intertemporal CAPM and the single-factor consumption CAPM. In the more general case of
recursive preferences (4) may still hold even if (2) does not (although the form of the price
of risk functions λW and λy is more involved - see A.1 for details). In what follows I refer to
this model as an Intertemporal CAPM (with human capital).
In addition to the canonical consumption CAPM and the human-capital ICAPM above
I consider another closely related model, referred to as CWCAPM, in which covariances of
returns with both consumption growth and aggregate financial wealth growth (e.g., proxied
by the market portfolio as above) contribute to the determination of asset’s expected excess
return:

∆Ct+1
ei
eM
ei
ei
, Rt+1
|zt ).
|zt ) + λW (zt ) Cov(Rt+1
E Rt+1
|zt = λC (zt ) Cov(Rt+1
,
Ct

(5)

This specification is motivated by the asset pricing models with recursive utility in which aggregate wealth proxies for the continuation value of future consumption utility (e.g., Epstein
and Zin, 1989; Duffie and Epstein, 1992) and models with social status concerns in which aggregate wealth is a state variable as long as it effects investors’ relative position (e.g., Bakshi
and Chen, 1996; Roussanov, 2010). In the latter case, the ratio of aggregate consumption to
aggregate financial wealth is a fundamental state variable that drives time-variation in the
two prices of risk λC (zt ) and λW (zt ) (see A.2 for a derivation).

8

Motivated by the role of wealth composition in driving conditional moments of consumption and asset returns I use the following variables in my investigation: the ratio of labor
income to consumption introduced by Santos and Veronesi (2006), the cointegrating residual of consumption, financial wealth and labor income developed by Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001a), and the ratio of aggregate consumption to financial (stock market) wealth that is
similar to the variable used by Duffee (2005).8 Throughout the remainder of the paper I will
adopt the following notation for the four alternative conditioning variables: the cointegrating residual of consumption and wealth is cay; by analogy, the labor income to consumption
ratio is referred to as yc; the consumption to wealth ratio is labeled ca.

2.1

Testing conditional restrictions

Linear factor models of empirical asset pricing can be specified as restrictions on first and
second moments of (excess) asset returns Re and some fundamental factors f such as

′
Et Ret+1 = Covt Ret+1 , ft+1 λt ,

(6)

where λ is the vector of risk prices associated with the factors, which generally vary over
time. This representation is equivalent to the stochastic discount factor representation and
the somewhat more traditional beta representation (see Cochrane (2005) for discussion).
As is well known, the conditional model above does not in general imply the unconditional
model


′
ei
ei
E Rt+1
= Cov Rt+1
, ft+1 λ̄.

(7)

Thus the conditional model cannot be tested directly using standard econometric methods.
The usual approach to testing such models (e.g. Cochrane (1996)) amounts to assuming
that the conditional covariances and expected returns are (linear) functions of prespecified
8

This is diﬀerent from measuring the ratio of consumption to total wealth, for example as estimated by
Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan (2009), which can vary even in the absence of the composition
eﬀect.

9

conditioning variable(s) and testing the unconditional ‘scaled factor’ models of the form

′

ei
ei
E Rt+1
= Cov Rt+1
, f̃t+1 λ̃,

(8)

where f̃t+1 = ft+1 ⊗ [1, zt ] and z is the vector of instruments that are assumed to capture all
of the relevant conditioning information. The focus of this paper is on testing the conditional
moment restrictions


′
ei
ei
E Rt+1
|zt = Cov Rt+1
, ft+1 |zt λ (zt ) ,

(9)

as well as their unconditional implications

h
i

′
ei
ei
E Rt+1
= E Cov Rt+1
, ft+1 |zt λ (zt ) .

(10)

Imposing conditional moment restrictions is equivalent to augmenting the space of test
assets with a large number of “managed” portfolios that use the conditioning variable to
determine the portfolio weights, as described by Cochrane (1996). Therefore, doing so yields
a much more powerful test of the conditional model than does (8). The challenge in imposing
such conditional restrictions is in allowing for a sufficiently general functional form of the
conditional moments and prices of risk, given little explicit guidance from economic theory.

3

Nonparametric cross-sectional regression

In this section I develop an econometric approach to estimating linear factor models with
conditioning information that is robust to misspecification of the functional relationship
between factor risk prices and the observed conditioning variables. This class of models can
be summarized by the set of N conditional moment restrictions, each corresponding to one
of the test assets i ∈ {1, . . . , N} :

ei
ei
E Rt+1
− Cov(Rt+1
, ft+1 |zt )′ λ (zt ) |zt = 0,
10

(11)

ei
where Rt+1
denotes excess returns on asset i and ft+1 is the K-vector of factors. The condi-

tioning variable zt is in general a d-dimensional vector.
For each fixed value z, the estimator of the vector of (conditional) risk prices is then

λ̂ (z) = arg min g (z)′ W (z) g (z) ,

(12)

λ

where



b Re |z − Cov
d Re , ft+1 |z ′ λ
g (z) = E
t+1
t+1

(13)

and W is a weighting matrix9 that can be state-dependent. Letting the vector of conditional
mean returns to be denoted m (z) and the N × K matrix of conditional covariances between
excess returns and factors be cv (z), the estimator is given by the weighted least-squares
regression of conditional mean returns on conditional covariances:
b (z) = cc
λ
v (z)′ W cc
v (z)

−1

b (z) ,
cc
v (z)′ W m

(14)

where the hatted variables refer to the estimated quantities, as usual. I use the locally linear
estimators of conditional moments in most of my analysis, as they are known to possess
somewhat better statistical properties than the simple nonparametric kernel regression approach, in particular lower bias at the boundaries of the state space, although both yields
essentially the same results in my setting. See appendix for a detailed description of these
estimators.

3.1

Properties of the estimator

b (z) under the null hypothesis that the asset
Consistency of the price of risk estimates λ

pricing model holds (i.e. the population moment conditions are satisfied) follows from the
9

The nonparametric approach used by Wang (2003) can be viewed as a special case of the method
considered here. He estimates stochastic discount factor (SDF) loadings under the assumption that the
factor mimicking portfolios are priced exactly, and then uses this estimated SDF to test its ability to price
a set of portfolio returns. In other words, he uses one set of (conditional) moment conditions for estimation
(by setting K conditional moments to zero in sample) and another set of N moment conditions for testing.

11

consistency of nonparametric conditional moment estimators above. More formal discussion
of consistency of the nonparametric price of risk estimators can be found in B. Similar to
the standard two-pass method, the usual errors-in-variables problem arising from the fact
that the covariances of returns with factors are estimated is also present in the context of
conditional estimation considered here. It does not affect the consistency of our estimators
as long as the “first-stage” quantities (conditional means and covariances) are estimated
consistently, but it does make the market price of risk estimators biased. In addition, the
nonparametric regression estimators of conditional moments are also biased. This is the
usual cost associated with the flexibility allowed by nonparametric estimation. Of course,
a parametric conditional model has the same problem unless economic theory specifies the
functional form of the conditional moments and risk prices. Unfortunately, there is no
straightforward way to “correct” for these two types of bias since the asymptotic theory for
the estimators proposed above is rather involved and its development is beyond the scope of
this paper10 . In practice I use bootstrap methods to conduct statistical inference. Bootstrap
allows constructing confidence intervals based on the approximated empirical distribution
functions of the estimators under study. I provide the details of the bootstrap approach in
Appendix E. The main way of controlling both the bias and the variance of the estimators is
by choosing the bandwidth h, which essentially specifies how smooth the resulting functional
estimates are (usually, too much smoothing increases the bias, whereas too little smoothing
increases the variance of the estimators). It is known that the choice of a kernel function
does not have a significant effect on the statistical properties of kernel estimators (see Pagan
and Ullah, 1999), as long as they satisfy certain simple conditions (see Appendix B ). I use
Epanechnikov kernel, which is known to be optimal (in terms of the trade-off between bias
and variance) whenever a single conditioning variable is used (as in my application).
Bandwidth selection is an unresolved issue that plagues much of the nonparametric estimation literature. It is a standard result that the optimal (in the sense that it minimizes
the mean integrated square error of the nonparametric regression) smoothing parameter h
10

Aı̈t-Sahalia (1992) presents a general method for constructing asymptotic distributions of estimators
based on nonparametric kernel functionals, which could be applied in the present setup.

12

is given by
1

h = cσ (z) T − d+4 ,

(15)

where σ is the (vector of) unconditional standard deviation(s) of z, T is the sample size, d is
the dimension of z, and c is a constant. Therefore, in practice, one only is given an optimal
convergence rate for the bandwidth, since the latter constant is unrestricted. Moreover,
when variables in z are highly persistent, which is the case for most of the financial ratios
and is true for some of the variables used in this study, larger bandwidths are optimal and
convergence rates are slower than in the standard stationary setup (see Bandi, 2004).
There exist a number of techniques for “automatic” choice of the optimal constant c,
and therefore of the optimal smoothing parameter. Most of them are based on either leaveone-out cross-validation or bootstrap and concentrate on minimizing the prediction error of
the conditional moment estimators. Since in the present context the conditional moment
estimators are “first-pass” quantities used in constructing the “second-pass” estimates of the
market prices of risk, it is unclear that any of those procedures are equally suitable in the
present context. At the same time, given the criterion that the estimators proposed here are
based on, it is natural to make the choice of the bandwidth parameter subject to the same
criterion. Consider



λ̂ (z)
ĥ(z)




 = arg min g (z; λ, h)′ W (z; h) g (z; λ, h) ,

(16)

λ,h

where
b (z; h) − cc
g (z; λ, h) = m
v (z; h)′ λ.

(17)

Then the first-order conditions still give the estimators λ̂ (z) above, but now the bandwidth
is chosen automatically. Pending further development of the asymptotic theory for the
estimators proposed here there is no claim that this method of choosing the bandwidth
is “optimal.” I find, however, that the results obtained using this approach do not differ
dramatically from those obtained with more standard procedures (for example, minimizing

13

the mean integrated standard error under the bootstrap distribution).
Methodologically, my approach is closely related and complementary to that adopted by
Nagel and Singleton (2010). They also impose conditional moment restrictions implied by the
asset pricing model. They derive the optimal weights on the test assets and instruments that
allow them to maximize the power of asset pricing tests asymptotically. At the same time,
their adoption of the GMM framework requires an explicit specification of the prices of risk
as functions of the conditioning variables. In contrast, I allow prices of risk to be as flexible
as possible by using the fully nonparametric approach. While this approach in general will
not be efficient, it minimizes the misspecification bias and gives a (true) model the greatest
chance of success by ensuring that it is not rejected due to an incorrectly specified functional
form of the risk prices (a non-trivial concern, as shown by Brandt and Chapman (2007)). In
addition, in Section 6.2 below I show that my approach allows parsimonious nonparametric
modeling of the dependence of the prices of risk on a large number of conditioning variables
via a single-index approach similar to that of Aı̈t-Sahalia and Brandt (2001).

4

Empirical results

I use excess returns on the six benchmark equity portfolios of Fama and French (1992), which
are the intersection of the two portfolios formed on size and three portfolios formed on the
ratio of book equity to market equity, to test conditional asset pricing models at quarterly
frequency. The time period is fourth quarter of 1952 through the fourth quarter of 2008 (see
D for detailed description of the data).

4.1

Conditional expected returns and conditional covariances

Before evaluating the cross-sectional fit of the asset pricing models I analyze the dynamics
of conditional moments of the test returns. All of these quantities are estimated nonparametrically; in order to reduce the bias in the estimates I present the means of the sampling
distributions along with the 95% confidence intervals obtained via stationary bootstrap (see

14

C for details on the bootstrap procedure). Shaded area in the background represents the
kernel estimate of the probability density function of the conditioning variable, scaled appropriately.
Figure 1 displays conditional expected excess returns on the six benchmark portfolios as
functions of cay (solid lines), along with the unconditional average returns (straight dashed
lines). Expected returns on all of the portfolios increase throughout most of the range of
cay, but decline at the high values of the state variable. The strength of the relationship
varies across portfolios. For large portfolios, and especially for large growth portfolios, the
differences between conditional mean returns in low-cay states and the high-cay states are a
lot more pronounced and more statistically significant than they are for the small portfolios
(especially small growth). For the large growth portfolios expected returns vary between
being close to zero or slightly negative to over four percent per quarter, around the unconditional mean of about two percent. For the small value portfolio the expected returns vary
between one and five percent, reverting back to the unconditional mean of 3.5% per quarter
in the right tail of the distribution of cay. For the small portfolios the variation in expected
returns is less detectable statistically than for large portfolios, as the 95% confidence intervals include the unconditional average return throughout most of the range except the lowest
values of cay.
Figure 2 reports the estimates of conditional covariances of portfolio returns with consumption growth functions of cay. The functional relationship between the conditional
covariance and the conditioning variable is roughly linear for all portfolios throughout most
of range of the state variable, except at the tails of its distribution, where covariances appear
concave but poorly estimated due to the relatively small number of extreme observations.
All of the covariances are decreasing in cay (except in the extreme left tail of the distribution). The decreasing pattern is consistent with the wealth composition effect emphasized
by Duffee (2005) if cay reflects changes in asset wealth more than changes in the value of
human wealth (which is unobservable). The decline appears somewhat steeper for the small
and growth portfolios. Since high values of cay predict high expected returns, they can be
thought of as “bad” states of the world, in which the price of market risk is high. Conversely,
15

low cay is associated with low risk premia. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) argue that this is
the mechanism through which conditional-beta models can explain the high excess returns
on value portfolios relative to the growth portfolios.
Are these differences in the direction of conditional covariances as functions of cay significant, economically or statistically?11 I test whether the differences between consumption
growth covariances of the value and growth portfolios within the same size grouping are significant, at a given value of the state variable. Figure 3 (lower panels) presents the plots of
pairwise differences in conditional covariances between the two large and two small portfolio
portfolios along the Value-Growth dimension, along with the 95% confidence bands. Broadly,
the differences between the value and growth portfolios described above are marginally significant at the five percent level in the right tail of the distribution of cay: when the variable
is above 0.02 (”bad states”) covariance with aggregate consumption growth is higher for the
large value portfolio than for the large growth, and for small value rather than for small
growth. Conversely, when cay is below −0.02 (”good states”), the covariances are higher
for the growth portfolios, although these differences are not significant. Given that in almost 60% of all observations cay is in the interval [−0.01, 0.01], most of the time there is
no statistically detectable difference in conditional covariances between value and growth
portfolios.
In order to formally test whether the conditional moments evaluated at high and low values of cay are different, I construct bootstrap distributions for the differences between point
estimates corresponding to such high and low values. Using these distributions recentered
around zero I can test whether the estimated differences between conditional moments of a
portfolio excess return evaluated at two different points in the state space are positive (for
expected returns) or negative (for conditional covariances). Table I reports the differences
between the point estimates of the conditional moments and the bootstrap p-values for these
11

The diﬀerence between value and growth portfolios is less pronounced in the covariances with the market
return and with the labor income growth (not reported here), which is consistent with the composition
eﬀect. The yc variable does not appear to capture a substantial cross-sectional variation in the dynamics of
conditional covariances, while ac works similarly to cay. These estimates are omitted here but are available
upon request.

16

tests. The conditional means and covariances are estimated at values of cay equal to −0.019
and 0.02 which correspond approximately to the 10th and 90th percentiles of the empirical
distribution of this variable. The differences in expected returns between the high and the
low values of cay are positive and statistically significant for the basis portfolios, with the
one-sided p-values at or below one percent. Again, this is consistent with the notion that low
values of cay represent “good states” and correspond to low risk premia, while high values
- “bad states” and high risk premia.
The estimated differences of conditional covariances of basis portfolio returns with aggregate consumption growth are negative, but the p-values are larger. Still, for the Small
Growth and the Large Growth portfolios the hypothesis that the difference is non-negative
can be rejected as the p-values are below five percent. Importantly, however, the conditional
covariances of the long-short (Value minus Growth) portfolio excess returns with consumption growth do exhibit the same pattern of time-variation as noted above: value is riskier
than growth in “bad times” and vice versa. Indeed, for both large and small stocks the difference between point estimates of the conditional covariances is significantly positive with
p-values under two percent.
Despite the marginal statistical significance and small economic magnitude of these differences, they have the right sign to be consistent with the value premium. In principle,
given a “right” amount of variation in the price of consumption risk it might be possible to
reconcile the unconditional expected returns predicted by the model with those observed in
the data. However, the estimated conditional first moments paint a very different picture.
The logic of the conditional (C)CAPM implies that value portfolios are riskier because they
have higher conditional covariance with the factor (consumption growth) in bad times. It
also implies that, as a consequence, conditional expected returns on value portfolios must
be especially high in those states of the world, relative to the growth portfolios. This is not
the case empirically: as described above, conditional expected returns on value (especially
the small value) portfolios are only weakly increasing as a function of cay. At the same
time, growth portfolios exhibit the strongest predictability, to the extent that the expected
returns on large value and small growth are virtually the same in the “bad” states in which
17

cay is high, even though they are quite different unconditionally. In particular, the differences of conditional expected returns between value and growth portfolios within each size
grouping, plotted in the top two panel of figure 3 are in stark contrast to the corresponding
differences in consumption covariances. While differences between covariances increase in
“bad states,” the differences in conditional expected returns are positive and flat throughout most of the range of cay and decrease in the right tail of the distribution, becoming
significantly negative. The bootstrap tests reported in Table I indicate that the differences
in conditional expected returns on Value minus Growth portfolios between high and low cay
states are negative, albeit not significantly different from zero at conventional levels, unlike
the differences in conditional covariances, which are significantly positive. It appears that
utilizing conditioning information poses a challenge for consumption-risk models attempting
to explain the value premium, since the dynamics of risk and expected returns appear to
have the opposite signs.

4.2

Time-varying price of consumption risk

The nonparametric cross-sectional regression allows me to estimate the price of consumption
risk (i.e., risk aversion) as a function of the conditioning variable. Figure 4 depicts the
estimated risk price as a function of cay. Similarly to the behavior of conditional excess
returns, the risk price is increasing as a function of the state variable throughout most of its
range, except for the largest values of cay where the risk price plummets. The estimate is
close to zero (and even slightly negative) for values of cay below −0.02, which correspond to
“good times” in the Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) interpretation. It rises to values around
250 and above at the mean of the distribution of cay which is equal to zero, becoming
statistically reliably different from zero despite the wider confidence band. For values above
the mean of cay the price of risk rises rapidly, reaching values of 500 and above. Such values
for the quantity that is essentially the coefficient of relative risk aversion might appear
extremely large, even if they are broadly consistent with the models of time-varying risk
aversion such as Campbell and Cochrane (1999). However, after reaching its peak for values

18

of cay around 0.02, the risk price starts to decline rapidly as a function of the state variable,
plunging below zero for for cay above 0.03. While the confidence band is wide for these high
levels of the state variable, this nonlinearity in the risk price is statistically significant. The
nonlinearity of the estimated price of consumption risk may explain the finding of Nagel
and Singleton (2010), who estimate this risk price under a linear specification and report
negative estimated risk aversion over much of the state space spanned by cay.12 While the
point estimates of the risk aversion obtained using my flexible specification are negative in
both tails of the distribution of cay, they are not statistically significantly different from zero
in those regions, even in the left tail where the confidence bands are fairly narrow.
The fact that the estimated price of risk is not monotonic as a function of cay, which
appears do be driven by the non-monotonicity of conditional expected returns depicted
in Figure 1, may appear surprising. At least in some of the models of time-varying risk
premia the effective risk aversion is a monotonic function of the underlying state variable ,
such as the surplus consumption ratio of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). However, even if
such a model were true, the fact that cay captures some of the composition effect as well
as the time-varying risk aversion, may lead to a non-monotonicity, since the composition
effect is, in general, not monotonic - see discussion in Santos and Veronesi (2006). Further,
in models with heterogenous agents such as Garleanu and Panageas (2009) the price of
aggregate consumption risk is not a monotonic function of the underlying state variable
(the consumption share of risk-tolerant investors). If the model of interest did feature a
monotonic relationship between a specific conditioning variable and the price of risk, one
could in principle impose such a restriction in estimation (e.g. similarly to Aı̈t-Sahalia and
Duarte (2003)), potentially improving the efficiency of the estimator as well as increasing the
power of the asset pricing tests. In fact, undersmoothing the estimator of the risk price by
imposing a tight upper bound on the bandwidth parameter yields an essentially monotonic
estimate of the price of risk even using my approach (these results are available upon request).
12

Since Nagel and Singleton (2010) use gross returns to pin down the scale of the stochastic discount factor
in their estimation, which may eﬀect the price of risk estimates, their results may not be directly comparable
to mine, as I only use excess returns.

19

The relation between the estimated conditional risk-return trade-off and the conditioning variable could be potentially influenced by the small number of observations in both the
left and the right tail of the empirical distribution of the cay. While there is substantial
uncertainty about the estimates near both of the boundaries of the support of this distribution, there is also possibility of a substantial bias. For example Li, Pearson, and Poteshman
(2004) show that conditioning on the state variable not crossing the boundary can bias the
estimated conditional means in a univariate setting. In the present context, this could mean
that the estimates of conditional expected returns estimated as a function of a variable that
includes market wealth in the denominator (such as consumption-wealth ratio) may be upwardly biased near the upper bound of the state space, as well as downward biased near the
lower bound. Given the evidence in Figure 1 the former bias should not be a concern, since
the conditional expected returns appear decreasing rather than increasing near the upper
bound of cay. The latter bias may be more of a problem, potentially explaining why the
estimated price of risk is zero or even negative for low values of cay. Employing locallylinear estimators of conditional moments helps mitigate boundary bias in the nonparametric
context (e.g., Fan and Gijbels, 1996). It is likely that the actual bias is indeed rather small
when cay is used as the conditioning variable since, unlike the ratio of consumption to stock
market wealth ca, the consumption-wealth residual is a composite variable that incorporates
information about aggregate labor income as well as non-stock market wealth, and therefore
is less directly affected by the condition that the level of stock market wealth stays within
the domain spanned by its observed values. Considering state variables that are not directly
influenced by the stock market returns may also help reduce the bias. I employ one such
variable, the labor income to consumption ratio yc, in some of the model specifications. As
a further extension, I use composites of several conditioning variables in Section 6.2.

4.3

Average pricing errors

The ability of the conditional models to explain the cross-section of returns is ultimately
judged based on their pricing errors. Table II reports the average pricing error test statistics

20

for the three conditional models, as well as the benchmark unconditional and scaled-factor
models. The first model (CCAPM) uses consumption growth as the only factor. The second
model (ICAPM) uses market return and labor income growth as the two risk factors. The
third model (CWCAPM) uses aggregate consumption and aggregate wealth growth as the
two factors. The conditional ICAPM is tested using as conditioning variables either cay,
following Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), or yc, following Santos and Veronesi (2006)); for
CWCAPM I use ca as the conditioning variable, which is most appropriate for this model;
I test the CCAPM using each one of these three variables.
The key test statistics of interest are the unconditional averages of the conditional pricing
errors that are being minimized by the conditional method of moments:
α = E (g (zt ; λ, h)) .

(18)

Thus, conditioning down the expectation (13) implies that the estimated average pricing
error, for asset i, is given by
h
i
b (zt ) ,
b Rei − Cov(R
d ei , ft+1 |zt )′ λ
α̂i = E
t+1
t+1

(19)

where the conditional moments and prices of risk are estimated using the nonparametric
cross-sectional regression approach of Section 3.
For the unconditional models and the scaled factor conditional models the corresponding
unconditional moments are used. The prices of risk in these latter cases are estimated
by cross-sectional regression of expected returns on covariances, which is equivalent to the
standard SDF/GMM methodology (e.g. see Cochrane (2005)). For the scaled factor models,
f̃t+1 = [ft+1 , ft+1 ⊗ zt ]

(20)

b (zt ) are linear in zt but does not
is used in place of ft+1 , which implicitly assumes that λ

place any restrictions on the conditional moments. One could also look at the scaled factor
models estimated by imposing the conditional moment restrictions, which would be a special
21

case of the conditional models where the prices of risk are linear functions of the conditioning
variables. This is similar to the approach of Nagel and Singleton (2010). Since the restrictions
imposed by this estimation method are tighter than those imposed by the nonparametric
approach, a model rejected using the latter method would also be rejected using the former.
Instead of testing whether the overall level of pricing errors across the portfolios is zero,
I focus on a few salient pricing errors that capture the essential features of the cross-section
of stock returns. Namely, I consider the pricing errors of four long-short portfolios: small
value minus small growth, small growth minus large growth, small value minus large value,
and large value minus large growth. In order to test whether each one of these pricing errors
is equal to zero I compute their finite sample distribution by semi-parametric bootstrap.
Specifically, I use the estimated values of the covariances and prices of risk (as functions of
conditioning variables) to simulate excess returns on the six basis portfolios under the null
hypothesis that all of the test portfolios are priced correctly. These are used to obtain pvalues for the (two-sided) tests of whether the pricing errors on the four long-short portfolios
are different from zero.
The scaled-factor models appear to do a much better job explaining the average returns
than the unconditional CCAPM and ICAPM. While for the unconditional consumption
CCAPM only the small value minus small growth pricing error is large and statistically
significant at 1.6% per quarter, the three other pricing errors are also sizable - except for
the Large Value - Large Growth spread all of the pricing errors are larger than the average
excess returns on the portfolios. The CCAPM scaled with cay cuts the Small Value minus
Small Growth and Small Growth minus Large Growth pricing errors by a factor of three,
and none of the errors are significantly different from zero. The unconditional ICAPM has
similar magnitudes of pricing errors and most of them are statistically significant, presumably
because the covariances with the market return are estimated much more precisely than
covariances of returns with consumption growth. The scaled CCAPM and ICAPM that
use the labor-consumption ratio yc as the instrument do not perform as well as do their
counterparts scaled with cay, in that pricing errors are larger and statistically significant,
but they still produce smaller pricing errors than the unconditional models.
22

While there is considerable uncertainty about the estimated conditional pricing errors,
the nonparametric tests reveal that the conditional models do not do a nearly as good a
job at explaining the cross-section of average returns as the scaled factor models suggest.
For example, for the consumption CAPM with either cay or ca the average pricing errors
have essentially the same magnitudes as the unconditional CCAPM pricing errors. The
Small Value minus Small Growth pricing error is statistically significant at a one or two
percent level. For the ICAPM or the CCAPM conditioned on yc the rejections are even
stronger, as in addition to the Small Value - Small Growth error, they display positive and
statistically significant pricing errors on either Large Value minus Large Growth or Small
Value minus Large Value. The key pricing errors that represent the value premium puzzle Small Value minus Small Growth and Large Value minus Large Growth - are of almost the
same magnitudes as the average returns on these strategies for most of the conditional (as
well as unconditional) models.
The only exception is the CWCAPM. This model has lower pricing errors even unconditionally, with the Small Value minus Small Growth pricing error of 82 basis points per
quarter that is not statistically different from zero. It does imply statistically significant
pricing errors for the Small Growth minus Large Growth and Large Value minus Large
Growth strategies, which are equal to negative 94 basis points, and negative 35 basis points,
respectively. Thus, according to CWCAPM Large Growth stocks actually outperform - the
opposite of value puzzle (as well as the size effect). It is not surprising that the scaled version
of this model can perform substantially better, since it does not impose the conditional moment restrictions and therefore has more degrees of freedom. Overall, while the CWCAPM
can be rejected on purely statistical grounds at least for some of the test assets, it emerges
as a clear leader in its ability to explain the value premium.

4.4

Conditional pricing errors

Average pricing errors can understate the extent of mispricing if conditional pricing errors
are large but volatile. The conditional pricing errors can be assessed by looking directly at

23

their nonparametric estimates. Figure 5 depicts the conditional pricing errors on the selected
portfolios for the consumption CAPM as functions of cay:

b Rei |zt − λc
d ei ∆Ct+1 |zt ).
E
C (zt ) Cov(Rt+1 ,
t+1
Ct

(21)

For each of the six portfolios, the solid line gives the estimated conditional mean of the
pricing errors with 95% confidence bands around it. The straight dashed line is the pricing
error from the unconditional model, while the dash-dotted line gives the pricing error from
the scaled factor model (8), both obtained using the standard GMM procedure described
in Cochrane (2005). These figures show that most of the conditional pricing errors are
significantly larger in absolute value than the corresponding scaled-factor pricing errors, and
often bigger (in absolute value) than the unconditional model errors. In the middle of the
range of cay (which contains the majority of observations) most of the conditional pricing
errors coincide with the errors of the unconditional CCAPM.
There is substantial statistical uncertainty about the estimated conditional pricing errors,
as evidenced by the wide confidence band around them. Still, some of the conditional errors
are statistically significantly different from zero over substantial regions over the state space.
In particular, small value and neutral portfolios significantly outperform when cay is negative
(i.e., in “good” times), while the large neutral portfolio outperforms in “bad” times (when
cay is positive. The latter pricing error switches from positive to negative but statistically
insignificant for negative values of cay, suggesting that looking at the average pricing error
may be misleading about the model’s performance as positive and negative conditional errors
cancel out on average.
The conditional pricing errors are also informative in the case of CWCAPM. Figure 6
presents conditional pricing errors for this specification as functions of ca:

d ei ∆Wt+1 |zt ).
b Rei |zt − λc
d ei ∆Ct+1 |zt ) − λc
E
W (zt ) Cov(Rt+1 ,
C (zt ) Cov(Rt+1 ,
t+1
Ct
Wt

(22)

It is evident that for the three large-capitalization portfolios (bottom three panels) the

24

hypothesis that the pricing errors are zero cannot be rejected. While there is some variation
in the pricing errors as a function of the state variable, the bootstrap distributions of error
estimates are centered near zero for most of the range. However, for the small-capitalization
portfolios (top three panels) this is not the case. The conditional pricing errors are typically
almost as large than the unconditional pricing errors, and their 95-percent confidence bands
do not include zero over ranges of ca that contain a nontrivial fraction of the data. In
particular, for the small growth portfolio, the pricing errors are significantly negative in the
region of high ca, with the exception of the extreme right tail which has very few observations
and wide error bounds. The small value portfolio has significantly positive errors in the same
(but smaller) range, implying that the value premium in small stocks is not explained as
well by the conditional model as the value effect in large stocks. This evidence suggests that
tests of conditional models based on unconditional pricing errors (or averages of conditional
error) may have low power as they ignore some of the information contained in the conditional
moment restrictions.

5

Statistical properties of the nonparametric tests

The empirical results above rely on the ability of the nonparametric tests to distinguish
between the conditional and the unconditional moments of asset returns and state variables,
especially since these results indicate that conditional models do not seem to substantially
outperform unconditional ones. Further, it is important to determine whether the apparent
superior performance of a two-factor model with consumption and aggregate wealth factors
(CWCAPM) relative to the one-factor consumption-based model is due to the tests’ lack of
statistical power.
In order to investigate the statistical properties of the nonparametric tests and confirm the
reliability of my empirical results above I conduct a simulation exercise. As a null hypothesis
for the Monte Carlo study I use a simplified version of the social status model described
in A.2, combined with exogenously parameterized dynamics of conditional covariances of
portfolio returns that are broadly consistent with the estimates in Section 4 above. This
25

model has a conditional two-factor structure of returns with rich yet tractable risk price
dynamics and thus provides a convenient laboratory for analyzing statistical properties of
conditional asset pricing tests. I generate artificial data by simulating the model, and then
apply the nonparametric estimation and testing methodology developed in Section 3 to the
simulated data in order to evaluate both the size and the power of the tests.

5.1

Simulation setup

I specify conditional expected excess returns as linear functions of conditional covariances
with aggregate consumption and wealth growth, scaled by the corresponding risk prices:

∆W̄t+1
∆C̄t+1
ei
ei
ei
|zt ) + λW (zt ) Cov(Rt+1
,
|zt ),
E Rt+1
|zt = λC (zt ) Cov(Rt+1
,
C̄t
W̄t
where
λC =
1+η

γ


γη
C̄t
W̄t

 γ , λW =



1+η

C̄t
W̄t



γ

C̄t
W̄t

γ ,

(23)

(24)

which is a special case of (A-17) with identical households (so that sit = 1 for ∀i, t). I assume that the aggregate consumption-wealth ratio is exponentially affine in the conditioning
variable zt , which is meant to mimic the behavior of the cointegrating residual cay in the
data:
C̄t
= exp (ζ0 + ζ1 zt ) ,
W̄t

(25)

where zt itself follows an AR(1) process:
z
zt+1 = ϕz zt + σz ωt+1
.

(26)

I assume that the logarithm of the aggregate consumption process follows a random walk:
c
log C̄t+1 = log C̄t + µc + σc ωt+1
,

26

(27)

while the stationarity of the consumption-wealth ratio implies that aggregate consumption
and aggregate wealth are cointegrated (in logs):
log W̄t = log C̄t − (ζ0 + ζ1 zt ) .

(28)

The parameters are chosen to match the moments of aggregate consumption as well as the
ratio of financial wealth to aggregate consumption. These parameters are summarized in
Table III (panel A).
I impose the following exogenous structure on the conditional covariances of returns with
state variables:
∆C̄t+1
|zt ) = ρic (zt ) σc σi ,
C̄t
∆C̄t+1
C̄t+1
∆W̄t+1
ei
ei
ei
Cov(Rt+1
,
|zt ) ≈ Cov(Rt+1
,
|zt ) − Cov(Rt+1
,
|zt )
W̄t
C̄t
W̄t+1
≈ ρic (zt ) σc σi − ζ1 ρiz (zt ) σz σi ,
ei
Cov(Rt+1
,

(29)
(30)
(31)

where σi is the standard deviation of portfolio i excess return.
Thus, the only source of time-variation in conditional covariances is in the time-varying
correlations for returns with the two factors - the consumption growth innovations and
innovations in the consumption-wealth residual. I exogenously specify simple functional
forms for the dynamics of these conditional covariances:

ρic (zt ) =

l0
i
1 + el1 zt

(32)

and
ρiz (zt ) = k0i + k1i zt .

(33)

For parsimony, I parameterize only two pairs of these conditional correlations, representing the extreme Value and Growth portfolios, so that the conditional correlations for the six

27

test portfolio returns are determined in the following manner:
.
ρ1f (zt ) = ρ4f (zt ) = ρG
f (zt ) ,
.
ρ3f (zt ) = ρ6f (zt ) = ρVf (zt ) ,

. 1 G
ρf (zt ) + ρVf (zt ) ,
ρ2f (zt ) = ρ4f (zt ) =
2

(34)
(35)
(36)

for f = {c, z}. Using empirical estimates for the conditional standard deviations implies
reasonable magnitudes for resulting conditional covariances of portfolio returns with consumption growth.The nonlinear structure of conditional correlations allows me to capture
the “composition effect” (i.e. covariances of returns with consumption growth decline as
consumption-wealth ratio increases) as well as the fact the key observation of Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001b) that Value portfolio returns covary more highly with consumption growth
than Growth portfolios in “bad times,” when zt is high, but not on average.
I then parameterize the price of risk functions (24) and the covariances of returns with
the cointegrating residual zt (which in turn feed into covariances with wealth growth) so
as to match the level of expected excess returns in the data, as well as to ensure that the
conditional expected returns are broadly increasing as functions of zt (albeit not necessarily monotonically).All of the parameters are summarized in Table III Panels A and B (all
moments are quarterly).
Finally, I simulate realized portfolio excess returns by adding innovations to the expected
returns (which are constructed as functions of the state variable zt ):
ei
Rt+1

=E

ei
Rt+1
|zt



+ σi



ρic

c
(zt ) ωt+1

+

ρiz

z
(zt ) ωt+1

+

q

1−

ρic

2

(zt ) −

ρiz

(zt )

2

i
ωt+1



,

(37)

i
where ωt+1
is the idiosyncratic (i.e., unpriced) component of portfolio i excess return. All
i
c
z
shocks ωt+1
as well as ωt+1
and ωt+1
are independently and identically distributed, drawn

from the standard normal distribution. The statistics of these simulated excess portfolio
returns are summarized in Panel C of Table III, together with those of the key state variables:
aggregate consumption growth, aggregate wealth growth, and the consumption-wealth ratio.
28

5.2

Monte Carlo analysis: pricing errors

I use the stylized model of expected portfolio excess returns described above to evaluate the
size and power properties of the nonparametric conditional asset pricing tests by means of
Monte Carlo simulation. Specifically, I simulate NM C = 10000 draws from the model and
compute the resulting distribution of pricing error test statistics. For each Monte Carlo draw
I simulate the model for Tlong = 1000 periods, and use the last Tshort = 221 observations,
corresponding to the length of the empirical sample, for testing. Table IV reports the
results. I estimate and test the following models using the simulated data: the one-factor
consumption CAPM (CCAPM), the two-factor consumption/wealth CAPM (CWCAPM),
which is the true model, and the two-factor model where the total stock market returns
(obtained as equal weighted portfolio of the six simulated tests assets) is used as a proxy for
the unobserved wealth portfolio return.
For each simulated series, I estimate average pricing errors by applying the conditional
method of moments estimation developed in Section 3 to the six simulated portfolio returns
and evaluate the average pricing errors on the four long-short corner portfolios, thus replicating the empirical analysis in Section 4. I use bootstrap with 100 replications to test whether
each of the portfolio pricing errors is significantly greater (or smaller) than zero. I report the
mean average pricing error across the Monte Carlo simulations for each model, as well as the
fraction of Monte Carlo draws in which the bootstrap tests reject the hypothesis that the
average pricing error is equal to zero (reported in the parentheses). The table also provides
the mean average excess returns on each of the test portfolios combined with the standard
deviation of these average excess returns across the Monte Carlo draws, as a measure of sampling uncertainty about the mean (in brackets). There is considerable uncertainty about the
magnitude of the size premium: the differences between Small and Large portfolio returns
are on average around 80 basis points per quarter but are well within two standard errors
from zero. At the same time, the value premium is very clearly pronounced: the differences
between Value and Growth portfolios are on average around 90 basis points per quarter
but clearly statistically significant as standard errors are less than 40 basis points for these

29

portfolios. Therefore, these test assets provide a suitable setting for evaluating the power of
different asset pricing tests to distinguish between the models aimed at explaining the value
premium.
I consider three models.

First, I test the the one-factor consumption-based model

(CCAPM) - while this model is false by construction in the simulated data, I am interested in evaluating the power of the tests to reject it. Second, I test the two factor model
with consumption growth as the first factor and the excess return on the market portfolio
(defined as an equal weighted average of the six basis portfolios) as the second factor (CWCAPM(M)). While this model does not hold exactly in the simulation, it is meant to proxy
for the true model (CWCAPM) when the wealth portfolio is unobserved. Finally, I test the
true model with the consumption growth and wealth growth factors (CWCAPM). The latter
allows me to evaluate the size of the tests (i.e., the probability of rejecting the true model).
I first test the unconditional versions of the models (reported in the upper panel of Table
IV)). The pricing error tests reject the unconditional CCAPM very strongly: average pricing
errors on the Value minus Growth portfolios are 1.44% and 1.05% for Small and Large pairs,
respectively, and in each case the pricing error is statistically significant in approximately 90%
of the Monte Carlo draws. For the CWCAPM(M) model these pricing errors are smaller but
still substantial (0.98 and 0.73 percent, respectively) and each statistically significant in 60%
of the Monte Carlo draws. In contrast, the bootstrap tests rarely reject the unconditional
version of the true (conditional) model CWCAPM: the largest pricing error, for the Small
Value minus Small Growth portfolio, is only 25 percent, and each of the Value minus Growth
pricing errors is statistically significant in at most 18 percent of cases (interestingly, Small
minus Large pricing errors, while essentially zero on average, are more often statistically
significant, about 22% of the time for either the Value or the Growth portfolios). In sum, the
unconditional bootstrap pricing error tests have substantial power to reject the wrong model,
and small probability of rejecting the unconditional approximation of the true conditional
model.
The middle panel of the table presents the results using unconditional tests of the conditional models using the scaled factor approach. All three models produce average pricing
30

errors that are essentially zero, with each of the portfolios producing a statistically significant
pricing error in about 15% of Monte Carlo draws for the one-factor model (CCAPM) and
between seven and ten percent of the time for both of the two-factor models. Consequently,
the scaled factor tests do not have much power to distinguish between the models, and in
particular to reject the false model, as it is rejected only slightly more often than the true
model.
Finally, the bottom panel reports tests using the nonparametric conditional method of
moments to test the conditional implications of the three models. The conditional CCAPM
has estimated pricing errors of almost the same magnitudes on average as the unconditional
CCAPM: the Value minus Growth strategies are mispriced by 1.07% and 0.80% in Small
and Large pairs, and statistically different from zero in 74% and 76% of the Monte Carlo
draws, respectively. For the conditional CWCAPM(M) the pricing errors on the same test
assets are only half as large, and statistically significant in only about 10% to 13% of the
draws. Thus, from the perspective of the conditional asset pricing tests, the model that
uses the market portfolio as a proxy for the wealth portfolio return is a reasonably good
approximation to the true model.
For the true model CWCAPM itself the conditional pricing errors are 0.14% for the Small
Value minus Small Growth and 0.11% for the Large Value minus Large Growth strategy.
Each of the average pricing error is statistically significantly different from zero in at most
six percent of the Monte Carlo draws. Therefore, the conditional test has the correct size:
the true model is rarely rejected based on these pricing error tests. For the Small minus
Large portfolios the pricing errors are small for all three models, and rarely significant, so
the power of the nonparametric test clearly comes from its ability to distinguish between
the different dynamics of the conditional means and covariances of Value portfolios vis-a-vis
Growth portfolios, rather than simply differences in the amount of uncertainty in returns
(by construction, conditional moments of the simulated Small and Large portfolio returns
within the same book-market grouping only differ in volatility).
Overall, the evidence from the Monte Carlo simulations indicates that imposing conditional moment restrictions in estimating the conditional asset pricing models substantially
31

improves the ability of cross-sectional asset pricing tests to distinguish between the model,
even if the tests are based on the unconditional pricing errors. The nonparametric tests
have sufficient power to reject a false conditional model as well as the ability to identify the
correct model. This is in contrast to the scaled-factor tests that do not impose conditional
moment restrictions by only testing the unconditional implications of the conditional models, effectively allowing the model too many degrees of freedom. Interestingly, the standard
unconditional model tests have a reasonably good ability to distinguish between the false
model and the true model, but only when the true model is correctly specified. In the case of
the unobserved wealth portfolio the unconditional approximation of the model that uses the
stock market return as a proxy is rejected much more often than is the conditional model,
since the latter uses additional information about the conditional covariance structure of observed returns to identify the risk prices. This finding helps to interpret one of the empirical
findings in Section 4.3 (the conditional CWCAPM is not rejected while the unconditional
version is rejected): the lack of rejection is not due to the low power of the nonparametric
test, but rather due to its superior ability to detect the conditional risk-return trade-off.

5.3

Monte Carlo analysis: conditional moments

Are the pricing error tests used to evaluate the conditional models based on reasonably accurate estimates of the conditional moments of excess returns? This question can also be
answered within the same Monte Carlo simulation setup. I simulate the model 10000 times
and estimate the conditional expected excess returns on the six benchmark portfolios, as well
as the conditional covariances of returns with simulated consumption growth, using short
samples of Tshort = 221 observations in each draw, following the same approach as employed
in Section 4.1. I report mean estimate across the Monte Carlo draws for each moment as a
function of the conditioning variable, alongside the true value of the conditional moment, as
well as the 95% confidence intervals for the estimates. Figure 7 presents estimates of conditional expected excess returns on the six portfolios while Figure 8 presents estimates of conditional covariances of returns with consumption growth. Clearly, the estimated conditional

32

moments are quite close to the true moments, although there is considerable uncertainty
about them. For the conditional mean excess returns, the 95% confidence bands include
zero in both the right and the left tail of the distribution of the conditioning variable, as
there are too few observations to estimate the conditional moments reliably. Still, the average conditional mean estimate virtually coincides with the true conditional mean function
throughout the range of the state variable. The same is essentially true for the estimates
of conditional covariances, although the latter appear slightly noisier near the boundaries
of the state space, with potentially a very slight slight bias toward zero in the upper tail
of the distribution of the conditioning variable. Overall, I conclude that the nonparametric
conditional moment estimators implemented as part of the conditional method of moments
have sufficiently reliable to permit robust interpretation of the estimation results.

6

Extensions

In this section I employ measures of long-run consumption risk to further corroborate the evidence in support of the CWCAPM. I then show that extending the conditioning information
set does not substantially improve the performance of the canonical conditional CCAPM.

6.1

Long-run consumption growth risk

The fact that the stock market may be a poor proxy for the total wealth portfolio could be
harming the empirical performance of the CWCAPM, as verified by the simulation evidence
above. The opposite concern is that the apparently superior performance of the CWCAPM
may be too good to be true. As a conditional two-factor model it may have enough degrees of
freedom to generate a spurious fit for the cross-section of conditional expected excess returns
due to the factor structure that is present in the returns on the benchmark portfolios. Such
concerns are raised by Daniel and Titman (2005) and Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010)
in the case of testing unconditional multi-factor models, and could potentially apply if the
factor structure carries over to the conditional covariances of portfolios returns.

33

I address both of these concerns simultaneously by relying on the key insight of Bansal and
Yaron (2004) that the total wealth return reflects news about future, as well as contemporaneous, consumption growth. Indeed, Parker (2003) shows that the variation in consumption
risk as measured by the conditional covariances of stock returns with long-run consumption growth over time is much better aligned with time-variation in expected stock returns
than is the case when contemporaneous consumption growth is used.13 Parker and Julliard
(2005) and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) show that exposures to news about future aggregate consumption help explain the differences in unconditional expected returns between
value and growth stocks (see also the discussion in Hansen, Heaton, Lee, and Roussanov
(2007)). Here I extend the analysis by using a single conditional covariance with long-run
consumption growth to capture the effect of both consumption risk and total wealth risk on
the conditional expected returns simultaneously.
I estimate conditional covariances with long-run consumption growth as


Ct+1+S
|zt ,
Cov Rt+1 ,
Ct

(38)

for S equal to either 11 or 19 quarters. I then estimate the one-factor conditional CCAPM
as before, using this covariance as the measure of consumption risk.
Table V displays the tests statistics for the differences in conditional moments between
the high and low cay states. Consistent with the findings of Parker (2003) the composition
effect is not present in the covariances of returns with long-run consumption growth, in contrast to the contemporaneous covariances: for most of the basis portfolios, the difference in
covariances between “bad” and “good” state are positive, and none are significantly different
from zero. The fact that we cannot reject that the differences are zero may be due to the lack
of statistical power in estimating time-variation in long-run covariances rather than to the
lack of comovement between long-run consumption risk and conditional expected returns.
However, the cross-sectional patterns of time-varying long-run consumption covariances
13

A measure of consumption risk based on longer horizons can be rationalized by appealing to models of
slow adjustment of consumption in response to wealth returns (e.g., Gabaix and Laibson, 2002).

34

are similar to those identified over the short run, albeit weaker. The differences in conditional
covariances on long-short Value minus Growth portfolios are still positive, and statistically
significant only for the Small portfolios. As before, the differences in average returns on Value
minus Growth strategies between “bad” and “good” states have the opposite (i.e. negative)
sign from the differences in covariances but are not statistically different from zero.
Table VI presents the corresponding pricing error tests for the unconditional, scaled
and conditional versions of the long-run CCAPM with cay as the conditioning variable.
When consumption growth is computed over 3-year interval (i.e., S = 11) the unconditional
CCAPM performs rather well, producing small pricing errors, none of which are statistically
different from zero. This is consistent with findings of Parker and Julliard (2005) who argue
that CCAPM with long-run consumption growth is able to explain the cross-section of stock
returns. Interestingly, for the 5-year horizon (S = 19) the CCAPM does not perform as
well - pricing errors are larger in magnitude, and, in particular, Small minus Large Value
pricing error is large (80 basis points per quarter) and statistically significant at a 4% level.
It is not surprising that in both cases the scaled version of the model performs better,
displaying small and insignificant pricing error. Imposing the conditional moment restrictions
nonparametrically reduces the advantage of the conditional models over the unconditional
ones as is the case in all of the situations analyzed above. Still, for both S = 11 and S = 19
none of the pricing errors are statistically different from zero, and most are smaller than
the unconditional ones. Overall, using measures of long-run consumption risk results in a
substantial improvement in explaining the value premium relative to the canonical CCAPM,
both unconditionally and conditionally.

6.2

Expanding the conditioning set: single-index approach

One concern is that the above results are due to a particular set of conditioning variables
used and other variables that are potentially important for capturing the joint dynamics of
asset returns and consumption, as well as for the price of consumption risk, are omitted. The
reason for focusing on composition of wealth variables is that models linking these variables

35

to risk prices have been established in the literature as described above, and using these
variables is sufficient for testing the predictions of these models. However, these models may
be misspecified, so that it is possible that a slightly more general version of the CCAPM
still holds. In principle, it is impossible to fully allay such concerns, as the Hansen-Richard
critique still applies. In practice, however, it is unlikely to be a serious problem, since the
evidence documented above puts fairly stringent requirements on the joint dynamics of asset
returns and consumption growth that would have to be satisfied by the “true” conditional
model. Consider the conditional asset pricing relation (1) implied by the consumption CAPM
where the information set It is partitioned into the subset spanned by a given conditioning
variable zt and the orthogonal component I˜t :


∆Ct+1
ei
ei
|zt , I˜t ).
E Rt+1
|zt , I˜t = γt Cov(Rt+1
,
Ct

(39)

Conditioning this down to the information set spanned by zt yields

E

ei
Rt+1
|zt






∆Ct+1
= E (γt |zt ) Cov
zt
Ct


∆Ct+1
ei
) zt
+Cov γt , Covt (Rt+1 ,
Ct


∆Ct+1
ei
−E (γt |zt ) Cov Et Rt+1 , Et
zt ,
Ct
ei
Rt+1
,

(40)
(41)
(42)

so that the tests that use one of composition of wealth variables as zt effectively ignore the last
two terms of this moment condition. Whether this omission can lead to a spurious rejection
of the model depends on the signs (and magnitudes) of these two terms. The empirical results
above indicate that the left hand side of this relation (the conditional expected return) for
Value minus Growth portfolios is greater than the first term on the left hand side in “good
times” (i.e. when conditional expected returns on all portfolios are low), and smaller in
“bad times” (when conditional expected returns are high). The last term is plausibly of
second order as even if consumption growth is predictable, the amount time-variation in the

36

conditional covariance between expected consumption growth and expected excess returns is
likely to be small. Focusing on the second term, the observed pattern of conditional pricing
errors implies that the covariance between the consumption risk of Value minus Growth
portfolios with the time-varying price of consumption risk γt must be higher in “good” times
than in “bad” times, as measured by the composition of wealth variables. While it cannot be
ruled out a priori, such a pattern of joint dynamics of returns and consumption risk appears
highly implausible.
While expanding the conditioning set using a range of known predictive variables is simple in principle, it raises difficult econometric challenges. In particular, conditional method
of moments is subject to the “curse of dimensionality” that comes with nonparametric estimation of conditional moments (e.g. as discussed by Brandt (1999)). The same problem
is faced by Nagel and Singleton (2010), who consider one conditioning variable at a time.
I address this issue by employing a semiparametric approach similar to that used by Aı̈tSahalia and Brandt (2001). This method allows the information contained in a K × 1 vector
of instruments Zt to be condensed into a single conditioning variable zt via a linear function
zt = θ′ Zt ,

(43)

where θ is a K × 1 vector of index weights. This single index can be used in place of
the single conditioning variable in the nonparametric estimation and asset pricing tests,
thus potentially capturing more information about the dynamics of consumption risk, asset
returns, and risk prices while maintaining the flexibility of nonparametric estimation. The
construction of a single index summarizing information about conditional moments of returns
is in the spirit of Ludvigson and Ng (2007) who propose a method for condensing information
in a large number of variables into a small number of instruments via factor analysis. In
order to impose additional discipline on the estimation, I impose the restriction that the
index weights are the same for all of the conditional moments across the tests assets. This
allows me to estimate the dependence of the factor risk prices on the single index directly.
Finally, I use a constant bandwidth parameter in estimating the conditional moments, which
37

is estimated jointly with the vector of index weights (e.g., Härdle, Hall, and Ichimura, 1993):



θ̂
ĥ




 = arg min GT (θ, h)′ W (θ, h) GT (θ, h) ,

(44)

θ,h

where
GT (θ, h) =

T
1X
g (zt ; h) ,
T t=1

zt = θ′ Zt

b (z; h) − cc
g (z; h) = m
v (z; h)′ λ̂ (z; h) ,
−1
b (z) = cc
b (z; h) ,
λ
v (z; h)′ cc
v (z; h)
cc
v (z; h)′ m

(45)
(46)
(47)
(48)

b and cc
and m
v are the nonparametric estimators of conditional means and covariances of
returns and factors as described above. I use the identity matrix in place of W (θ, h) for
simplicity, although any matrix that converges in probability to some positive-definite matrix
can be used, including the optimal GMM weighting matrix of Hansen (1982) or the weighting
matrix used in the continuously-updated updated GMM estimator of Hansen, Heaton, and
Yaron (1996).
I use this framework to test whether conditioning variables other than the composition
of wealth variables used above help capture time-variation in the price of consumption risk.
As such I add the following variables to the conditioning set: IP , the 12-month growth
rate of the monthly U.S. industrial production index; the term spread term (the difference
between the 10-year and the 3-month U.S. treasury bond yields); the default spread def (the
difference between the BAA and the AAA rated bond yields); and the dividend yield dp (the
ratio of the quarterly dividends on the value-weighted market portfolio to the total market
capitalization of the portfolio at the end of the quarter). I also consider the first 8 principal
components extracted from the panel of 131 macroeconomic time series in Ludvigson and
Ng (2009).
I conduct inference in the following way. First, I compute the probability that each of the
38

elements of θ̂ that is estimated to be positive is negative under the bootstrap distribution,
and vise versa for the negative ones (I refer to these as non-parametric p-values). Second, I
compute the semiparametric p-values for these one-sided tests under the null hypothesis that
the index weights are equal to zero for all variables except for one of the composition of wealth
variables (e.g., cay). In order to do this I estimate the model using the single given variable,
resample the residuals as described in the appendix, and re-estimate the model using the
single-index approach described above. The resulting bootstrap distribution provides the
probabilities of generating obtained point estimates when the true coefficients are zero.
The results of single-index estimation and tests are presented in Table VII. I consider
four different specifications of the single-index model. The first one includes cay as well as
IP , term, and def . While the signs of the point estimates are consistent with the notion of
counter-cyclical price of consumption risk (the yield spreads as well as cay come in positively,
where as IP has a negative coefficient), only cay has a statistically significant weight in the
index (the probability that it has a ‘wrong’ sign under the bootstrap distribution is 1%,
while it is above 15% for all the other variables). Imposing the null hypothesis that only
cay enters the index yields very large p-values for the other three variables. Adding the
dividend-price ratio to the index (the second specification) reduces the magnitude of the
cay coefficient as well as that for the term spread, and even flips the sign for def . Still,
only the cay coefficient is the only variable that is strongly statistically significant (for the
dividend yield, the bootstrapped coefficient is negative 10% of the time, so its significance is
marginal). Further, under the null that only cay enters the index, the dp can have coefficient
at least as large as estimated with a probability of 44%.
In the third specification I add the labor-consumption ratio yc to all of the above variables.
Like cay, this variable’s weight in the index is very precisely estimated, with essentially zero a
zero probability that the coefficient is negative (rather than positive). It is not clear, however,
whether cay and yc contain independent information about the price of consumption risk.
In fact, under the null that only cay enters the index the coefficient for yc is not statistically
significant, and vice versa: under the null that only yc matters, cay coefficient could be as
large as observed over 31% of the time (all of the other variables are not significant in either
39

case). As it appears that the two composition of wealth variables essentially drive each
other out in these tests, it is likely that the common information that is contained in both
of them is sufficient to capture the time-variation in the price of consumption risk. As none
of the other variables have a statistically detectable contribution to the index, this evidence
validates the focus on the composition of wealth variables in conditional asset pricing tests.
Finally, the fourth specification presented in Panel B of the Table considers the index
comprised of cay and the eight principal components of the macroeconomic panel. Unlike
the variables in Panel A, the weights of all of the principal components in the single index are
estimated very precisely, since they are orthogonal to each other by construction. Under the
null hypothesis that cay is the only variable driving the price of consumption risk only two
of the eight principal principal components have estimated coefficients that are statistically
significantly different from zero: P C2 and P C6.
Does a specification in which these two macroeconomic variables enter the single index
along with cay improve the performance of the conditional asset pricing model? To answer
this question I use the composite index consisting only of three variables (cay, P C2 and
P C6) to estimate the conditional price of consumption risk together with the conditional
moments and test the asset pricing model as before. Panel C of the same Table presents
the coefficients of the single index together with their p-values under the null that cay is the
only variable entering the index, showing that under this specification neither of the principal
components is significant. Adding these two additional degrees of freedom makes it harder to
reject the asset pricing model using the average pricing error tests: the pricing errors on the
four long-short portfolios presented in Panel E are all insignificantly different from zero, even
though their economic magnitudes are large, especially for the key Small Value minus Small
Growth portfolio, which has pricing error greater than its average return (1.83% percent vs.
1.63%). Nevertheless, examining the pricing errors on the six basis portfolios themselves,
displayed in Panel D, reveals statistically detectable mispricing. In particular, the Small
Value and Small Intermediate portfolios both have large and statistically significant pricing
errors. Therefore, even with the flexibility attained by adding macroeconomic factors to the
conditioning set describing the dynamics of the price of consumption risk the model is not
40

able to explain the value and size anomalies.

7

Conclusion

This paper investigates the empirical performance of conditional asset pricing models in
which conditioning information captures the changing composition of total wealth, and as
such is a source of time-variation in expected returns and covariances. The main finding
is that the time-series behavior of consumption risk associated with the trading strategies
that capture the “value premium” in the cross-section of stock returns are is at odds with
the dynamics of conditional expected returns on these strategies. The evidence I present is
consistent with the argument of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) that value portfolio returns
covary with aggregate consumption growth more during “bad times”, when risk premia are
high, than during “good times,” while the opposite is true for growth portfolios. At the same
time, the conditional expected returns on value portfolios do not increase by more than those
of growth portfolios in “bad states,” as predicted by the conditional CCAPM. This central
conclusion is largely robust to the alternatives ways of measuring time-varying consumption
risk of equity portfolios.
The evidence presented here suggests that greater covariation of returns with the measure
of consumption growth might not be sufficient to explain the value premium by itself. This
finding mirrors the theoretical arguments of Lettau and Wachter (2007) and Santos and
Veronesi (2010) that models with time-varying risk aversion driven by habit formation cannot
explain the value premium if growth stocks are viewed as long duration assets and therefore
more sensitive to variation in discount rates (see also Lynch and Randall (2010)). The fact
that the conditional covariances and conditional expected returns on value portfolios do not
move in the same direction as functions of conditioning information suggests that another
risk factor might be required whose dynamics would play an offsetting role.
The conditional models that are not rejected on the basis of average pricing errors are
the CCAPM with long-horizon consumption growth and the two-factor CWCAPM in which
consumption growth and aggregate wealth growth are two separately priced sources of risk,
41

which suggests that the cross-section of average returns reflects long-run consumption risk
that is partly captured in the return on the market portfolio (e.g., Bansal and Yaron, 2004;
Hansen, Heaton, and Li, 2008). However, the relative success of these models appears to be
driven primarily by their unconditional, rather than conditional, properties.
Better measurement of consumption risk could be part of the solution to the remaining puzzle, e.g. by allowing infrequent adjustment of consumption to wealth shocks, as
advocated by Jagannathan and Wang (2007), and by measuring long-run (rather than contemporaneous) consumption risk of households that participate in the stock market as in
Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2005). Applying the methodology developed
here to testing the conditional implications of the asset pricing models considered in these
recent studies should yield further insights into the role of consumption risk in explaining
the cross-section of stock returns, but is fraught with difficulties as estimation of conditional
covariance may not be feasible given the data available to researchers at present.

References
Aı̈t-Sahalia, Y., 1992. The delta and bootstrap methods for nonlinear functionals of nonparametric
kernel estimators based on dependent multivariate data, working Paper.
Aı̈t-Sahalia, Y., Brandt, M., 08 2001. Variable selection for portfolio choice. Journal of Finance
56 (4), 1297–1351.
Aı̈t-Sahalia, Y., Duarte, J., 2003. Nonparametric option pricing under shape restrictions. Journal
of Econometrics 116 (1-2), 9–47.
Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., Labys, P., March 2003. Modeling and forecasting
realized volatility. Econometrica 71 (2), 579–625.
Ang, A., Kristensen, D., Mar. 2009. Testing conditional factor models, nBER Working Paper.
Bakshi, G. S., Chen, Z., May 1996. The spirit of capitalism and stock market prices. American
Economic Review 86 (1), 133–157.

42

Bandi, F., February 2004. On persistence and nonparametric estimation (with an application to
stock return predictability), university of Chicago Working Paper.
Bansal, R., Kiku, D., Shaliastovich, I., Yaron, A., May 2012. Volatility, the macroeconomy and
asset prices. Working Paper 18104, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bansal, R., Viswanathan, S., September 1993. No arbitrage and arbitrage pricing: A new approach.
Journal of Finance 48 (4), 1231–1262.
Bansal, R., Yaron, A., August 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles. Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481 – 1509.
Benzoni, L., Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R. S., 2007. Portfolio choice over the life-cycle when
the stock and labor markets are cointegrated. Journal of Finance 62 (5), 2123–2167.
Bollerslev, T., Engle, R. F., Wooldridge, J. M., February 1988. A capital asset pricing model with
time varying covariances. Journal of Political Economy 96 (1), 116–131.
Brandt, M. W., October 1999. Estimating portfolio and consumption choice: a conditional Euler
equation approach. Journal of Finance 54 (5), 1609–1645.
Brandt, M. W., Chapman, D., 2007. Linear approximations and tests of conditional pricing models,
NBER Working Paper No. W12513.
Breeden, D. T., 1979. An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and
investment opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265–96.
Campbell, J. Y., 1987. Stock returns and the term structure. Journal of Financial Economics 18,
373–399.
Campbell, J. Y., April 1996. Understanding risk and return. Journal of Political Economy 104 (2),
298–345.
Campbell, J. Y., Cochrane, J. H., 1999. By force of habit: A consumption based explanation of
aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205–251.

43

Campbell, J. Y., Cochrane, J. H., 2000. Explaining the poor performance of consumption-based
asset pricing models. Journal of Finance 55 (6), 2863–2878.
Campbell, J. Y., Giglio, S., Polk, C., Turley, R., September 2012. An intertemporal CAPM with
stochastic volatility. Working Paper 18411, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chan, Y. L., Kogan, L., 2002. Catching up with the joneses: Heterogeneous preferences and the
dynamics of asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 110, 1255–1285.
Chen, H., Joslin, S., November 2010. Generalized transform analysis of aﬃne processes: with an
application to a model of time-varying labor income risk, working paper, MIT Sloan.
Chen, X., Fan, Y., August 1999. Consistent hypothesis testing in semiparametric and nonparametric
models for econometric time series. Journal of Econometrics 91 (2), 373–401.
Chen, X., Ludvigson, S. C., 2009. Land of addicts? An empirical investigation of habit-based asset
pricing models. Journal of Applied Econometrics 24 (7), 1057–1093.
Cochrane, J. H., 1996. A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model. Journal
of Political Economy 104 (3), 572–621.
Cochrane, J. H., 2005. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Cochrane, J. H., Longstaﬀ, F. A., Santa-Clara, P., 2008. Two Trees. Review of Financial Studies
21 (1), 347–385.
Constantinides, G. M., June 1990. Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle.
Journal of Political Economy 98 (3), 519–543.
Cuoco, D., 1997. Optimal consumption and equilibrium prices with protfolio constraints and
stochastic income. Journal of Economic Theory 72, 33–73.
Daniel, K. D., Titman, S., July 2005. Testing factor-model explanations of market anomalies,
working paper.
Duﬀee, G., 2005. Time-variation in the covariance between stock returns and consumption growth.
Journal of Finance 60 (4), 1673–1712.

44

Duﬃe, D., Epstein, L. G., 1992. Asset pricing with stochastic diﬀerential utility. Review of Financial
Studies 5 (3), 411–436.
Epstein, L., Zin, S., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption
growth and asset returns I: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Epstein, L., Zin, S., 1991. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption
growth and asset returns II: An empirical analysis. Journal of Political Economy 99, 263–286.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., June 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of
Finance 47 (2), 427–465.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal
of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, E. F., MacBeth, J., May-June 1973. Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal
of Political Economy 81, 607–636.
Fama, E. F., Schwert, G. W., 1977. Human capital and capital market equilibrium. Journal of
Financial Economics 4, 115–146.
Fan, J., Gijbels, I., 1996. Local Polynomial Modelling and Its Applications. Chapman and Hall,
London.
Ferson, W. E., Harvey, C. R., 1999. Conditioning variables and the cross section of stock returns.
Journal of Finance 54 (4), 1325 – 1360.
Ferson, W. E., Kandel, S., Stambaugh, R. F., June 1987. Tests of asset pricing with time-varying
expected risk premiums and market betas. Journal of Finance 42 (2), 201–220.
Ferson, W. E., Siegel, A. F., 2009. Testing Portfolio Eﬃciency with Conditioning Information.
Review of Financial Studies 22 (7), 2535–2558.
Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., 2002. The 6D bias and the equity-premium puzzle. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Volume 16. MIT Press, pp. 257–330.

45

Gallant, A. R., Hansen, L. P., Tauchen, G., July/August 1990. Using conditional moments of
asset returns to infer the volatility of intertemporal marginal rates of substitution. Journal of
Econometrics 45 (112), 141–180.
Garleanu, N., Panageas, S., 2009. Young, old, conservarive and bold. the implications of ﬁnite lives
and heterogeneity for asset pricing, working paper.
Ghysels, E., 1998. On stable factor structures in the pricing of risk: Do time-varying betas help or
hurt? Journal of Finance 53 (2), 549–573.
Gourieroux, C., Monfort, A., Tenreiro, C., 2000. Kernel M-estimators and functional residual plots.
In: Krishnakumar, J., Ronchetti, E. (Eds.), Panel Data Econometrics: Future Directions. Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam, Ch. 12.
Grossman, S. J., Melino, A., Shiller, R. J., July 1987. Estimating the continuous-time consumptionbased asset-pricing model. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 5 (3), 315–327.
Grossman, S. J., Shiller, R. J., 1982. Consumption correlatedness and risk measurement in
economies with non-traded assets and heterogeneous information. Journal of Financial Economics
10, 195–210.
Hansen, L., Richard, S. F., 1987. The role of conditioning information in deducing testable restrictions implied by dynamic asset pricing models. Econometrica 55, 587–613.
Hansen, L. P., July 1982. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.
Econometrica 50 (4), 1029–1054.
Hansen, L. P., Heaton, J., Lee, J., Roussanov, N., 2007. Intertemporal substitution and risk aversion. In: Heckman, J. J., Leamer, E. E. (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics. Vol. 6. Elsevier, pp.
3967 – 4056.
Hansen, L. P., Heaton, J., Yaron, A., 1996. Finite-sample properties of some alternative GMM
estimators. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (3), 262–280.
Hansen, L. P., Heaton, J. C., Li, N., 04 2008. Consumption strikes back? measuring long-run risk.
Journal of Political Economy 116 (2), 260–302.

46

Härdle, W., Hall, P., Ichimura, H., 1993. Optimal smoothing in single-index models. The Annals
of Statistics 21 (1), pp. 157–178.
Härdle, W. K., 1992. Applied Nonparametric Regression. Cambridge University Press.
Harvey, C., 1989. Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing models. Journal of
Financial Economics 24, 289–317.
He, H., Pagés, H., 1993. Labor income, borrowing constraints, and equilibrium asset prices. Economic Theory 3, 663–696.
Heaton, J. C., Lucas, D. J., 2000. Portfolio choice and asset prices: The importance of entrepreneurial risk. Journal of Finance 55, 1163–1198.
Horowitz, J. L., 2001. The bootstrap. In: Heckman, J. J., Leamer, E. (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics. Vol. 5. Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam.
Jagannathan, R., Kubota, K., Takehara, H., 1998. Relationship between labor-income risk and
average return: Empirical evidence from the Japanese stock market. Journal of Business 71 (3),
319–348.
Jagannathan, R., Wang, Y., 08 2007. Lazy investors, discretionary consumption, and the crosssection of stock returns. Journal of Finance 62 (4), 1623–1661.
Jagannathan, R., Wang, Z., March 1996. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected
returns. Journal of Finance 51 (1), 3–53.
Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2001a. Consumption, aggregate wealth and expected stock returns.
Journal of Finance.
Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2001b. Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: a cross-sectional test when risk
premia are time-varying. Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238–1287.
Lettau, M., Wachter, J. A., 02 2007. Why Is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A Duration-Based
Explanation of the Value Premium. Journal of Finance 62 (1), 55–92.

47

Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., November 2006. The conditional CAPM does not explain asset-pricing
anomalies. Journal of Financial Economics 82 (2), 289–314.
Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., Shanken, J., May 2010. A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests. Journal
of Financial Economics 96 (2), 175–194.
Li, M., Pearson, N. D., Poteshman, A. M., 2004. Conditional estimation of diﬀusion processes.
Journal of Financial Economics 74 (1), 31 – 66.
Ludvigson, S. C., Ng, S., January 2007. The empirical risk-return relation: A factor analysis
approach. Journal of Financial Economics 83 (1), 171–222.
Ludvigson, S. C., Ng, S., 2009. Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia. Review of Financial Studies
22 (12), 5027–5067.
Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 06 2005. Housing collateral, consumption insurance, and risk
premia: An empirical perspective. Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1167–1219.
Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2008. The Returns on Human Capital: Good News on Wall
Street is Bad News on Main Street. Review of Financial Studies 21 (5), 2097–2137.
Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Verdelhan, A., 2009. The wealth-consumption ratio, NBER
working paper.
Lynch, A. W., Randall, O., 2010. Why Surplus Consumption in the Habit Model May Be Less
Persistent than You Think, NBER Working Paper.
Malloy, C., Moskowitz, T., Vissing-Jørgensen, A., December 2005. Long-run stockholder consumption risk and asset returns. Journal of Finance 64 (6), 2427–2479.
Martin, I., June 2009. The Lucas orchard, working paper, Stanford University.
Merton, R. C., September 1973. An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41 (5),
867–887.
Merton, R. C., 1980. On estimating the expected return on the market: an exploratory investigation.
Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323–361.

48

Nagel, S., Singleton, K., 2010. Estimation and evaluation of conditional asset pricing models.
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Pagan, A., Ullah, A., 1999. Nonparametric Econometrics. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Pagan, A. R., Schwert, G. W., July 1990. Alternative models for conditional stock volatility. Journal
of Econometrics 45, 267–290.
Pakos, M., 2004. Asset pricing with durable goods and non-homothetic preferences, working paper,
University of Chicago.
Palacios, M., September 2010. Human capital as an asset class implications from a general equilibrium model, working paper, Vanderbilt University.
Papanikolaou, D., 2011. Investment shocks and asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 119 (4),
639 – 685.
Parker, J. A., May 2003. Consumption risk and expected stock returns. American Economic Review
93 (2), 376–382.
Parker, J. A., Julliard, C., 2005. Consumption risk and the cross section of expected returns.
Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), 87–131.
Petkova, R., Zhang, L., October 2005. Is value riskier than growth? Journal of Financial Economics
78 (1), 187–202.
Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., Tuzel, S., March 2007. Housing, consumption and asset pricing. Journal
of Financial Economics 83 (3), 531–569.
Politis, D., Romano, J., 1994. The stationary bootstrap,. Journal of the American Statistical Association 89, 1303–1313.
Roll, R. W., 1977. A critique of the asset pricing theory’s tests. Journal of Financial Economics 4,
129–176.
Roussanov, N., October 2010. Diversiﬁcation and its discontents: Idiosyncratic and entrepreneurial
risk in the quest for social status. Journal of Finance 65 (5), 1755–1788.

49

Santos, T., Veronesi, P., 2006. Labor income and predictable stock returns. Review of Financial
Studies 19 (1), 1–44.
Santos, T., Veronesi, P., November 2010. Habit formation, the cross section of stock returns and
the cash-ﬂow risk puzzle. Journal of Financial Economics 98 (2), 385–413.
Shanken, J., 1990. Intertemporal asset pricing : An empirical investigation. Journal of Econometrics
45 (1-2), 99–120.
Stambaugh, R. F., 1982. On the exclusion of assets from tests of the two-parameter model: A
sensitivity analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 10, 237–268.
Wang, K. Q., 2003. Asset pricing with conditioning information: a new test. Journal of Finance
58, 161–196.
Yogo, M., April 2006. A consumption-based explanation of expected stock returns. Journal of
Finance 61, 539580.

50

Table I: Differences in conditional moments of portfolio returns
Bootstrap tests of differences in conditional moments of returns for the benchmark portfolios,
using z = cay as the conditioning variable, where z L = −0.019 and z H = 0.02 correspond to
the 10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution of cay, respectively. The test statistics are
differences in point estimates of conditional moments evaluated at these two states for each
test portfolio. The p-values for the one-sided tests reported in the parentheses are computed
using the bootstrap distributions of the corresponding test statistics centered at zero. Data
is for the time period IV.1952 - IV.2008.

Small Growth
Small Value
Large Growth
Large Value
Small Value minus Growth
Large Value minus Growth

E(R|z H ) − E(R|z L ) 100 × (cov(R, ∆c|z H ) − cov(R, ∆c|z L ))
4.06
-1.13
( 0.01)
( 0.04)
3.63
-0.41
( 0.01)
( 0.23)
5.21
-1.12
( 0.00)
( 0.01)
3.62
-0.33
( 0.01)
( 0.24)
-0.43
0.72
( 0.41)
( 0.01)
-1.59
0.79
( 0.09)
( 0.02)

51

Table II: Average pricing errors: quarterly data, cay
Unconditional pricing errors for the conditional model are given by
h
i
b (zt ) ,
d ei , ft+1 |zt )′ λ
b Rei − Cov(R
αi = E
t+1
t+1

(TF-1)

where i is one of the four long-short portfolio returns that are combinations of the original
6 portfolios used to estimate the model: Small Value minus Small Growth (SV-SG), Small
Growth minus Large Growth (SG-LG), Small Value minus Large Value (SV-LV) and Large
Value minus Large Growth (LV-LG).
P-values for the test that individual pricing errors are equal to zero given in the parentheses
are computed using (semi)parametric stationary bootstrap with 10000 replications.
Model
unconditional CCAPM
unconditional (I)CAPM
unconditional CWCAPM
CCAPM scaled with cay
(I)CAPM scaled with cay
CCAPM scaled with yc
(I)CAPM scaled with yc
CWCAPM scaled with ca
conditional CCAPM with cay
conditional ICAPM with cay
conditional CCAPM with yc
conditional ICAPM with yc
conditional CCAPM with ca
conditional CWCAPM with ca

average returns

SV-SG SG-LG SV-LV LV-LG
1.75
-0.70
0.54
0.51
( 0.01) ( 0.13) ( 0.19) ( 0.24)
2.05
-0.11
0.93
1.01
( 0.00) ( 0.64) ( 0.00) ( 0.01)
0.83
-0.73
0.61
-0.51
( 0.37) ( 0.14) ( 0.09) ( 0.00)
0.52
-0.22
0.74
-0.44
( 0.26) ( 0.35) ( 0.07) ( 0.02)
0.25
-0.34
0.29
-0.37
( 0.54) ( 0.16) ( 0.44) ( 0.08)
1.09
-0.83
0.48
-0.21
( 0.02) ( 0.02) ( 0.10) ( 0.28)
0.71
-0.64
0.63
-0.56
( 0.01) ( 0.00) ( 0.01) ( 0.00)
0.15
-0.15
0.10
-0.10
( 0.55) ( 0.41) ( 0.65) ( 0.53)
1.41
-0.58
0.66
0.17
( 0.01) ( 0.10) ( 0.06) ( 0.55)
1.57
-0.32
0.47
0.78
( 0.00) ( 0.18) ( 0.13) ( 0.03)
1.48
-0.54
0.71
0.24
( 0.00) ( 0.11) ( 0.05) ( 0.50)
1.84
-1.09
0.52
0.22
( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.05) ( 0.49)
1.44
-0.94
0.36
0.15
( 0.02) ( 0.02) ( 0.27) ( 0.57)
0.82
-0.94
0.23
-0.35
( 0.19) ( 0.01) ( 0.19) ( 0.01)
1.59
52

0.13

0.88

0.84

Table III: Simulated model - CWCAPM
Panel A lists the parameters of the conditional two-factor asset pricing model with consumption risk and aggregate wealth risk (CWCAPM) used in the Monte Carlo simulation
exercise.
Panel B lists the parameters governing the conditional correlations of simulated returns with
the pricing factors.
Panel C displays summary statistics of the simulated data.
Panel A. Preference parameter and aggregate dynamics
γ
η
ζ0
ζ1
beginequation0pt]
15
20 25 × 10
-1.66 8.80
Panel B. Conditional correlation parameters
l0
l1
k0
k1
beginequation0pt] Value
0.30 2.00 -0.75 5.00
Growth 0.30 100.00 -0.40 -2.00
Panel C. Summary statistics of simulated data
beginequation0pt]
∆C

Mean (%)
Std.Dev. (%)
Autocorrelation

∆W

C
W

Portfolio excess returns
SG
SI
SV
LG
LI
LV
0.50 0.68 18.91 2.79 2.87 3.65 1.85 2.05 2.82
0.46 6.11 2.42 11.49 8.83 9.23 7.59 6.33 7.22
0.00 -0.06 0.89 -0.00 -0.00 -0.00 -0.01 -0.01 -0.01

53

Table IV: Average pricing errors: Monte Carlo simulations
A version of the conditional two-factor model CWCAPM (the true model) is simulated
NM C = 10000 times. The artificial data in each replication constitutes a sample of T = 221
observations from the simulated series.
The following models are estimated using either conditional or unconditional moments:
CCAPM is the one-factor consumption-based model; the two-factor model CWCAPM(M)
uses the simulated stock market portfolio return as a proxy for the wealth portfolio return,
where as the model CWCAPM uses the true wealth return.
Unconditional average pricing errors are estimated for the four long-short portfolio returns
that are combinations of the 6 basis portfolios used to estimate the model: Small Value
minus Small Growth (SV-SG), Small Growth minus Large Growth (SG-LG), Small Value
minus Large Value (SV-LV) and Large Value minus Large Growth (LV-LG). Values in the
parentheses indicate the fraction of Monte Carlo draws for which the p-values for the test
that individual pricing errors are equal to zero are less than 5%. The p-values are computed
using (semi)parametric stationary bootstrap with 100 replications.
The means of portfolio excess returns and standard errors for the means (in brackets) are
average and standard deviations of estimates of means across the Monte Carlo draws, respectively.
Model
unconditional CCAPM
unconditional CWCAPM(M)
unconditional CWCAPM
CCAPM scaled with z
CWCAPM(M) scaled with z
CWCAPM scaled with z
conditional CCAPM with z
conditional CWCAPM(M) with z
conditional CWCAPM with z

SV-SG SG-LG SV-LV LV-LG
1.44
-0.20
0.19
1.06
( 0.89) ( 0.16) ( 0.15) ( 0.90)
0.98
-0.20
0.05
0.73
( 0.60) ( 0.46) ( 0.49) ( 0.60)
0.25
-0.02
0.04
0.19
( 0.17) ( 0.22) ( 0.23) ( 0.18)
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.02
( 0.16) ( 0.15) ( 0.15) ( 0.16)
0.03
-0.03
0.01
-0.00
( 0.09) ( 0.09) ( 0.10) ( 0.09)
0.01
-0.00
-0.00
0.01
( 0.07) ( 0.08) ( 0.09) ( 0.07)
1.07
-0.09
0.17
0.80
( 0.74) ( 0.14) ( 0.14) ( 0.76)
0.41
-0.26
-0.17
0.32
( 0.10) ( 0.07) ( 0.08) ( 0.13)
0.14
0.02
0.05
0.11
( 0.05) ( 0.06) ( 0.08) ( 0.06)

average returns

0.87
[ 0.38]

54

0.86
[ 0.67]

0.77
[ 0.58]

0.97
[ 0.25]

Table V: Differences in conditional moments of portfolio returns - long-run consumption risk
Bootstrap tests of differences in conditional covariances of returns on the benchmark portfolios with long-run aggregate consumption growth and differences in conditional mean excess
returns, estimated jointly using z = cay as the conditioning variable, where z L = −0.019
and z H = 0.02 correspond to the 10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution of cay (in the
entire sample IV.1952 - IV.2008), respectively. Consumption growth is calculated over S + 1
quarters.

Small Growth
Small Value
Large Growth
Large Value
Small Value minus Growth
Large Value minus Growth

Small Growth
Small Value
Large Growth
Large Value
Small Value minus Growth
Large Value minus Growth

Panel A: S = 11
E(R|z H ) − E(R|z L ) 100 × (cov(R, ∆c|z H ) − cov(R, ∆c|z L ))
4.28
-1.31
( 0.01)
( 0.34)
3.26
4.24
( 0.01)
( 0.91)
5.29
4.00
( 0.00)
( 0.96)
3.48
6.11
( 0.01)
( 0.99)
-1.03
5.55
( 0.26)
( 0.01)
-1.80
2.10
( 0.07)
( 0.11)
Panel B: S = 19
E(R|z H ) − E(R|z L ) 100 × (cov(R, ∆c|z H ) − cov(R, ∆c|z L ))
5.08
-4.10
( 0.01)
( 0.23)
3.85
1.83
( 0.01)
( 0.64)
5.89
1.90
( 0.00)
( 0.71)
4.32
3.67
( 0.00)
( 0.83)
-1.23
5.93
( 0.23)
( 0.01)
-1.57
1.77
( 0.10)
( 0.23)

55

Table VI: Average pricing errors: long-run consumption risk
CCAPM estimated using quarterly aggregate data, with consumption risk measured by
covariances with long-run consumption growth over S + 1 quarters.
P-values for the test that individual pricing errors are equal to zero given in the parentheses
are computed using (semi)parametric stationary bootstrap with 10000 replications.
Model

SV-SG SG-LG SV-LV

LV-LG

unconditional CCAPM, S = 11

0.40
( 0.53)
0.72
( 0.43)

0.33
( 0.17)
0.10
( 0.28)

0.47
( 0.22)
0.80
( 0.04)

0.25
( 0.45)
0.02
( 0.70)

0.21
( 0.18)
0.18
( 0.29)

0.15
( 0.19)
0.14
( 0.18)

0.49
( 0.06)
0.39
( 0.12)

-0.13
( 0.24)
-0.07
( 0.37)

-0.10
( 0.25)
0.40
( 0.62)

0.49
( 0.17)
0.10
( 0.31)

0.69
( 0.08)
0.60
( 0.11)

-0.30
( 0.17)
-0.10
( 0.23)

1.63

0.15

0.97

0.81

unconditional CCAPM, S = 19

CCAPM scaled with cay, S = 11
CCAPM scaled with cay, S = 19

conditional CCAPM with cay, S = 11
conditional CCAPM with cay, S = 19

average returns

56

Table VII: Multiple conditioning variables - single index
Single-index semiparametric estimation of the time-varying price of consumption growth risk.
The estimated coefficients contained in the vector θ are weights of individual variables in the
single index used in the nonparametric estimation of the conditional prices of risk. The bootstrap p-values in the parentheses are computed using two methods: fully nonparametrically,
by estimating the frequency of bootstrap samples producing the estimate of an opposite sign
from the point estimate (pnonp ), and semi-parametrically under the null hypothesis that only
one variable z enters the index.
The variables are the consumption-wealth residual cay, together with a set of macroeconomic
and financial variables, such as the 12-month growth rate of industrial production IP ; the
term spread term; the default spread def ; the dividend yield dp; and the labor income to
consumption ratio yc (Panel A), and with the first 8 principal components extracted from
131 macroeconomic series in Ludvigson and Ng (2009) (Panel B).

Variables:
θ̂
pnonp
pnull , z = cay
Variables:
θ̂
pnonp
pnull , z = cay

Panel A: standard predictors
cay
IP
term
def
dp
yc
1.22
-0.50
0.43
1.85
1.13
1.51
( 0.01) ( 0.08) ( 0.07) ( 0.20) ( 0.16) ( 0.03)
( 0.84) ( 0.70) ( 0.23) ( 0.42) ( 0.19)

Panel B: factor-based predictors
cay
P C1
P C2
P C3
P C4
P C5
P C6
P C7
P C8
1.33
-1.12
1.35
0.90
0.93
0.72
1.42
0.65
0.94
( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00)
( 0.15) ( 0.01) ( 0.84) ( 0.72) ( 0.93) ( 0.01) ( 0.96) ( 0.81)
Panel C: coefficients on individual predictors
Variables:
cay
P C2
P C6
1.04
1.62
0.30
pnull , z = cay
( 0.10) ( 0.95)

Panel D: pricing errors on benchmark portfolios
Portfolio
SG
SI
SV
LG
LI
LV
-0.60
0.87
1.23
0.28
0.70
0.73
( 0.82) ( 0.05) ( 0.04) ( 0.10) ( 0.06) ( 0.07)
average returns
1.60
2.79
3.27
1.30
1.59
2.09
Panel E: pricing errors on long-short strategies
Portfolio
SV-SG SG-LG SV-LV LV-LG
1.83
-0.88
0.50
0.45
( 0.25) ( 0.34) ( 0.21) ( 0.66)
average returns
1.63
0.15
0.97
0.81
57

Figure 1: Conditional expected excess returns using cay
Each panel depicts the conditional expected excess returns on a portfolio over the range of the
conditioning variable, cay. The top row contains Small stock portfolios, the leftmost column
- Growth stock portfolios. The bold solid line is the mean of the sampling distribution of
the nonparametric estimate, the dash-dotted lines are 95% confidence bounds, all obtained
via stationary bootstrap. Rescaled kernel density of the conditioning variable is shaded in
the background.

58

Figure 2: Conditional covariances of portfolio returns with consumption growth
using cay
Each panel depicts the conditional covariance of a portfolio excess return with the with
aggregate consumption growth over the range of the conditioning variable, cay. The solid
line is the mean of the sampling distribution of the nonparametric estimate, the dash-dotted
lines are 95% confidence bounds, all obtained via stationary bootstrap. Rescaled kernel
density of the conditioning variable is shaded in the background.

59

Figure 3: Difference in conditional expected returns and conditional covariances
of portfolio returns with consumption growth using cay
Each panel depicts differences in either the conditional expected returns or the conditional
covariance of a portfolio excess return with the aggregate consumption growth over the range
of the conditioning variable, cay for the two long short portfolios:
SV - SG (small value minus small growth)
LV - LG (large value minus large growth)
The solid line is the mean of the sampling distribution of the nonparametric estimate, the
dash-dotted lines are 95% confidence bounds, all obtained via stationary bootstrap. Rescaled
kernel density of the conditioning variable is shaded in the background.

60

Figure 4: Conditional price of consumption risk using cay
The figure depicts the estimated price of consumption covariance risk (risk aversion) implied
by the cross-section of stock returns, as a function of the consumption-wealth residual cay.
The solid line is the mean of the sampling distribution of the nonparametric estimate, the
dash-dotted lines are 95% confidence bounds, all obtained via stationary bootstrap. In
addition, the pricing errors corresponding to the unconditional version of the model, as well
as the scaled-factor conditional version are shown in the bottom set of panels (dashed and
dotted straight lines, respectively).

61

Figure 5: Conditional pricing errors for CCAPM using cay
Each panel depicts the conditional pricing error for the portfolio. The bold solid line is
the mean of the sampling distribution of the nonparametric estimate, the dash-dotted lines
are 95% confidence bounds, all obtained via stationary bootstrap. In addition, the pricing
errors corresponding to the unconditional version of the model, as well as the scaled-factor
conditional version are shown in the bottom set of panels (dashed and dotted straight lines,
respectively). Rescaled kernel density of the conditioning variable is shaded in the background.

62

Figure 6: Conditional pricing errors for CWCAPM using ca
Each panel depicts the conditional pricing error for the portfolio. The bold solid line is
the mean of the sampling distribution of the nonparametric estimate, the dash-dotted lines
are 95% confidence bounds, all obtained via stationary bootstrap. In addition, the pricing
errors corresponding to the unconditional version of the model, as well as the scaled-factor
conditional version are shown in the bottom set of panels (dashed and dotted straight lines,
respectively).

63

Figure 7: Conditional means of portfolio excess returns - Monte Carlo estimates
The two-factor conditional model CWCAPM is simulated 10000 times; the conditional expected excess returns on the six benchmark portfolios are estimated using short samples of
Tshort = 221 observations for each draw. The solid line is the average estimate across the
Monte Carlo draws, and the dash-dotted lines are the 95% confidence intervals. The solid
red line is the true conditional moment function.

Small Growth

Small Neutral

Small Value

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

−0.02

−0.02

−0.02

−0.04

−0.04

−0.04

−0.06

−0.06

−0.06

−0.08

−0.08

−0.1

−0.03

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

−0.1

−0.08

−0.03

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

−0.1

Large Growth

Large Neutral
0.1

0.1

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

−0.02

−0.02

−0.02

−0.04

−0.04

−0.04

−0.06

−0.06

−0.06

−0.08

−0.08

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

0.03

−0.1

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

Large Value

0.1

−0.03

−0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

0.08

−0.1

−0.03

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

−0.08

−0.03

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

64

0.03

−0.1

−0.03

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

0.03

Figure 8: Conditional covariances of portfolio returns with aggregate consumption
growth - Monte Carlo
The two-factor conditional model CWCAPM is simulated 10000 times; the conditional covariances of excess returns on the six benchmark portfolios with the simulated consumption
growth are estimated using short samples of Tshort = 221 observations for each draw. The
solid line is the average estimate across the Monte Carlo draws, and the dash-dotted lines
are the 95% confidence intervals. The solid red line is the true conditional moment function.

Small Growth

−3

1

x 10

Small Neutral

−3

1

x 10

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

0

−0.2

−0.2

−0.2

−0.4

−0.4

−0.4

−0.6

−0.6

−0.6

−0.8

−0.8

−1

−0.03

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

−1

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

−1

Large Neutral

−3

1

x 10

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

0

−0.2

−0.2

−0.2

−0.4

−0.4

−0.4

−0.6

−0.6

−0.6

−0.8

−0.8

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

0.03

−1

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

Large Value

−3

1

0.8

−0.03

−0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

0.8

−1

−0.03

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

Large Growth

−3

x 10

x 10

−0.8

−0.03

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

1

Small Value

−3

1

0.8

x 10

−0.8

−0.03

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

65

0.03

−1

−0.03

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

cay − Consumption−wealth residual

0.03

Appendix
A

Intertemporal CAPM with the Composition Effect

I derive restrictions on equilibrium expected stock returns that explicitly feature wealth
composition variables. I first restrict my attention to economies populated by representative
consumer(s) who derive income from financial assets and human capital (in the form of a
single stream of labor income). The derivation follows standard ICAPM arguments as in
Merton (1973) and Breeden (1979), generalized along the lines of Duffie and Epstein (1992).
I then consider a stylized economy with heterogeneous investors who have relative wealth
concerns as in Roussanov (2010).
Since the primary focus of this paper is empirical, I do not prove that the model presented
here possesses an equilibrium solution, nor do I fully specify the dynamics of the available
investment technologies. Provided that an equilibrium exists, I characterize the testable
restrictions it places on the cross-section of asset returns as well as on aggregate consumption.
14

The technologies available to the investor consist of a vector of K risky stocks S =
[S 1 , . . . , S K ]′ , a riskless bond B, and a stream of aggregate labor income y, with the dynamics
given by
dSt
= µt dt + σt dZt ,
St
dBt
= rt dt,
Bt
dyt = mt yt dt + σty yt dZt,
14

(TF-2)
(TF-3)
(TF-4)

In endowment economy settings Santos and Veronesi (2006) and Cochrane, Longstaﬀ, and Santa-Clara
(2008) are able to characterize the equilibrium quantities more explicitly by making speciﬁc assumptions that
restrict the dynamics of asset returns; Martin (2009) and Chen and Joslin (2010) provide explicit solutions
of similar exchange economies with more general underlying dynamics. Palacios (2010) solves a model of a
production economy with recursive preferences, which is most closely related to the environment considered
here. The issues of equilibrium existence in the more general environments featuring labor income have been
addressed rigorously by Cuoco (1997) and He and Pagés (1993).

66

where Zt is an M-dimensional Brownian motion with E(dZt, dZt′) = I, σ is a N ×M matrix,
σ y is a 1 × M vector, N ≤ M (i.e. markets are not necessarily complete).
The dynamic budget constraint gives the law of motion for financial wealth:
dWt = [(rt + α′ (µt − rt 1))Wt + yt − ct ]dt + α′ Wt σt dZt,

(TF-5)

where α is the vector of wealth shares invested in each risky asset.
In order to simplify exposition and focus on the composition effect as the sole driver
of time-variation in conditional moments, assume that there are only two state variables
affecting the conditional moments of returns and entering the consumer’s dynamic optimization problem. In particular, assume that mt , σ yt , µt , σ t and rt are adapted to the filtration
generated by [W, y] (in what follows I suppress the time subscripts). That is, conditional expected returns and the conditional covariance matrix of returns can potentially depend only
on the total value of the market portfolio and aggregate labor income y. This specification
incorporates a possibility that the financial wealth and labor income are cointegrated, e.g.
as in Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007).

A.1

Representative agent with recursive preferences

Consider a representative agent whose preferences are represented by stochastic differential
utility (see Duffie and Epstein (1992) for details). These preferences are given by a tuple
(f ∗ , A), referred to as “aggregator”, where f ∗ is a “felicity” function of the current consumption and of the continuation utility (thus responsible for intertemporal substitution) and A is
the “variance multiplier” of the utility process (reflecting risk aversion).Using the (ordinally
equivalent) normalized aggregator (f, 0), the Bellman equations is given by
1
0 = maxDV + (rW + y) Vw + myVy + σy σy′ y 2Vyy ,
c,α
2

67

(TF-6)

where
1
DV = (α′ (µ − r1) − c)W Vw + α′ σσ ′ αW 2 VW W + α′ σσ ′y W yVW y + f (c, V (W, y)) (TF-7)
2
In general, the standard first order conditions characterize the optimal consumption and
investment policies.
• Consumption:
VW (W, y) = fc (c, V )

(TF-8)

• Portfolio weights:
α=−

VW
yVW y
−1
−1
(σσ ′ ) (µ − r1) − (σσ ′ ) σσ ′y
.
W VW W
W VW W

(TF-9)

From the latter we can again obtain the restriction of conditional expected returns:
µi − r = −

VW W
VW y
dy
W Cov(Ri , RM ) − y
Cov(Ri , ).
VW
VW
y

(TF-10)

But now differentiating the envelope condition yields
VW W = fcc CW + fcV VW

and

(TF-11)

VW y = fcc Cy + fcV Vy

(TF-12)

Then the conditional moment restrictions on asset returns15 can be rewritten as
µi − r = −W
where CW =



fcc
CW + fcV
fc

∂C ∗ (W,y)
∂W



Cov(Ri , RM ) − y

and Cy =

∂C ∗ (W,y)
∂y



fcc
fcV Vy
Cy +
fc
fc



Cov(Ri ,

dy
), (TF-13)
y

for the optimal consumption policy C ∗ (W, y).

In the special case of additive utility with the IES/risk aversion parameter − fccfcC = γ
15

Notice that in general this relation cannot be reduced to the familiar two-factor representation involving
the market return and the consumption growth due to the presence of labor income.

68

we have
µi − r = γεW Cov(Ri , RM ) + γεy Cov(Ri ,

dy
),
y

(TF-14)

which, as a consequence of the Itô’s lemma is equivalent to the consumption CAPM restriction
µi − r = γCov(Ri ,

A.2

dC
)
C

(TF-15)

Heterogeneity and social status concerns

Departing from the assumption of representative investor, I now assume that there are N
households, each household j has its own labor/proprietary income process given by
dytj = mytj dt + σy ytj dZtj ,
which is driven by the Brownian vector dZtj =

h

dZt dZ̃tj

(TF-16)
i′

, whose components dZt and

dZ̃tj are independent so that the latter captures the idiosyncratic part of household’s wealth
and consumption growth (in general, markets are incomplete).
Preferences exhibit social status externalities of a type introduced in Roussanov (2010).
Households solve
Vt

Wtj , ytj , W̄t

with the period utility function:
U(Ctj , W̄t )



= max

Z

∞

e−ρ(s−t) U(Csj , W̄s )ds

(TF-17)

t

1−γ
Ctj
+ η W̄t1−γ
=
1−γ

Ctj
W̄t

!

,

(TF-18)

where individual households view the aggregate wealth process
W̄
dW̄t = µw
t W̄t dt + σt W̄t dZt

(TF-19)

as exogenous. The first term in the period felicity function captures the standard utility
derived from consumption, where as the second term represents the concern for social sta69

tus. I assume that individual consumption enters the second term, rather than individual
wealth, as in Roussanov (2010), motivated by the fact that consumption expenditures may
be more easily observable than total wealth, especially in the presence of non-traded wealth
components such as human capital. The first-order conditions with respect to the portfolio
weights imply a restriction on the conditional expected returns (for individual investor j):
µi − r = −Ctj

where −Ctj UUccc = γ
Let sjt =

Ctj
C̄t

U
dC j
dW̄tj
Ucc
Cov(Rj , jt ) − W̄t cW̄ Cov(Rj ,
),
Uc
Uc
Ct
W̄tj

(TF-20)

(Ctj )
ηW̄t−γ
and −W̄t UUcW̄
.
=
γ
−γ
−γ
j −γ
j
c
(Ct ) +ηW̄t
(Ct ) +ηW̄t−γ
−γ

be the ratio of individual to per-capita consumption. Then, by following the

arguments of Grossman and Shiller (1982), averaging this expression across households (and
assuming that all households participate in the equity market) obtains
µj − r = λC Cov(Rj ,

where the risk prices are λC = γEt



dC̄t
dW̄tj
),
) + λW Cov(Rj ,
C̄t
W̄tj

s−γ
t
γ
C̄
−γ
st +η W̄t
t



, and λW = γEt



(TF-21)

η



C̄t
W̄t


s−γ
t +η



.
C̄t γ
γ

W̄t

Thus, the prices of aggregate consumption risk and aggregate wealth risk both vary over
time as functions of the ratio of aggregate consumption to financial wealth

C̄t
,
W̄t

as well as,

potentially, the cross-sectional distribution of consumption.

B

Consistency of nonparametric price of risk estimators

b (z)
In order to establish the uniform consistency of the estimators of market prices of risk λ
it is enough to show the uniform weak convergence of the objective function,
QT (z; λ) = gT (z)′ W gT (z) ,

70

(TF-22)

to its population analogue,
Q∞ (z; λ) = g∞ (z)′ W g∞ (z) ,
where


i
ei
ei
g∞
(z) = E Rt+1
− Cov(Rt+1
, ft+1 |z)′ λ (z) |z = 0.

(TF-23)

(TF-24)

This is true since the population objective reaches its minimum (since W is assumed to be
positive semidefinite) at the true value of the functional parameter λ̃ (z):


Q∞ z; λ̃ = 0

for all z ∈ Z

(TF-25)

and identification is ensured as long as the number of moment conditions N (i.e. the number
of test assets) is at least as large as the number of functional parameters K (i.e. the number
of factors): λ̃ (z) is unique for each z ∈ Z (here Z denotes the domain of conditioning
variable(s), Z ⊂ Rd ). The aim is therefore to show that
p

sup sup kQT (z; λ) − Q∞ (z; λ)k → 0 as T → ∞,

(TF-26)

z∈Z λ∈Λ

which would imply that
p
b (z) − λ̃ (z) →
0 as T → ∞.
sup λ

(TF-27)

z∈Z

To simplify exposition, I consider only the special case that factors have conditional mean
equal to zero. Then the conditional moment restrictions can be written as

i
ei
ei
g∞
(z) = E Rt+1
− (Rt+1
ft+1 )′ λ (z) |z = 0.

71

(TF-28)

The sample analogues of these moment conditions are
gTi



T −1 h
X
′ i
z − zt
ei
ei
.
(z) = PT −1
Rt+1 − Rt+1 × ft+1 λ K

z−zt
h
t=1 K
t=1
h
1

(TF-29)

They can be alternatively represented as

LiT
(z) =
,
fˆT (z)

(TF-30)



T −1

z − zt
1 X
e
(z; λ) =
Ψ Rt+1 , ft+1 ; λ K
T hd t=1
h

(TF-31)

gTi
where
LiT
with


′
e
e
e
Ψ Rt+1
, ft+1 ; λ = Rt+1
− Rt+1
× ft+1 λ,

(TF-32)

and fˆT (z) is the kernel estimator of the marginal density f (z) of z:


T −1
X
z
−
z
1
t
K
fˆT (z) =
.
T hd t=1
h

(TF-33)

Now we can appeal to the standard results for kernel M-estimators and kernel density estimators to establish the uniform convergence of these quantities to their population counterparts
Li∞ (z; λ) = f (z) E [Ψ (R, f; λ) |z] and f (z), respectively. Following Brandt (1999) one can
use the result by Gourieroux, Monfort, and Tenreiro (2000) who show that, under a set of
conditions described below,
a.s.

sup sup LiT (z; λ) − Li∞ (z; λ) → 0 as T → ∞.

(TF-34)

z∈Z λ∈Λ

Uniform consistency of kernel density estimators is a standard result (e.g. Pagan and Ullah
(1999), Theorem 2.8). Combining the two and applying the continuous mapping theorem
yields TF-26. The following conditions are required in order establish the above results:

72

1. The kernel function K (.) is Lipschitz continuous, has bounded support and
Z

K (u) du = 1

(TF-35)

Rd

2. The sets Z and Λ are compact
3. The bandwidth h → 0 as T → ∞ and there exists such β ∈ (0, 1) that

T (1−β)/2 hd
log T

→∞

as T → ∞

e
4. Rt+1
, ft+1 , zt form a strictly stationary process with the geometric mixing property:
sup

[P (A ∩ B) − P (A) P (B)] < αρk , ∀k ∈ N∗ ,

(TF-36)

A∈F0 ,B∈Fk



where α ≥ 0, 0 ≤ ρ < 1, F0 = σ Rτe +1 , fτ +1 , zτ , τ ≤ 0 , Fk = σ Rτe +1 , fτ +1 , zτ , τ ≥ k .

5. The distribution of zt exists, is continuous, and has uniformly continuous strictly positive pdf and absolutely integrable characteristic function.
6. Ψ (R, f; λ) is (Lipschitz)
continuous on Λ for all R, f and measurable in R, f for all

 2
e
λ; ∃δ > 0: E sup|Ψ Rt+1
, ft+1 ; λ | β +δ < ∞, where β from condition (3) on the
λ∈Λ

bandwidth.

7. Li∞ (z; λ) are uniformly equicontinuous for all i:
∀ε > 0, ∃δ > 0 : sup sup sup Li∞ (u; λ) − Li∞ (s; λ) < ε

(TF-37)

z∈Z ku−sk<δ λ∈Λ

C

Bootstrap

Since stationarity of the conditioning variable (z) is a maintained assumption throughout
the empirical investigation in this paper, I use stationary bootstrap in order to construct
confidence intervals for nonparametric and semiparametric estimates. The bootstrap proce-

73

dure allows one to approximate the entire sampling distribution of the estimators using their
empirical distribution (EDF).
For a sample of length T , the stationary bootstrap procedure introduced by Politis and
Romano (1994) amounts to constructing R resampled sets of T observations, which consist
of overlapping blocks of observations from the original set. Each observation includes the
vector of realized portfolio returns and the realized consumption growth at time t + 1 as well
as the vector of conditioning information known at time t. The block lengths are sampled
randomly from a geometric distribution. This ensures that the resulting time-series remain
stationary.
In order to minimize the bias in the distribution of nonparametric estimators I undersmooth the estimates (i.e. use low values of the bandwidth parameter h). See Horowitz
(2001) for an extensive discussion on the use of bootstrap procedures in various settings,
including nonparametric estimation and dependent data.
I use fully non-parametric bootstrap to construct point-wise confidence bands for the
functional estimates of conditional expected returns and conditional covariances, as well as
for the tests of differences in conditional moments across points in the state space (e.g.,
Härdle (1992)).
Inference in pricing error tests is based on a semi-parametric bootstrap procedure under the null hypothesis that the average conditional pricing error is equal to zero for each
portfolio. Specifically, I recenter the residuals
Ct+1
ei
ei
b (zt )
d t+1
|zt )λ
uit+1 = Rt+1
− Cov(R
,
Ct

(TF-38)

around zero, resample them jointly with zt and consumption growth realization using the stationary block-bootstrap method described above, and calculate excess returns corresponding
to each bootstrapped observation in period τ as
b (zτ ) + ui .
d ei , Cτ +1 |zτ )λ
R̃τei+1 = Cov(R
τ +1
τ +1
Cτ
74

(TF-39)

I then re-estimate the model on each of the bootstrapped samples in order to construct the
distribution of average pricing errors for each portfolio.

D

Data

The equilibrium pricing relations (2), (4) and (5) hold exactly in continuous time. Both
consumption and labor income data are time-averaged, which might potentially bias the
estimates. There is no simple solution to this problem (e.g., see Grossman, Melino, and
Shiller (1987)), since high-frequency macroeconomic data is either unavailable or of poor
quality. In all of the tests I use quarterly data for consumption and labor income data
(results are very similar if monthly data are used instead).
The proxy for the portfolio of traded assets that I use in empirical tests is the valueweighted portfolio of NYSE, NASDAQ and Amex stocks. The universe of traded assets used
in cross-sectional tests consists of the 6 portfolios of NYSE, NASDAQ and Amex stocks sorted
annually on size and book to market equity, which are used by Fama and French (1993) to
construct their benchmark factor returns SMB and HML. Monthly returns are compounded
to obtain quarterly returns. Excess returns are constructed using the one-month and threemonth Treasury bill rates in place of the riskless rate at monthly and quarterly frequency,
respectively.
In order to maintain consistency with previous studies and, in particular, to facilitate the
comparison with Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) and Santos and Veronesi (2006), I use the
consumption, financial wealth, and labor income series constructed by Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) (obtained from Sydney Ludvigson’s website). I also use their cay variable. The
financial wealth variable a is used for constructing the consumption-wealth ratio ca. Consumption series is NIPA nondurable consumption (excluding shoes and clothing at quarterly
frequency, following Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a)) and services. I use total stock market
capitalization (i.e. NYSE, NASDAQ and Amex, obtained from CRSP) as a proxy for total
financial wealth in constructing the ca variable, following Duffee (2005). Quarterly stock
market wealth, labor income, and consumption are all deflated with the price deflator of
75

nondurables and services. All data is ranging from the fourth quarter of 1952 to the fourth
quarter of 2008. Labor income and consumption data are from the U.S. National Income
and Product Accounts.

E

Comparison with parametric approaches

Could the conclusions reached above be obtained using more standard econometric approaches? Assume that the conditional means of consumption growth and excess returns,


ei
ei
, ∆CCt+1
as well as their conditional covariance - Et ∆CCt+1
, Et Rt+1
, and Covt (Rt+1
) - are all
t
t

linear in the vector of conditioning variables zt (which includes the constant). Then we can
estimate (e.g. as in Duffee (2005)) the following system:
∆Ct+1
= κ′ zt + uct+1 ,
Ct
ei
Rt+1
= µ′i zt + uit+1 ,

gi =
where Cov
t+1



∆Ct+1
Ct

′
ci
gi
Cov
t+1 = δi zt + ut+1

− Et ∆CCt+1
t



(TF-40)
(TF-41)
(TF-42)


ei
ei
Rt+1
− Et Rt+1
= uct+1 uit+1 is the ‘ex-post’ covariance of

consumption growth and excess returns on asset i, so that the ex ante conditional covariance
is given by its projection on the vector of conditioning variables:
ei
Covt (Rt+1
,

∆Ct+1
g it+1 = δi′ zt .
) = Et Cov
Ct

(TF-43)

Table VIII shows the coefficients from the regressions of returns and the ex-post consumption covariances on zt for several choices of the conditioning variable. The assets used
are three portfolios formed from the 6 benchmark portfolios sorted on market capitalization
on book/market equity ratios used by Fama and French (1992). The growth portfolio is the
equal-weighted average of the small and large growth portfolios, the value and neutral portfolios are, similarly, equal-weighted averages across value and neutral portfolios, respectively.
If high values of zt are associated with “bad times” and, consequently, a high price of
76

consumption risk, the assets whose covariances with consumption growth are increasing in
zt are riskier. If the CCAPM holds, their expected excess returns should also increase in zt .
Duffee (2005) finds that an increase in the ratio of stock market wealth to consumption is
associated with a rise in the covariance of the aggregate stock market return and consumption
growth. However, it is also associated with low expected stock returns. The top panel
illustrates that the same is true for each of the book/market-sorted portfolios. In fact, their
does not appear to be much difference in the sensitivities of either conditional expected
returns or conditional covariances to this variable, despite the fact that it appears to be a
useful scaling variable as shown in section 4.
The two middle panels of table VIII display the sensitivities of first and second moments of
returns to cay. It does appear that cay plays a similar role at quarterly frequency to the role
played by ac at monthly frequency: rising cay not only predicts higher expected returns, but
also lower covariances of consumption with returns, presumably due to the declining share of
financial assets in total wealth. The expected return sensitivities exhibit the pattern familiar
from section 4.1: value returns are not quite as predictable as growth returns (in terms of
the slope coefficient). There is virtually no difference in covariances if the entire sample is
used for the estimation. However, using a shorter subsample ending in the second quarter
of 2003, which is closer to the sample used by Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), I find that the
covariance of value returns with consumption growth actually increases when cay goes up,
while growth returns’ covariance declines. This is consistent with the argument of Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001b) that value is riskier in “bad times,” but inconsistent with the fact
that value’s expected returns are not more but less sensitive than growth’s expected returns.
Further, the coefficients for the conditional covariances are not statistically significantly
different from zero, as their standard errors are very large. This might be in part due to the
fact that the linear model is misspecified. Finally, using the labor-to-consumption ratio as
the predictive variable (bottom panel) leads to similar conclusions: covariances and expected
returns appear to move in the opposite directions for all portfolios, and while there is some
heterogeneity across covariance sensitivities, there is much less difference in expected return
sensitivities.
77

In principle, one could go further and impose conditional moment restrictions on the asset
returns jointly. This entails making parametric assumptions on the functional form of risk
prices. For example, one could follow Duffee (2005) and assume that γt = γ0 + γ1 xt . Then
the model could be estimated using the instrumental variables GMM approach of Campbell
(1987) and Harvey (1989). However, such a model would be misspecified by construction,
since expected returns, covariances, and prices of risk cannot be all linear. Thus even if
the true conditional model holds, it could produce non-trivial pricing errors. Brandt and
Chapman (2007) emphasize that the nonlinearity need not be large to produce a spurious
rejection. Alternatively, one could avoid imposing parametric structure on the prices of risk
and only make assumptions about the dynamics of conditional second moments, as done, for
example, by Ferson and Harvey (1999), among others. I discuss this approach in Appendix
E and show that, indeed, one can reject the conditional CCAPM using cay. Still, the
conditional restrictions imposed using this method rely crucially on the linear specification
of conditional betas. Therefore, if the linear model for conditional betas is misspecified, it
is possible that the conditional tests will reject even the true conditional model. Ghysels
(1998) argues that this problem is potentially quite severe, to the extent that the conditional
beta models can perform even worse empirically than the unconditional models. Given
the substantial difference in the estimated sensitivities of consumption covariances to the
conditioning variable between the samples the concern over misspecification should make it
hard to argue in favor of using the parametric approaches for imposing conditional moment
restrictions.

F

Testing conditional factor models using beta representation

Consider the setup of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), who specify a conditional consumption
CAPM with a single conditioning variable, cay - the cointegrating residual of consumption,
i
h
∆Ct+1
,
×
cay
financial wealth and labor income, so that f̃t+1 = ∆CCt+1
t in (8) above. Their
Ct
t
78

tests concentrate on the beta representation
i
i
i
ei
E(Rt+1
) = η0 + η1 βcay
+ λ0 β∆C
+ λ1 β∆C
,
t+1
t+1 ×cay t
t

(TF-44)

which is equivalent to (8) except that they allow a non-zero (and time-varying) cross-sectional
intercept (η0 + η1 cay t ), which implies that the conditional zero-beta rate is not necessarily
equal to the risk-free interest rate. The estimate and test this specification using the standard
cross-sectional regression methodology of Fama and MacBeth (1973), first estimating the
h
i
∆Ct+1
betas (loadings) of returns on the scaled factors cay t , ∆CCt+1
,
×
cay
by time-series
t
Ct
t
regression and then regressing the cross-section of returns on the cross-section of betas to
obtain the risk premium estimates λ (and η).
An alternative approach would be to test the conditional implications of the consumption
CAPM using cay as the conditioning variable. The conditional beta representation is given16
by
ei
Et (Rt+1
) = ηt + λt βti ,

(TF-47)

where ηt , λt , and βti are all functions of cay. Conditioning down obtains

ei
E(Rt+1
) = E ηt + λt βti .

(TF-48)

Assuming, as Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) do, that conditional betas (and risk premia)
16

i
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) start with the stochastic discount factor model Et [Mt+1 Rt+1
] = 1, where
∆Ct+1
Mt+1 = at + bt Ct . Taking the unconditional expectation and assuming the SDF coeﬃcients are linear
functions of the conditioning variable yields

E[(a0 + a1 cay t + (b0 + b1 cay t )

∆Ct+1 i
)Rt+1 ] = 1
Ct

(TF-45)

and standard manipulations produce the expected return-beta representation (TF-44). Alternatively, working with the conditional expectation directly, the conditional expected returns are given by

i
Et (Rt+1
)=

1
bt
∆Ct+1 i
− Et [
Rt+1 ],
at
at
Ct

which leads to the beta representation for excess returns (TF-47).

79

(TF-46)

are linear, i.e. βti = β0i + β1i cay t , these pricing implications can also be tested using the
Fama-Macbeth methodology (e.g. Ferson and Harvey (1999)). Specifically, the parameters
β0i and β1i can be estimated as factor loadings in the time series regressions
ei
Rt+1
= α0 + α1 cay t + β0i

∆Ct+1
∆Ct+1
+ β1i
cay t
Ct
Ct

(TF-49)

Then the fitted conditional betas β̂ti = β̂0i + β̂1i cay t can be used in the cross-sectional regressions (at each date t ) to estimate ηt and λt . The latter can be used to obtain either the
unconditional averages of the risk premium and the zero-beta rate, or can be projected on
the conditioning information set. Average of the conditional pricing errors for each asset are
then given straightforwardly as
i

u =

ei
E(Rt+1
)



i
− E η̂t + λ̂t β̂t .

(TF-50)

Both of these are valid approaches to testing a conditional factor model. However, the
latter approach has more power, since it imposes additional restrictions on the dynamics of
conditional betas and expected returns. A simple way to illustrate the dramatic differences
between the two approaches is to compare the average pricing errors. Figure 9 plots the
average returns on the 25 portfolios formed on size and book-to-market (see Appendix for
data description) against the average returns predicted by four empirical models: the unconditional consumption CAPM, the unconditional scaled-factor specification of conditional
CCAPM in (TF-44), the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), and the conditional
specification of conditional CCAPM in (TF-47). The unconditional consumption CAPM
(top left panel) is well-known to have virtually no explanatory power for the average returns
of the Fama-French portfolios. In contrast, the scaled CCAPM of Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001b) does a relatively good job at lining up the predicted mean returns against the actual ones (top right panel), reducing the square root of the average (squared) pricing errors
(alphas) by a third compared to the unconditional CCAPM (from 0.6% to 0.4% for quarterly returns). This performance is comparable to the well-known ability of the Fama-French

80

portfolio-based model to explain the cross-section of value and size-sorted portfolios (bottom
left panel). However, imposing the conditional restrictions (TF-47) eliminates virtually all of
the advantage of the conditional model over the unconditional one. The conditional model
generates very little dispersion in the predicted average returns (bottom right panel), thus
failing to explain any of the variation in the observed mean portfolio returns.

G

Consumption of stockholders

The fact that not all households participate in the equity market suggests an alternative
interpretation of the composition effect, i.e. the tendency of the conditional covariances of
stock returns with aggregate consumption growth to decline as a the contribution of financial wealth to consumption decreases. Since equity, which represents a large fraction of total
financial wealth, is concentrated in the hands of stockholders, their consumption is likely
to be disproportionately effected by stock market fluctuations, relative to the consumption
of non-stockholders. Thus, a decrease in the value of equity would reduce the stockholders’
relative share of aggregate consumption, and therefore reduce the sensitivity of aggregate
consumption to the fluctuations in stock market wealth. Indeed, consistent with this interpretation, Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2005) use household-level data from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) to show that the consumption-wealth residual cay
is highly negatively correlated with the time-varying share of stockholders’ consumption in
the aggregate consumption.
The direct implication of this interpretation of the composition effect is that the canonical
asset pricing relation 2 is misspecified as long as the measure of aggregate consumption
includes all households rather than just those that are marginal in the asset market of
interests (i.e., stockholders in the case where stock returns are the test assets). In order to
verify whether my conclusions are robust to this type of misspecification I use the data from
Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2005) to test the conditional CCAPM. Their
measure of quarterly stockholder consumption growth is available at a monthly frequency
(i.e., for overlapping quarterly growth rates), but for a shorter time period (03.1983 - 11.2004)
81

than the aggregate data used elsewhere in the paper. As a benchmark comparison, I also
use the monthly series of quarterly aggregate consumption growth based on the NIPA data
constructed by Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2005) for the same time period.
I construct the monthly analog of the cay variable as a cointegrating residual of monthly
series for aggregate consumption, stock market wealth, and labor income; the resulting series
has very similar properties to the cay variable of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b).
As before, I estimate conditional expected returns and conditional covariances of returns
with consumption growth jointly, by selecting kernel bandwidth so as to minimize the conditional pricing errors for the cross-section of portfolio returns. The evidence in table IX
shows that if differences between “good” and “bad” states in conditional covariances of returns and consumption growth are measured the same way as above, the composition effect
is statistically detectable for stockholder consumption, at least for the large growth portfolio, while the differences are not statistically significant for the NIPA aggregate consumption
growth measure over the same sample period (however, in both cases statistical significance
is somewhat sensitive to the choice of “high” and “low” states. Moreover, the magnitudes of
differences in covariances between high and low states are greater for stockholder consumption than for aggregate consumption, which is likely due to the fact that levels of covariances
are proportionally higher for latter than for the former. For the Value minus Growth portfolio returns, in both cases the difference is positive and statistically significant for the small
portfolios, consistent with the conditional CCAPM of the value effect, but not for the large
portfolios. As before, however, the differences in expected returns on these portfolios are
negative, albeit not statistically significantly.
In terms of the average pricing errors, the consumption CCAPM, both unconditional
and conditional, that uses stockholder consumption does appear to perform somewhat better than the model with aggregate consumption estimated over the same sample period.
Table X displays the average pricing errors for the two sets of models, using either cay or
the stock market wealth-consumption ratio ac. While all of the versions of the CCAPM
that uses NIPA aggregate consumption growth have large and highly statistically significant pricing errors on the Small Value minus Small Growth and Small Growth minus Large
82

Growth portfolios, for the stockholder consumption CAPM these pricing errors are smaller
(although still substantial) and not statistically different from zero, with the exception of the
conditional CCAPM using ac where it is significant. However, for the stockholder consumption CAPM the Small Value minus Large Value portfolio has a large (2 % per quarter) and
statistically significant pricing error, either unconditionally or when cay is used as the conditioning variable. Moreover, the lack of statistical significance might be in part attributed
to the short sample, which makes estimated pricing errors highly imprecise, especially in
the nonparametric setting. Overall, there is evidence that using stockholder consumption to
measure risk in asset returns improves the performance of a canonical consumption-based
asset pricing model, but does not fully explain the cross section of equity returns. This conclusion is consistent with the evidence documented above that high average return portfolios
(e.g. small value) do not seem to have higher conditional expected returns than low average
return portfolios at times their risk measured by conditional covariance with consumption
growth is higher.

83

Table VIII: Sensitivity of conditional moments to conditioning variables
Regression slope coefficients of portfolio excess returns and their ex-post covariances with
consumption growth on the lagged conditioning variable. Standard errors are given in the
parentheses.
ac - monthly
E(Ri ) R2
Growth -0.77 0.01
( 0.45)
Neutral -0.57 0.01
( 0.34)
Value
-0.64 0.01
( 0.34)

data
Cov i
R2
0.51
0.00
( 2.32)
0.68
0.00
( 1.47)
0.64
0.00
( 1.44)

cay - quarterly
E(Ri ) R2
Growth
1.35
0.03
( 0.42)
Neutral
1.11
0.03
( 0.35)
Value
1.03
0.03
( 0.38)
cay - quarterly
E(Ri )
Growth
2.35
( 0.57)
Neutral
1.87
( 0.47)
Value
1.79
( 0.50)

data
Cov i
R2
-4.47 0.01
( 3.74)
-4.29 0.02
( 2.99)
-4.60 0.02
( 3.31)

data up to 2003
R2
Cov i
R2
0.07 -1.29 0.00
( 9.54)
0.07
1.22
0.00
( 8.12)
0.05
2.46
0.00
( 8.32)

yc - quarterly
E(Ri ) R2
Growth -0.25 0.01
( 0.19)
Neutral -0.15 0.00
( 0.17)
Value
-0.18 0.00
( 0.21)

84

data
Cov i
R2
0.11
0.00
(19.97)
0.44
0.00
(17.61)
0.70
0.00
(20.72)

Table IX: Differences in conditional moments of portfolio returns - stockholders
Bootstrap tests of differences in conditional covariances of returns on the benchmark portfolios with stockholder consumption growth and differences in conditional mean excess returns, estimated jointly using z = cay as the conditioning variable, where z L = −0.0174
and z H = 0.02 correspond to the 10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution of cay (in the
entire sample IV.1952 - IV.2008), respectively. The test statistics are differences in point
estimates of conditional moments evaluated at these two states for each test portfolio. The
p-values for the one-sided tests reported in the parentheses are computed using the bootstrap distributions of the corresponding test statistics centered at zero. Conditional means
and covariances are estimated jointly using monthly observations of quarterly consumption
growth measures based on, alternatively, the NIPA aggregate data, or the stockholder consumption data from the CEX, both for the period 03.1983 - 11.2004 (see Malloy, Moskowitz,
and Vissing-Jørgensen (2005) for detailed description).
Panel A: NIPA
E(R|z ) − E(R|z L ) 100 × (cov(R, ∆c|z H ) − cov(R, ∆c|z L ))
1.75
-1.82
( 0.25)
( 0.06)
0.76
-0.12
( 0.37)
( 0.45)
2.64
-1.13
( 0.06)
( 0.09)
1.14
-0.35
( 0.25)
( 0.30)
-0.99
1.69
( 0.33)
( 0.04)
-1.50
0.79
( 0.17)
( 0.08)
H

Small Growth
Small Value
Large Growth
Large Value
Small Value minus Growth
Large Value minus Growth

Small Growth
Small Value
Large Growth
Large Value
Small Value minus Growth
Large Value minus Growth

Panel B: CEX stockholders
E(R|z H ) − E(R|z L ) 100 × (cov(R, ∆c|z H ) − cov(R, ∆c|z L ))
2.14
-9.73
( 0.16)
( 0.06)
0.33
-3.92
( 0.41)
( 0.21)
2.83
-7.93
( 0.03)
( 0.05)
0.88
-5.35
( 0.25)
( 0.07)
-1.81
5.82
( 0.16)
( 0.05)
-1.95
2.58
( 0.07)
( 0.16)
85

Table X: Average pricing errors: stockholder consumption
CCAPM estimated using monthly observations of quarterly consumption growth measures
based on, alternatively, the NIPA aggregate data, or the stockholder consumption data
from the CEX, both for the period 03.1983 - 11.2004 (see Malloy, Moskowitz, and VissingJørgensen (2005) for detailed description).
P-values for the test that individual pricing errors are equal to zero given in the parentheses
are computed using (semi)parametric stationary bootstrap with 10000 replications.
Model

SV-SG SG-LG SV-LV

LV-LG

unconditional CCAPM (NIPA)

3.43
( 0.00)
1.84
( 0.10)

-3.16
( 0.00)
1.11
( 0.16)

-0.13
( 0.35)
2.26
( 0.01)

0.40
( 0.31)
0.69
( 0.22)

3.08
( 0.00)
1.23
( 0.15)
-0.33
( 0.03)
0.62
( 0.62)

-3.20
( 0.00)
-1.15
( 0.05)
-1.53
( 0.27)
-0.39
( 0.45)

-0.30
( 0.17)
1.41
( 0.06)
-0.83
( 0.10)
-0.27
( 0.07)

0.18
( 0.52)
-1.33
( 0.00)
-1.03
( 0.09)
0.51
( 0.23)

3.45
( 0.00)
1.88
( 0.13)
3.29
( 0.00)
2.19
( 0.05)

-3.15
( 0.00)
1.01
( 0.24)
-2.96
( 0.00)
0.41
( 0.60)

-0.12
( 0.44)
2.15
( 0.05)
-0.10
( 0.46)
1.74
( 0.21)

0.42
( 0.36)
0.74
( 0.28)
0.43
( 0.21)
0.86
( 0.14)

2.28

-0.79

1.16

0.34

unconditional CCAPM (stockholders)

CCAPM (NIPA) scaled with cay
CCAPM (stockholders) scaled with cay
CCAPM (NIPA) scaled with ac
CCAPM (stockholders) scaled with ac

conditional CCAPM (NIPA) with cay
conditional CCAPM (stockholders) with cay
conditional CCAPM (NIPA) with ac
conditional CCAPM (stockholders) with ac

average returns

86

Figure 9: Fama-MacBeth regressions
Each panel plots the average excess returns on the 25 portfolios sorted on size (S, 1 = low, 5
= high) and book-to-market (B, 1 = low, 5 = high)), against the average returns predicted
by one of the four models:
ei
i
unconditional consumption CAPM, E(Rt+1
) = η + λβ∆C
;
t+1
ei
i
i
i
Fama-French three-factor model, E(Rt+1 ) = η + λM βRM RF + λS βSM
B + λH βHM L ;
unconditional version of the conditional consumption CAPM scaled with cay,
ei
i
i
E(Rt+1
) = η0 + η1 cay t + λ0 β∆C
+ λ1 β∆C
;
t+1
t+1 ×cay t

(TF-51)

conditional consumption CAPM using cay as the conditioning variable:

ei
E(Rt+1
) = E ηt + λt βti , where βti = bi0 + bi1 cay t .
S1B5
S1B4
S2B5

3.5
3

S3B5
S2B4
S2B3
S3B4
S4B5
S1B3
S1B2
S4B4
S4B3
S3B3
S3B2
S2B2
S5B5
S5B3
S5B4
S4B2
S4B1
S5B2
S3B1
S5B1

2.5
2
1.5
1

Scaled CCAPM: R2 = 0.54, root mean sq. α = 0.40
4

Actual mean excess return

Actual mean excess return

CCAPM: R2 = −0.01, root mean sq. α = 0.61
4

S2B1
S1B1

1

2
3
Predicted mean excess return

3

S3B5
S2B4
S2B3
S3B4
S4B5
S1B3
S1B2
S4B3 S4B4
S3B3
S3B2
S2B2
S5B5
S5B3 S5B4
S4B2
S4B1
S5B2
S3B1
S5B1

2.5
2
1.5
1

S1B5
S1B4

S2B1
S1B1

1

2
3
Predicted mean excess return

3

S3B5
S2B4
S3B4 S2B3
S4B5
S1B3
S4B4S1B2
S4B3
S3B2 S3B3
S2B2
S5B5
S5B3
S5B4
S4B2
S4B1
S5B2
S3B1
S5B1

2.5
2
1.5

S2B1
S1B1

1

2
3
Predicted mean excess return

4

Conditional CCAPM: R2 = 0.03, root mean sq. α = 0.57
4
Actual mean excess return

Actual mean excess return

S2B5

S1B5
S1B4
S2B5

3.5

1

4

Fama−French: R2 = 0.73, root mean sq. α = 0.30
4
3.5

(TF-52)

3

87

S3B5
S2B4
S2B3
S3B4
S4B5
S1B3
S1B2
S4B4
S4B3
S3B3
S3B2
S2B2
S5B5
S5B3
S5B4
S4B2
S4B1
S5B2
S3B1
S5B1

2.5
2
1.5
1

4

S1B5
S1B4
S2B5

3.5

S2B1
S1B1

1

2
3
Predicted mean excess return

4

