                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MEASURING BUSINESS CYCLES BY SAVING FOR A RAINY DAY

                                           Mario J. Crucini
                                          Mototsugu Shintani

                                         Working Paper 16075
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16075


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2010




We gratefully acknowlege the financial support of the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Mario J. Crucini and Mototsugu Shintani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Business Cycles by Saving for a Rainy Day
Mario J. Crucini and Mototsugu Shintani
NBER Working Paper No. 16075
June 2010
JEL No. E3

                                            ABSTRACT

We propose a simple saving-based measure of the cyclical component in GDP. The measure is motivated
by the prediction that the represenative consumer changes savings in response to temporary deviations
of income from its stochastic trend, while satisfying a present-value budget constraint. To evaluate
our procedure, we employ the bivariate error correction model of Cochrane (1994) to the member
countries of the G-7 and Australia. Our estimates reveal, that to a close approximation, the stochastic
trend component of GDP is consumption and the transitory component is the error correction term,
which justifies the use of our saving-based measure.


Mario J. Crucini
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu

Mototsugu Shintani
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
mototsugu.shintani@vanderbilt.edu
1. Introduction

   Applied macroeconomic analysis inevitably begins with a decomposition of aggregate
output into a business cycle component and a growth component. Most researchers rely on
statistical …lters to achieve this decomposition and rationalize a particular parametric choice

of the …lter (or computer algorithm) based upon preconceptions of what a business cycle
should look like. A common view of what a business cycle component should look like is that
it replicate the National Bureau of Economic Research Business Cycle Dating Committee’s

choices of business cycle peaks and troughs. While we do not deny the utility of this approach,

there is a certain arbitrariness in the metric used to decide if a particular business cycle is

too short or too long, particularly when the broader objective of the decomposition is to

speak to both the growth and business cycle literatures. One alternative approach is to

fully specify and estimate a particular DSGE model. A second alternative is to rely on

actual consumption responses to infer a representative agent’s view of trend and cyclical

components, imposing minimal economic restrictions common to a wide class of models.

While the DSGE approach mitigates the obvious ‘measurement without theory’concern of

critics of business cycle …lters, it is subject to the issue of model misspeci…cation which could

make the decomposition into trend and cycle totally invalid. Consequently, we opt for the

latter course of action.
   In this paper, we conduct trend-cycle decompositions of aggregate output using one of

the most basic conditions imposed in almost all macroeconomic models –the representative
consumer’s long-run budget constraint. In the presence of a stochastic trend, the long-run
budget constraint requires cointegration of consumption and total income. However, con-

sumption is less volatile and contains better information about the long-run trend than does
income alone. This motivates a multivariate approach to trend-cycle decompositions using
consumption as a proxy for the trend component, which implies that the cyclical component

of output is essentially equal to national saving. Unlike other economic based decompo-
sitions available in the literature, our procedure is extremely simple to apply, embodies an

                                               2
economic restriction found in virtually every macroeconomic model and is unlikely to involve

misspeci…cation.
   The idea of using consumption as a covariate in trend-cycle decompositions of output is
not new. Motivated by the permanent income model, Cochrane (1994) considers a bivariate

error correction model (ECM) of GNP and consumption with a log consumption/GNP ratio
as the error correction term to capture the cointegration of these two economic variables. He
then conducts a multivariate Beveridge-Nelson (BN) decomposition using an ECM estimated

using U.S. quarterly data. Cochrane’s ECM/BN approach is extended to include asset wealth
as an additional covariate by Lettau and Ludvigson (2004).1 Instead of using the ECM/BN

approach, Morley (2007) considers a bivariate unobserved components (UC) model of GDP

and consumption while imposing a cointegrating restriction for the purpose of estimating

the stochastic trend component of the output.2 In these studies, the short-run dynamics of

the model are estimated parametrically. In contrast, our saving-based measure of business

cycles does not require a parametric speci…cation of short-run business cycle dynamics.

   The nonparametric nature of our approach has similarities to the Hodrick-Prescott (HP)

…lter, the most common approach to business cycle decompositions presently in use. When

using consumption as a proxy for the stochastic trend, as emphasized in this paper, it is

natural to smooth out the transitory component from the raw consumption series.                    One

of our proposed saving measures applies the HP …lter to obtain a smoothed consumption

series before subtracting it from output to estimate the cyclical component. This measure
may be viewed as a multivariate HP …ltering method which imposes a long-run cointegrating
relationship between consumption and output. The estimated cycle based on this procedure,

however, turns out to di¤er greatly from univariate HP …lter applied to output alone, as done
in the business cycle literature.
   Since our approach is most closely related to Cochrane’s study, we revisit his ECM/BN
   1
     While not in ECM format, Rotemberg and Woodford (1996) and Ravn (1997) also use the BN de-
composition applied to a three variable system of log output, log consumption/output ratio and log hours
worked.
   2
     For a comparison of UC models and BN decompositions, see Morley, Nelson and Zivot (2003).


                                                   3
method in detail both theoretically and empirically. The results of the ECM/BN decompo-

sition serve as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of our simpli…ed measure. Impor-
tantly, our saving-based measure nests the ECM/BN cycle with the cointegrating restriction
in many cases. As noted by Cochrane (1994), in the special case in which consumption is an

exact random walk: “the Beveridge-Nelson trend would exactly equal consumption less the
mean log GNP/consumption ratio” (page 252). In such a case, the saving measure would
work without the need to smooth consumption at all. Even in the presence of transitory

variation in consumption, we show that the ECM/BN estimate of the business cycle is ex-
tremely well approximated by saving when raw consumption is replaced by a moving average

of current and past consumption.

   Cochrane’s analysis of U.S. output and consumption is extended to include the G-7 plus

Australia. To evaluate the plausibility of the estimated model, impulse responses and vari-

ance decomposition analysis of permanent and transitory shocks in the ECM are reported.

The estimated impulse response functions are found to be qualitatively consistent with the

simple permanent income model and even better approximations to the predictions of the

one-sector DSGE workhorse model of macroeconomics. To identify each shock, Cochrane’s

ECM is slightly modi…ed by imposing a zero restriction on the error correction term in

consumption equation.        As it turns out, a simple saving-based measure tracks the more

elaborate estimated ECM/BN cycle very closely in every country. Surprisingly, the role of

short-run dynamics in the ECMs are typically negligible. Simply put: a linearly detrended
savings (rate) alone captures most of the transitory variation in output. Thus Cochrane’s
conjecture on the usefulness of consumption as a proxy for the BN trend seems valid not

only for the U.S. but also for other industrialized countries.3
   Our approach to trend-cycle decompositions is simple and gives a di¤erent cyclical com-
ponent than existing approaches. The implications of this are discussed in a later section

of the paper where we focus on the international business cycle comovement puzzle and the
   3
     Work in progress demonstrates the applicability of this decomposition to 160 or so countries over the
last 30 years.


                                                    4
Great Moderation debate.

   Throughout the paper, we use the notation yt = 100             ln Yt and ct = 100     ln Ct , where
Yt is Gross Domestic Product and Ct is the aggregate private consumption.


2. The trend-cycle decomposition of GDP
2.1. A saving-based measure of the business cycle

Consider the additive (in logs) trend-cycle decomposition of output yt ,



                                            yt = ytg + ytc ,

where ytg is the ‘growth’ or ‘trend’ component and ytc is the ‘cyclical’ or ‘transitory’ com-
ponent. Instead of relying on researcher’s preconceptions about business cycle frequencies,

the idea is to obtain the cyclical component such that a representative agent would view

it as a transitory deviation from the stochastic trend in output. One approach to achiev-

ing such a decomposition is to specify a representative agent model and estimate its deep

parameters. Here, instead, the focus is on the present value budget constraint faced by

the representative consumer. The long-run budget constraint identity implies that income

and consumption share a common long-run trend. In other words, income and consumption

are cotrending. Since almost every modern macroeconomic model embodies this sensible

economic restriction, it is useful to impose it at the outset.
   Simple characterizations of the permanent income model rely on restrictive assumptions

such as a constant interest rate, exogenous endowment and quadratic utility. However, as an

approximation, it is often a convenient benchmark model to understand the core implications
of more general models. For example, under the assumption of a stochastic trend in income,

a closed form solution from the rational expectation-permanent income model implies that

consumption and income are cointegrated. Campbell (1987) provides supporting evidence

for this prediction using the U.S. quarterly data.4 He further points out that the same closed
   4
     This implication of cointegration is also examined using select international data by Campbell and
Clarida (1987) for Canada and U.K., MacDonald and Kearney (1990) for Australia, and Shintani (1994) for


                                                   5
form solution of the permanent income model implies that saving, de…ned as the di¤erence

between total disposable income and consumption, should be high when income is expected
to fall.   Essentially this is a logarithmic version of the familiar ‘saving for a rainy day’
implication of the permanent income model found in Campbell and Deaton (1989).

    If aggregate output is used in place of total disposable income, the simple permanent
income model suggests that the common stochastic trend is permanent income, ytg = ct , and
the transitory component is savings, ytc = st = yt                  ct . In practice, consumption does not

necessarily follow a pure random walk process as suggested by the model. The point, however,
is that consumption is less volatile than output and therefore contains better information

about the trend as a result of thoughtful consumption decisions made by rational consumers.

Thus, consumption is expected to be a good proxy for the trend after removing its transitory

component, sometimes referred to as ‘transitory consumption.’ This motivates the following

simple measure of the cyclical component in GDP based on a modi…ed aggregate saving:

                                           ytc = yt     cgt              t;                          (2.1)

where cgt is the estimated trend based on smoothed consumption. If cgt = ct and if there is

no deterministic trend component ( = 0 and                    = 0), the measure reduces to just aggregate

saving itself, st = yt ct . For the consumption trend, one may simply use the moving average
                                         P 1
of lagged consumption as, cgt = (1=M ) M   j=0 ct j where M is the moving average length.

    Typically, the HP …lter is applied to output and consumption by minimizing
                      XT                     XT           g
                               (ytc )2 +               [(yt+1    ytg )        (ytg   ytg 1 )]2 :     (2.2)
                         t=1                     t=1


and
                       XT                    XT
                                (cct )2 +              [(cgt+1   cgt )        (cgt   cgt 1 )]2       (2.3)
                          t=1                    t=1

separately, where    is a smoothing parameter chosen by the researcher and ztc = zt                    ztg ,

z = y; c. Obviously, by separately …ltering income and consumption, their is no guarantee
that income and consumption obey a cointegrating restriction.
Japan.

                                                         6
   One option is to employ a constrained multivariate HP …lter which minimizes

                     XT                    XT         g
                            (ytc )2 +              [(yt+1     ytg )   (ytg    ytg 1 )]2
                        t=1                    t=1
                          nXT                     XT                                             o
                     +! 1             (cct )2 +            [(cgt+1    cgt )   (cgt   cgt 1 )]2
                                  t=1                  t=1
                          XT
                     +! 2           (cgt ytg )2                                                           (2.4)
                                t=1


where ! 1 and ! 2 are weights controlling the relative importance of the two variables as well
as the long-run restriction involving the growth components of consumption and income.
The approach developed in this paper does not require the researcher to choose ! 1 and ! 2 .

The HP trend component of consumption which minimizes (2.3), denoted, cgt , is used as the

measure of smoothed consumption. Thus simply setting cgt = cgt and substituting this into
(2.1) de…nes the HP-version of our saving-based business cycle measure.

   If yt and ct are cointegrated, yt and cgt are also cointegrated. In the presence of a linear

deterministic trend, the cointegrating vector that eliminates a common stochastic trend may

or may not eliminate a common deterministic trend at the same time. Using the terminology

of Ogaki and Park (1997), two variables are deterministically cointegrated if the cointegrating

relationship also eliminates the deterministic trend. The long-run budget constraint is more

closely related to this notion of deterministic cointegration, suggesting                  = 0 in the de…nition

of the saving-based measure of the cycle. However, leaving the room for the possibility of

  6= 0 may be useful in some cases as it can proxy for missing additional covariates (e.g.,
an asset variable), a the gradual shift in the preference for the precautionary saving, or the

presence of measurement errors. In applications, the residual from the regression of yt                      cgt

on a linear trend allows for such possibilities.

2.2. A bivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition of Cochrane’s (1994) error cor-
     rection model

Cochrane (1994) extracts the information on the trend in GNP from consumption using a
bivariate error correction model (ECM) of GNP and consumption combined with a multi-

variate Beveridge-Nelson (BN) decomposition.

                                                        7
   The speci…cation of the ECM employed here is,

                     ct =        c1   +        c2 t   +   c1    ct    1   +       c2       ct    2   +       c3    yt   1   +     c4    yt   2   + "ct        (2.5)

                     yt =        y1   +        y2 t   +   y (ct 1             yt 1 )

                                +     y1   ct     1   +    y2    ct       2   +       y3    yt       1   +    y4    yt      2   + "yt                         (2.6)

where "ct and "yt are non-orthogonalized shocks. The …xed lag length of 2 follows Cochrane.

Note that equation (2.5) involves two modi…cations of Cochrane’s original ECM: including
time trends in both equations and omitting the error correction term, ct                                                                         1       yt 1 , from
the consumption growth equation. The trend terms are included to re‡ect the elimination

of any deterministic trend from our saving-based cyclical component and the absence of

error correction term in consumption growth equation is related to shock identi…cation as

explained below.

   Consider the role of the loading coe¢ cient                                        y.   A characteristic equation of a cointegrated

bivariate system should have one unit root and the other root outside the unit circle. Thus,

in the absence of an error correction term in (2.5), cointegration of consumption and income

requires         y   2 (0; 2) in (2.6). For this reason, the estimate of                                                    y   has a direct implication

for the long-run budget constraint. If                                    y    = 0, both consumption and income are di¤er-

ence stationary and they are not cointegrated.5 Since the t-statistic follows a nonstandard

distribution under the null hypothesis                                y       = 0, Cochrane employs a bootstrap method to
claim that the coe¢ cient is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero in his analysis. As long as the

cointegrating restriction                  y    2 (0; 2) is satis…ed, however, the ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimator remains asymptotically normal.
   To calculate the impulse response functions of this ECM, Cochrane employs the conven-

tional recursive orthogonalization of shocks with the order consumption and then income.
The identi…ed shocks can be interpreted as the permanent and transitory shocks since the
orthogonalized shock in (2.6) which has zero (contemporaneous) impact on consumption can-

not be a permanent shock, according to the permanent income model. To be more speci…c,
   5
       If   y   < 0 or   y   > 2, the system is an explosive process.

                                                                                  8
                                                  P                                              T
the permanent shock, denoted by                   t ,   and the transitory shock, denoted by     t ,   are identi…ed

as
                                                          P
                                                          t           1   "ct
                                                                =R
                                                          T
                                                          t               "yt
where R is the lower triangular matrix which satis…es RR0 = E(                          0
                                                                                      t t)   =   and E(      0
                                                                                                           t t)    =I
where        0
             t   = ["ct "yt ] and   0
                                    t   = [   P
                                              t
                                                   T
                                                   t ].       In addition to the permanent response to       P
                                                                                                             t ,   the

presence of cointegration (i.e., the error correction term) restricts the impulse responses of
consumption and income to converge to a common level in the long-run in response to either
shock, consistent with the long-run budget constraint.6

     To get a sense of how the estimated impulse responses of the ECM compare to those aris-

ing from a workhorse macroeconomic model, Figure 1 shows theoretical impulse responses

of income and consumption to permanent and persistent productivity shocks using the one-

sector neoclassical model calibrated to the U.S. economy by King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988).

The permanent shock scenario is the impulse response of the model following a 1% innova-

tion to productivity under the assumption productivity follows a pure random walk. The

transitory shock scenario assumes a …rst-order autoregressive process for productivity with

persistence set at 0.9. By comparing the top panel of Figure 1 of Cochrane (1994, p. 245)

with our Figure 1, we see that Cochrane’s estimated impulse responses of GNP and con-

sumption to permanent (consumption) and transitory (GNP) shocks match up surprisingly

well with those of the calibrated model.
     One notable di¤erence is a small permanent e¤ect of what Cochrane identi…es as a transi-

tory (GNP) shock, whereas the persistent, but transitory productivity shock has no long-run
impact of either consumption or output in our estimated system or in the basic neoclassical
model. The di¤erence is due to the fact that Cochrane includes the error correction term

in both equations of the ECM. Let                         c    be the parameter on the error-correction-term in
consumption growth equation in Cochrane’s speci…cation. Then, the long-run responses to
     6
         See King, Plosser, Stock and Watson (1991) on this point.




                                                                  9
the identi…ed transitory shock are:

                                 @Et (yt+h )       @Et (ct+h )               c
                              lim      T
                                             = lim             =                     :
                             h!1   @ t         h!1   @ Tt                y       c


From Table 1 of Cochrane (1994, p. 243) bc =               0:02 and by = 0:08, and this formula gives a

long-run impulse response of 0:2 (= 0:02=0:1) consistent with Figure 1 of Cochrane’s paper.
                                               T
As long as   y   6= 0, the transitory shock,   t ,   identi…ed by a recursive scheme has zero long-run
e¤ect if and only if    c   = 0, as imposed in equation 2.4. An alternative is to directly impose

a zero long-run impulse response assumption as Blanchard and Quah (1989) do. However,
a simple application of Blanchard-Quah method cannot incorporate the contemporaneous

impact of the permanent shock implied by the permanent income model.7

   For this reason, the zero restriction on the loading coe¢ cient                       c   in the consumption

growth equation is imposed when estimating the ECM in what follows.                             Due to the fact

that the two equations no longer have common regressors, OLS becomes ine¢ cient since

the equivalence of OLS and generalized least squares (GLS) no longer holds. To achieve

e¢ ciency, we employ a restricted multivariate GLS method. The GLS estimator is asymp-

totically normal as long as the cointegrating restriction            y   2 (0; 2) is satis…ed as shown in

the Statistical Appendix.

   Having established the appropriateness of the ECM and the estimation method, the re-

maining technical detail is the BN decomposition in the ECM context. The multivariate

BN decomposition in a cointegrated system was …rst proposed by Stock and Watson (1988)
and has been used in many applied studies, including Cochrane (1994), Evans and Reichlin
(1994), and Lettau and Ludvigson (2004). As in the case of a univariate BN decomposition,

both the trend and cycle components are generated from a common vector error component.
The trend component follows a (multivariate) random walk process, while the cyclical com-
ponent is serially correlated. This feature contrasts to an alternative decomposition based

on the ECM, often referred to as Granger-Gonzalo decomposition (Gonzalo and Granger,
   7
     Cochrane also argues that the conventional identi…cation scheme has an advantage over Blanchard and
Quah scheme as the former does not require an estimate of the spectral density at frequency zero.


                                                      10
1995), where the trend and cycle components are orthogonal, but the trend component is

generated from serially correlated errors.8
     What is the relationship between the BN decomposition (ytg and ytc ) and shocks identi…ed
                                         P             T
by the recursive scheme (                t    and      t )?      When there is an error correction term in (2.5),

the bivariate cointegrated system generally implies that the random-walk trend component
ytg is generated by a linear combination of current                                      P
                                                                                         t   and       T
                                                                                                       t .   However, if we impose

 c   = 0, the long-run impulse response to identi…ed shocks becomes lower triangular, and

thus the random-walk trend component ytg is generated only from the permanent shock                                             P
                                                                                                                                t .

In contrast, the cyclical component ytc consists of current and past values of both type of
              P          T
shocks,       t   and    t .

     What does this imply about the relationship between our saving-based business cycle

measure (2.1) and the ECM/BN cycle?9 Cochrane points out that, if consumption follows a

pure random walk, as predicted by the simple permanent income model, the ECM/BN trend

becomes (log) consumption less the mean of savings, ytg = ct st . Thus the ECM/BN cycle is

simply demeaned savings, ytc = yt                     ytg = st        st . In the presence of a deterministic trend, the

cyclical component becomes detrended savings, ytc = st                                                t, which corresponds to (2.1)

with a choice of cgt = ct . What happens if consumption growth is serially correlated? Such an

extension can be considered by imposing                              c3   =   c4   = 0 in (2.5). The Statistical Appendix

shows that the ECM/BN cycle once again corresponds to (2.1) provided consumption is

smoothed according to:
                                                                     X
                                                                     2
                                                           cgt   =         wi ct   i                                          (2.7)
                                                                     i=0
                         1
where w0 =         1 (
                                     , w1 =           c1
                                                                , and w2 =                   c2
                                                                                                     . It is important to note that
                         c1 + c2 )            1 (   c1 + c2 )                      1 (   c1 + c2 )

the moving average weights, wi ’s, depend only on the coe¢ cients in (2.5), not on those in

(2.6). It is straightforward to obtain a similar result for the more generalized case beyond
     8
         See also Gonzalo and Ng (2001) for identi…cation of shocks combined with Granger-Gonzalo decompos-
tion, and Levtchenkova, Pagan and Robertson (1998) for a more comprehensive discussion.
    9
      See Appendix A.2 for our de…nition of the BN cycle in a multivariate context. We adopt the opposite
sign convention for the transitory component, making it procyclical.



                                                                      11
two lags in the ECM by adding more lags in the moving average of (2.7). In summary, even

in the presence of transitory consumption variation, the ECM/BN cycle takes the form of
(2.1) with the moving average weights for consumption determined by the parameters which
capture the short-run dynamics of consumption growth.

3. Estimation of ECMs in the G-7 and Australia

The bivariate error-correction models of (2.5) and (2.6) are estimated on a country-by-

country basis. Quarterly series of GDP and total consumption are used for Yt and Ct ,
respectively. Both were obtained from the OECD database. The countries are: Australia,

Canada, France, Italy, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The

starting dates of the samples vary, all end in the …rst quarter of 2005 (see Table 1).

   Table 1 reports the estimation results obtained using a restricted multivariate GLS

method. The coe¢ cient    y   on the error correction term is positive in all cases supporting the

saving for a rainy day implication of Campbell (1987): when the representative consumer

increases her consumption above income (dissaving) it foretells an increase in income growth.

Furthermore, all the point estimates fall in the range of cointegrating restriction     y   2 (0; 2)

mostly with a tight con…dence interval (exceptions are Italy and the United Kingdom). Thus,

the results are consistent with long-run budget constraints.

   In contrast, the short-run dynamics are imprecisely estimated: the coe¢ cients on lagged

consumption and income growth are statistically signi…cant in only 18 of 56 cases. Fourteen
of these statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients are accounted for by only three countries: Japan
(6), Canada (4) and Italy (4). There is no tendency for lagged growth rates to be more

signi…cant in the consumption equation than in the income equation. In this sense, the
cointegrating relationship is the robust feature of the empirical model.

3.1. Decomposition of variance

Table 2 reports variance decompositions at forecast horizons of one quarter, one year and
in…nity. As the Table shows, consumption changes are largely unpredictable, consistent with

                                                12
a random walk. As a consequence, virtually all of the variance in consumption growth gets

attributed to the permanent shock. In sharp contrast, the variance of output growth is split
almost exactly 50-50 between permanent and transitory shocks for the United States and
this is robust across forecast horizons. Cochrane (1994) attributed 85% of the 1-quarter

ahead forecast to the transitory component compared to only about 60% here. Most of this
di¤erence is likely due to the fact that his bivariate speci…cation also included an error-
correction term in (2.5), thereby allowing transitory shocks to alter the long-run level of

consumption and income and elevating their importance in the variance decomposition of
output. Germany and the United Kingdom are similar to the U.S. with about 60% of output

variation attributed to the transitory shock. Japan is an outlier with a small fraction of

variance attributed to the transitory shock (40%). What is interesting about the remaining

countries –Australia, Canada, France and Italy – is that transitory shocks are even more

important than is true of the U.S.. Thus the international evidence against the pure random

walk model of output growth seems even more compelling in other countries than it is for

the United States.

3.2. Impulse responses

The estimated impulse responses, are broadly consistent with those produced using the model

of King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988) presented earlier in Figure 1. The half-life of the income

response to a transitory shock is 7 quarters according to the quantitative theory. The average

half-life across countries using the estimated impulse responses (Figure 2) is very close to
this, at 8 quarters. The path back to the steady-state is predicted to be monotonic in the
benchmark theory, typical of our estimates. Consumption displays a hump-shape response

rising for a number of quarters before returning monotonically back to the steady-state level.
According to the theory, the hump-shaped response re‡ects the interaction of wealth and
substitution e¤ects. The wealth e¤ect of a transitory shock is small as is evident from the fact

that the theoretical impulse never exceeds 0.25 percent above the steady-state in response
to a persistent unit (1 percent) productivity shock. The initially high real interest rate,

                                              13
generated by higher productivity creates an upward sloping pro…le in the initial few quarters

due to an intertemporal substitution e¤ect.
   Turning to the case of a pure random walk productivity shock (i.e. a permanent increase
in productivity of 1%), the basic neoclassical model predicts a monotonically rising pro…le of

both consumption and income. Both variables increase toward new higher steady-state levels,
with consumption everywhere below income. The reason for this is that in the new higher
steady-state, the capital is higher than initially to re-equate the higher marginal product

of capital (due to higher productivity) with the unchanged steady-state real interest rate.
To accomplish this, investment must rise above the steady-state by more in the short-run

than the long-run; this accounts for the gap in consumption and income along the transition

path. In an open economy the tension between consumption and investment in the income

identity is relaxed and as we shall see in the empirical results, consumption tends to track

income more closely in the permanent shock case in open economies. Interestingly the largest

countries look more like the closed economy simulation, consistent with the notion that the

tension between consumption and investment again arises at the global level.

   Figure 2 shows the impulse responses are quite similar across countries. Most coun-

tries display monotonic transitions of GDP back to the steady-state following a transitory

disturbance.   An exception is Japan, where output keeps rising for three quarters before

adjustment back toward the steady-state begins. The half-life of the response of output in

the neoclassical model is 8 quarters which is within one quarter of the empirical estimates
for Australia, Canada, France and the United States. Germany has a much lower empirical
half-life of 4 quarters while Japan, Italy and the United Kingdom have half-lives of 2 years

or more. A signi…cant fraction of the higher half-life for Japan is due to the hump-shaped
output response; it takes 11 quarters for the impulse to return to its level at impact.
   Turning to consumption, recall the impact response to a transitory shock is restricted to

be zero in the empirical model. Some delay is evident in the maximal estimated consumption
response, but not as much as the theory implies. The consumption pro…les also display


                                              14
di¤erent sensitivity to the same magnitude disturbance across countries.

   Permanent shocks carry the economy to a new higher level of consumption and income
while restoring the ratio of these two key macroeconomic variables in both the theory and
the estimated model. Most of the empirical impulses indicate rapid adjustment toward the

new higher steady state with half of the adjustment achieved in the …rst few quarters. Only
Australia, Italy and the United Kingdom take more than one year to account for one-half of
the distance between the impact response and the new higher steady-state level of output.

The response of the calibrated neoclassical model is considerably slower.
   The simplest version of the permanent income hypothesis predicts that consumption rises

in exact proportion to income if the shock is exogenous and permanent. This is what gives

rise to the classic prediction that a permanent income shock has no implication for a nation’s

current account. Here, however, a permanent shock generates a predictable rise in income.

In the neoclassical theory, this is because a permanent rise in productivity leads to a process

of capital accumulation to a new higher steady-state, which takes real time to accomplish.

Consumption, therefore is expected to rise above income initially based on permanent income

logic, even in the permanent productivity shock case. Empirically, however, income moves

almost immediately to its long-run level and therefore consumption and income move quite

closely together, in response to the permanent shock. This contrasts strongly with the

transitory shock case where most of the movements are in income, while consumption barely

adjusts.


4. Saving cycles and ECM/BN cycles
4.1. Summary statistics

This section computes our saving-based business cycle measure for each nation and compares

them with the BN cycle obtained from the restricted bivariate ECM estimates as well as
some commonly used univariate business cycle measures. We denote Cochrane’s ECM/BN
cycle by ECM-BN. The simplest version of our saving-based measure, namely, the detrended


                                              15
savings with the choice of cgt = ct in (2.1) is denoted by SV. The saving-based measure
                                                          P4 1
derived using a moving average of consumption cgt = (1=4) j=0  ct j , is denote by SV-MA.
The saving-based measure with the HP-…ltered consumption obtained by minimizing (2.3)
with   = 1600 is denoted by SV-HP. The univariate BN business cycle measure obtained

from the OLS estimate of a second-order autoregressive (AR) model of output growth is
denoted by BN, and the standard HP cycle obtained by minimizing (2.2) with            = 1600 is
denoted by HP.

   Table 3 reports the standard deviations of the cyclical measures. The notable …nding here
is that the magnitude of volatility in general is much larger for the multivariate measures than

for the univariate measures. For the multivariate measures, ECM-BN cycle and saving-based

cycles, SV in particular, are remarkably similar to each other. For the univariate measures,

the largest (across country) cyclical volatility for the BN cycle barely reaches a standard

deviation of 0.5%, the mean across countries is a mere 0.34%. The small contribution of

the BN cycle to the variance of output is the ‡ipside of the argument, by Beveridge and

Nelson (1981), that output is close to a random walk. The standard deviation of the HP

cycle is always intermediate between the univariate BN model and the multivariate models.

Moreover, cyclical variability of output according to the univariate BN model is trivial.

   Table 4 examines the time series correlations of the various estimates of the cycle. The BN

cycle has an average (across countries) correlation of near zero with multivariate measures,

such as ECM-BN and SV. The HP cycle is positively correlated with multivariate measures
for all countries, with the highest correlation being 0.72 with SV-HP. Based on the similarity
of the moments of the ECM-BN cycle and the SV cycle, one might suspect that the two follow

a similar time path. Figure 3, in fact, shows that the two estimates are virtually identical.
Simply put: to a very close approximation, savings is the cycle in GDP and consumption is
the trend.

   The obvious di¤erence between the HP cycle and the SV cycle (see Figure 3) is that the
SV produces business cycles signi…cantly longer in duration and greater in amplitude than


                                              16
the HP cycle (for the U.S., the two are more comparable). The average duration of these

cycles would push the upper limits of what business cycle theorists (or the NBER dating
committee, for that matter) would consider reasonable. And yet, if the goal of the exercise
is to parse the data into trend and cycle for purposes of applications to growth theory and

business cycle theory, it seems logical to infer the stochastic trend from permanent income
behavior of the mythical representative agent rather than relegate the task to a purely
statistical procedure.

    Taking the view that non-in‡ationary or sustainable economic growth is tracked by the
growth component, the implication of our cyclical measure is dramatically di¤erent from

the conventional view of the output gap using the HP …lter. The di¤erences involve many

policy relevant aspects: i) the extent of variance around the growth trend, ii) the duration

of cycle; and iii) the timing of turning points. The welfare implications of business cycles

is also altered given the greater persistence and volatility of the deviations from the growth

path.

4.2. The international comovement puzzle

Given the analysis above, it should not be surprising that the simple saving-based measure

of business cycles has dramatic implications for some key business cycle facts. Consider

the most cited of these: the international correlation of GDP. The correlation of U.S. and

foreign business cycles, is uniformly positive using the HP cycle, averaging about 0.5 across
countries. This is higher than the correlation of 0.02 produced in the two-sector, two-country
benchmark model of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994).10 The contrast of the observed and

simulated moments has been dubbed the comovement puzzle: pointing to the observation
that models have di¢ culty producing the high international output correlations observed in
the data. Table 5 shows that the SV measure of the cycle in U.S. output has an average

correlation of nearly zero with its foreign counterpart. Aiming for this empirical target seems
  10
     Baxter and Crucini (1995) explore the role of incomplete markets in a one-sector, two-country business
cycle model and …nd signi…cantly positive output correlations arise only when productivity are near random
walks with modest international correlations in the innovations and no dynamic spillovers.


                                                    17
likely to change the relative merit of alternative international business cycle models.

4.3. The Great Moderation

Stock and Watson (2005) documented a decline in the size of common, international, shocks

in recent decades. In this sense business cycle volatility may be sensitive not only to the
choice of the method of the trend-cycle decomposition but also to the time period. Table
6 shows the standard deviations of alternative business cycle measures computed for two

subsamples. We follow Stock and Watson and divide the sample into a period that ends
in 1993 and a period starting in 1994. On average, we observe declines in all the business

cycle measures as we move from the …rst period to the second period. However, volatility

reductions are not so obvious when multivariate measures are employed in place of univariate

measures. In fact, standard deviations are actually larger in the second subsample when SV

and SV-MA cycles are employed. It could be that better economic policy smoothed out high

frequency variation while the underlying cycle perceived by consumers remained as volatile

as ever.


5. Conclusions

As emphasized by Canova (1998), alternative detrending …lters extract di¤erent types of

business cycle information from the data.11 The standard approach to business cycle de-

compositions in macroeconomics is the univariate HP …lter. Baxter and King (1999) and

the NBER business cycle dating committee take nuanced approaches, starting with a formal

de…nition of what a business cycle should look like in terms of duration or judging business
cycle peaks and troughs using multiple indicators but not holding to an algorithm, respec-

tively. Applying minimal theoretical restrictions embodied in traditional macroeconomic

models, such as the permanent income model, we …nd that business cycles do not conform
to these conventional approaches. Consequently, many of the empirical challenges in the
  11
     Cogley and Nason (1995) go further and show that the Hodrick-Prescott …lter can create periodicities
in the cyclical component when none exist in the original series.



                                                   18
business cycle literature may be di¤erent than was previously thought. Two key dimensions

of business cycle facts found to be very sensitive to …ltering relate to ongoing debates about
the extent of international comovement and the Great Moderation. While obviously central
to business cycle research, these two examples are just illustrative, there are likely other

key relationships such as the association of nominal and real variables deserving of the same
scrutiny. Much remains to be done.




                                             19
Appendix

A1. Multivariate GLS Estimation of Restricted Vector ECMs
An unrestricted bivariate ECM with lag two (with constant and trend term),

                 ct                      c1                   c2                        c
                             =                     +                    t+                        (ct     1           yt 1 )
                 yt                      y1                   y2                        y

                                              c1       c3                  ct      1                     c2           c4                    ct   2       "ct
                                    +                                                    +                                                           +
                                              y1       y3                  yt      1                     y2           y4                    yt   2       "yt

can be written in a matrix form
                                                                        X = AZ + E
where      X = [ X1 ; :::; XT ],                     Xt = ( ct ; yt )0 , Z = [Z0 ; :::; ZT                                          1] ;
                                                            2                  3
                                                                1
                                                            6 t                7
                                                            6                  7
                                                       Zt = 6
                                                            6   c t  1   y t 1
                                                                               7;
                                                                               7
                                                            4 Xt 1             5
                                                                    Xt 2

                                                       c1          c2          c        c1         c3             c2           c4
                                        A=
                                                       y1          y2          y        y1         y3             y2           y4

and E = ["1 ; :::; "T ]. A linear restriction c = 0 on A can be expressed by a =vec(A) = Sr+s,
where vec(A) = ( c1 ; y1 ; c2 ; y2 ; c ; y ; c1 ; y1 ; c3 ; y3 ; c2 ; y2 ; c4 ; y4 )0 ,
                                                2       3
                                                  I4 0
                                            S = 4 0 0 5;
                                                  0 I9
                                                                                                                  0
r=(     c1 ;   y1 ;   c2 ;   y2 ;   y;    c1 ;     y1 ;     c3 ;    y3 ;        c2 ;    y2 ;      c4 ;        y4 )     and s = 0. Since

                      vec( X) = (Z 0                   IK )vec(A) + vec(E) = (Z 0                                          IK )Sr + vec(E);
a restricted GLS estimator is given by

                                 b       b = Sb
                                 a = vec(A)   r
                                                                                            1
                                    = S S 0 (ZZ 0                          "
                                                                               1
                                                                                   )S           S 0 (Z                "
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                              )vec( X)

with its limit distribution
                         p                                   h                                                                          i
                                                          d                                                                    1
                                         T (b
                                            a          a) ! N 0; S S 0 (Q                                     "
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                      )S           S0

where Q =plim ZZ 0 =T .




                                                                                   20
A2. Bivariate Beveridge-Nelson Decomposition of Restricted Vec-
tor ECMs
To simplify the derivation, we omit constant and trend term without the loss of generality.
Suppose a vector ECM
                                               p
                                               X
                                      0
                              Xt =      Xt 1 +   Bi Xt i + "t
                                                       i=1

where Xt is an n 1 vector of variables, is an n r matrix representing cointegrating
vectors, is an n r loading coe¢ cients, Bi ’s are n n coe¢ cient matrices and "t is an
n 1 zero mean error vector. Its VAR(1) representation is given by
                                          Wt = AWt       1   + ut

where Wt = [ Xt0 ; :::; Xt0 p+1 ; 0 Xt 1 ], A is an (np + r) (np + r) coe¢ cient matrix and
ut is an (np + r) 1 error vector. A multivariate version of Beveridge and Nelson (1981)
decomposition for the i-th element of Xt yields its cyclical component given by

                            X
                            k                          X
                                                       k
                e c = lim
                X                     ct+jjt
                                  e0i W        = lim         e0i Aj Wt = e0i A(I   A) 1 Wt
                 it
                      k!1                       k!1
                            j=1                        j=1


and trend component given by

                                       e c = Xit + e0 A(I
                          Xitg = Xit + X                               A) 1 Wt
                                        it          i

where ei is a selection vector for i-th element. Note that we can simply ‡ip the sign of the
original BN cycle to much the de…nition of cyclical component in the main text as Xitc = X ec .
                                                                                            it
For a restricted bivariate ECM with transitory consumption ( c = 0 and c3 = c4 = 0), its
VAR(1) representation is simpli…ed to
2         3 2                                                    32             3 2               3
     ct            c1        0         c2       0       0              ct 1            "1t
6 yt      7 6 y1                                                 7 6            7  6              7
6         7 6                  y3      y2         y4      y      7 6 yt 1       7 6 "2t           7
6 ct 1 7 = 6 1               0       0          0       0        7 6 ct 2       7+6 0             7:
6         7 6                                                    76             7 6               7
4 yt 1 5 4 0                 1       0          0       0        5 4 yt 2       5 4 0             5
   ct yt           c1     y1      y3   c2   y2       y4     y +1     ct 1 yt 1         "1t "2t




                                                   21
Thus, for the transitory component of yt , we have

       ytc =      yetc =     [ 0 1 0 0 0 ]A(I                                     A) 1 Wt
                                     2                                                                                                                                     3
                                                              c1                      0                      c2                         0                0
                               6 y1                                                                                                                                        7
                               6                                                          y3                 y2                              y4              y             7
           =      [ 0 1 0 0 0 ]6
                               6 1                                                    0                  0                              0                0                 7
                                                                                                                                                                           7
                               4 0                                                    1                  0                              0                0                 5
                                                              c1            y1                 y3            c2                y2                 y4              y   +1
                  2                                                                                                                 3    1   2                        3
                    1    c1                0                                c2                 0                  0                                     ct
                  6                        1                                                                                        7        6          yt            7
                  6   y1                                  y3                y2                           y4                 y       7        6                        7
                  6 1                      0                       1                           0                  0                 7        6          ct            7
                  6                                                                                                                 7        6                1       7
                  4 0                            1                 0                           1                  0                 5        4          yt    1
                                                                                                                                                                      5
                       y1            c1        y3                      y2             c2            y4                 y                           ct        yt
                                                                                                    2                               3
                                                                                                                  ct
                  h                                                                  i6
                                                                                      6                           yt                7
                                                                                                                                    7
           =          1 (
                           c1 + c2
                                             0                   c2
                                                                                  0 1 6
                                                                                      6                           ct       1
                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                    7
                            c1 + c2 )                1 (       c1 + c2 )
                                                                                      4                           yt       1
                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                             ct            yt
                                      c1   +         c2                                             c2
           = yt       ct                                               ct                                                          ct 1 :
                                 1    (    c1    +        c2 )                    1        (       c1    +        c2 )

The trend component of yt can be obtained as
                                                                                  +
        ytg = yt       ytc = yt + ct                 yt +                    c1            c2
                                                                                                              ct +                                c2
                                                                                                                                                                      ct   1
                                                                   1         (    c1   +           c2 )                        1        (     c1   +         c2 )
                            1                                                c1                                                          c2
            =                                ct +                                              ct       1   +                                             ct 2 :
                1      (    c1   +    c2 )                1        (    c1   +         c2 )                       1             (   c1   +         c2 )

Consistent with the argument of Cochrane, in the case of random walk consumption with
                                                                                 c
  c1 = c2 = 0, the results above implies that the cyclical component reduces to yt = yt ct =
                                                    g
st (saving) and the trend component reduces to yt = ct (consumption).




                                                                             22
References

[1] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland, 1994. Dynamics of the Trade
   Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve? American Economic Review 84(1),
   84-103.

[2] Baxter, Marianne, and Mario J. Crucini, 1995. Business Cycles and the Asset Structure

   of Foreign Trade. International Economic Review 36(4), 821-854.

[3] Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King, 1999. Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate

   Band-Pass Filters For Economic Time Series. The Review of Economics and Statistics

   81(4), 575-593.

[4] Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson, 1981. A New Approach to Decomposition

   of Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular

   Attention to Measurement of the Business Cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics 7,

   151-174.

[5] Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Danny Quah, 1989. The Dynamic E¤ects of Aggregate

   Demand and Supply Disturbances. American Economic Review 79, 655-673.

[6] Campbell, John, Y., 1987. Does Saving Anticipate Declining labor Income? An Alter-

   native Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis. Econometrica 55(6) 1249-1273.

[7] Campbell, John Y., and Richard H. Clarida, 1987. Saving and Permanent Income in

   Canada and the United Kingdom, in Economic E¤ects of the Government Budget (E.
   Helpman, A. Razin, and E. Sadka, Eds.) 122-141, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[8] Campbell, John Y., and Angus Deaton, 1989. Why Is Consumption So Smooth? Review

   of Economic Studies 56(3), 357-373.

[9] Canova, Fabio, 1998. Detrending and Business Cycle Facts, Journal of Monetary Eco-

   nomics 41, 475-512.

                                          23
[10] Cochrane, John H., 1994. Permanent and Transitory Components of GNP and Stock

    Prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics 30, 241-265.

[11] Cogley, Timothy, and James M. Nason, 1995. E¤ects of the Hodrick-Prescott Filter on

    Trend and Di¤erence Stationary Time Series: Implications for Business Cycle Research.
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 19(1-2), 253-278.

[12] Evans, George, and Lucrezia Reichlin, 1994. Information, Forecasts, and Measurement
    of the Business Cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics 33, 233-254.

[13] Gonzalo, Jesús and Clive Granger, 1995. Estimation of Common Long-Memory Compo-

    nents in Cointegrated Systems, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13(1), 27-35.

[14] Gonzalo, Jesús and Serena Ng, 2001. A Systematic Framework for Analyzing the Dy-

    namic E¤ects of Permanent and Transitory Shocks, Journal of Economic Dynamics and

    Control 25, 1527-1546.

[15] Hodrick, Robert J. and Edward C. Prescott, 1997. Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An

    Empirical Investigation. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29(1), pages 1-16, Feb-

    ruary.

[16] King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser and Sergio Rebelo, 1988. Production, Growth and

    Business Cycles I: The Basic Neoclassical Model. Journal of Monetary Economics 21,

    195-232.

[17] King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, 1991,
    Stochastic Trends and Economic Fluctuations. American Economic Review 81, 819-
    840.

[18] Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2004. Understanding Trend and Cycle in

    Asset Values: Reevaluating the Wealth E¤ect on Consumption. American Economic
    Review 94(1), 276-299.


                                           24
[19] Levtchenkova, S., A. R. Pagan and J. C. Robertson, 1998. Shocking Stories. Journal of

    Economic Surveys 12(5), 507-532.

[20] MacDonald, R., and C. Kearney, 1990. Consumption , Cointegration and Rational Ex-
    pectations: Some Australian Evidence. Australian Economic Papers 29, 40-52.

[21] Morely, James C., 2007. The Slow Adjustment of Aggregate Consumption to Permanent
    Income. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39(2-3), 615-638.

[22] Morley, James C., Charles R. Nelson and Eric Zivot, 2003. Why Are the Beveridge-
    Nelson and Unobserved-Components Decompositions of GDP so Di¤erent? Review of

    Economics and Statistics 85(2), 235-243.

[23] Ogaki, Masao, and Joon Y. Park, 1997. A Cointegration Approach to Estimating Pref-

    erence Parameters. Journal of Econometrics 82, 107–134.

[24] Ravn, Morten O., 1997. Permanent and Transitory Shocks, and the UK Business Cycles,

    Journal of Applied Econometrics 12, 27-48.

[25] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, 1996. Real-Business-Cycle Models and

    the Forecastable Movements in Output, Hours and Consumption, American Economic

    Review 86, 71-89.

[26] Shintani, Mototsugu, 1994. Cointegration and Tests of the Permanent Income Hypoth-

    esis: Japanese Evidence with International Comparisons. Journal of the Japanese and

    International Economies 8, 144-172.

[27] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 1988. Testing for Common Trends. Journal of
    the American Statistical Association 83, 1097-1107.

[28] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2005. Understanding Changes in International

    Business Cycle Dynamics. Journal of the European Economic Association 3(5), 968–
    1006.


                                           25
                           Table 1. –Bivariate Vector ECM Estimates


   Country                        const.            trend           ct     1        yt       1        ct   1            ct    2        yt    1      yt   2
   Australia
                            ct     0:81             0:00                    0:00                  0:04              0:01            0:09            0:05
   1959:3 to 2005:1               (5:24)           (0:78)                   ( )                  (0:48)            (0:13)          (1:62)          (0:94)
   T = 183                  yt     4:82             0:00                    0:08                  0:09              0:06             0:06           0:01
                                  (2:44)           (0:70)                  (1:91)                (0:70)            (0:47)          (0:67)          (0:15)
   Canada
                            ct     0:90             0:00                    0:00                   0:19             0:03            0:29            0:05
   1961:1 to 2005:1               (4:72)           (1:67)                   ( )                  (2:17)            (0:30)          (3:21)          (0:54)
   T = 177                  yt     6:02             0:00                    0:10                  0:15              0:19            0:18             0:05
                                  (3:23)           (0:19)                  (2:84)                (1:66)            (2:15)          (1:97)          (0:55)
   France
                            ct     0:67             0:00                    0:00                   0:13             0:22             0:02           0:09
   1970:1 to 2005:1               (3:84)           (1:60)                   ( )                  (1:21)            (2:17)          (0:16)          (0:64)
   T = 141                  yt     3:18             0:00                    0:05                  0:11              0:15            0:12            0:13
                                  (2:32)           (0:32)                  (2:05)                (1:45)            (2:07)          (1:07)          (1:35)
   Germany
                            ct     1:19              0:01                   0:00                   0:33              0:14           0:04            0:14
   1970:1 to 2005:1               (5:17)           (2:71)                   ( )                  (3:13)            (1:36)          (0:35)          (1:24)
      T = 141               yt     9:04             0:00                    0:15                   0:14              0:05           0:07            0:13
                                  (3:87)           (2:11)                  (3:58)                (1:46)            (0:55)          (0:61)          (1:24)

   Notes: The regressions are of the form:


             ct =     c1   +     c2 t   +     c1    ct    1   +       c2       ct    2   +       c3    yt      1   +     c4       yt   2   + "ct

             yt =     y1   +     y2 t     +   y (ct 1             yt 1 )

                      +    y1    ct   1   +    y2    ct       2   +      y3     yt       1   +    y4       yt      2   + "yt


where ct = 100   ln Ct and yt = 100                 ln Yt . Restricted multivariate generalized least squares

estimates.




                                                                      26
                Table 1 (continued). –Bivariate Vector ECM Estimates


Country                   const.   trend    ct   1   yt   1     ct   1     ct   2    yt   1    yt   2
Italy
                     ct    0:40     0:00          0:00         0:42       0:16       0:14       0:08
1970:1 to 2005:1          (3:30)   (1:98)         ( )         (4:56)     (1:75)     (2:27)    (1:34)
T = 141              yt    7:83      0:01         0:13         0:31       0:15       0:30       0:05
                          (3:24)   (3:09)        (3:16)       (2:20)     (1:09)     (3:17)    (0:54)
Japan
                     ct    2:51      0:01         0:00          0:48       0:20      0:26      0:32
1955:2 to 2005:1          (7:72)   (6:48)         ( )         (4:42)     (1:80)     (2:28)    (2:77)
T = 200              yt    4:57      0:01         0:05          0:26       0:10      0:22      0:32
                          (4:21)   (2:80)        (2:45)       (2:56)     (0:98)     (2:06)    (2:96)
United Kingdom
                     ct    0:55     0:00          0:00          0:08      0:10        0:01     0:01
1955:1 to 2005:1          (3:09)   (0:82)         ( )         (0:86)     (1:06)     (0:12)    (0:06)
T = 201              yt    2:27     0:00          0:03         0:11       0:11        0:14     0:02
                          (2:24)   (1:32)        (1:70)       (1:31)     (1:30)     (1:58)    (0:20)
United States
                     ct    0:60     0:00          0:00         0:12       0:10       0:10      0:01
1955:1 to 2005:1          (4:71)   (0:17)         ( )         (1:30)     (1:03)     (1:41)    (0:15)
   T = 201           yt    5:15      0:01         0:10         0:44       0:20       0:02      0:00
                          (3:20)   (2:77)        (3:06)       (3:76)     (1:62)     (0:23)    (0:05)




                                            27
          Table 2. –Consumption and Income Variance Decompositions


    Variance of:                       ct                    yt

                              Accounted for by       Accounted for by
                           Permanent Transitory   Permanent Transitory
     Country       Horizon   shocks      shocks     shocks      shocks
     Australia        1       100:0        0:0       22:5        77:5
                      4        98:3        1:7       22:6        77:4
                     1        98:2         1:8       22:3        77:7
      Canada          1       100:0        0:0       29:5        70:5
                      4        94:9        5:1       38:1        61:9
                     1        94:6         5:4       37:2        62:8
      France          1       100:0        0:0       37:3        62:7
                      4        99:7        0:3       47:0        53:0
                     1        99:7         0:3       46:8        53:2
     Germany          1       100:0        0:0       38:3        61:7
                      4        99:1        0:9       38:4        61:6
                     1        99:1         0:9       37:5        62:5
       Italy          1       100:0        0:0       18:1        81:9
                      4        97:7        2:3       35:4        64:6
                     1        97:6         2:4       36:1        63:9
      Japan           1       100:0        0:0       58:4        41:6
                      4        96:0        4:0       58:4        41:6
                     1        95:7         4:3       57:3        42:7
      United          1       100:0        0:0       38:9        61:1
     Kingdom          4       100:0        0:0       39:2        60:8
                     1        100:0        0:0       39:1        60:9
      United          1       100:0        0:0       41:2        58:8
      States          4        99:1        0:9       51:5        48:5
                     1        99:0         1:0       50:8        49:2

Note: See Table 1 for the sample period.




                                           28
      Table 3. –Standard Deviations of Alternative Business Cycle Measures


                            Multivariate measures               Univariate
                    Cochrane’s          Saving-based
                     measure              measures               measures
                    ECM-BN         SV SV-MA SV-HP               BN HP
     Australia         2.49        2.21    2.50     2.31        0.09 1.44
     Canada            2.15        1.57    1.77     1.85        0.34 1.39
     France            1.49        1.38    1.48     1.49        0.44 0.91
     Germany           1.73        1.58    1.59     1.77        0.07 1.34
     Italy             2.06        1.53    1.76     1.69        0.57 1.43
     Japan             3.22        2.15    2.34     2.54        0.52 1.50
     United Kingdom    3.30        3.31    3.30     3.37        0.10 1.45
     United States     1.69        1.40    1.60     1.94        0.55 1.55
     Averages          2.27        1.89    2.04     2.12        0.34 1.38

Note: See Table 1 for the sample period.




                                           29
          Table 4. –Correlation of Alternative Business Cycle Measures


                             Multivariate measures               Univariate
                    Cochrane’s           Saving-based
                     measure               measures              measures
                    ECM-BN          SV SV-MA SV-HP               BN HP
                      (1) Correlation with ECM-BN
     Australia         1.00         1.00    0.94     0.87        0.27    0.49
     Canada            1.00         0.99    0.85     0.75       -0.05    0.26
     France            1.00         0.99    0.83     0.76       -0.03    0.23
     Germany           1.00         0.98    0.91     0.80       -0.18    0.42
     Italy             1.00         0.83    0.50     0.43        0.14    0.07
     Japan             1.00         0.99    0.92     0.88       -0.09    0.39
     United Kingdom    1.00         1.00    0.95     0.88        0.03    0.08
     United States     1.00         0.97    0.75     0.72        0.06    0.39
     Averages          1.00         0.97    0.83     0.76        0.02    0.29
                          (2) Correlation with SV
     Australia          –           1.00    0.95     0.89       0.34     0.51
     Canada              –          1.00    0.88     0.77       -0.18    0.30
     France              –          1.00    0.90     0.81       -0.16    0.25
     Germany             –          1.00    0.85     0.77       -0.20    0.40
     Italy               –          1.00    0.90     0.66       -0.24    0.22
     Japan               –          1.00    0.92     0.87       -0.14    0.39
     United Kingdom      –          1.00    0.95     0.89       0.01     0.08
     United States       –          1.00    0.88     0.79       -0.16    0.45
     Averages            –          1.00    0.90     0.81       -0.09    0.33
                          (3) Correlation with HP
     Australia           –            –     0.58     0.74       0.39     1.00
     Canada              –            –     0.38     0.77       -0.31    1.00
     France              –            –     0.29     0.66       -0.34    1.00
     Germany             –            –     0.49     0.79       -0.36    1.00
     Italy               –            –     0.36     0.79       -0.30    1.00
     Japan               –            –     0.51     0.72       -0.38    1.00
     United Kingdom      –            –     0.18     0.43       -0.34    1.00
     United States       –            –     0.50     0.86       -0.34    1.00
     Averages            –            –     0.41     0.72       -0.25    1.00

Note: See Table 1 for the sample period.




                                           30
        Table 5. –International Business Cycle Comovement with the U.S.


                           Multivariate measures                Univariate
                   Cochrane’s          Saving-based
                    measure              measures                measures
                   ECM-BN         SV SV-MA SV-HP                BN HP
    Australia         0.24        0.27     0.31    0.40        -0.33 0.43
    Canada            0.01        0.00     0.06    0.45        0.57 0.72
    France            0.25        0.24     0.20    0.23        0.29 0.36
    Germany          -0.05       -0.06    -0.09    0.15         0.17 0.43
    Italy            -0.17       -0.15    -0.04    0.19         0.15 0.33
    Japan            -0.04       -0.04    -0.07    0.15         0.30 0.40
    United Kingdom   -0.10       -0.11    -0.04    0.20         0.34 0.65
    United States     1.00        1.00     1.00    1.00         1.00 1.00
    Averages          0.02        0.02     0.05    0.25        0.21 0.47

Note: Sample period is 1970:Q4 to 2005:Q1.




                                       31
Table 6. –Standard Deviations of Alternative Business Cycle Measures: Subsamples


                            Multivariate measures               Univariate
                    Cochrane’s          Saving-based
                     measure              measures              measures
                    ECM-BN         SV SV-MA SV-HP               BN HP
                           (1) 1970Q4 - 2005Q1
     Australia         2.57        2.27    2.55     2.24        0.08   1.34
     Canada            1.96        1.45    1.78     1.81        0.34   1.50
     France            1.48        1.37    1.48     1.50        0.44   0.91
     Germany           1.68        1.54    1.59     1.75        0.06   1.34
     Italy             2.05        1.52    1.76     1.68        0.58   1.43
     Japan             2.70        1.79    1.84     2.11        0.45   1.32
     United Kingdom    3.05        3.11    3.11     3.18        0.10   1.50
     United States     1.68        1.31    1.29     1.87        0.51   1.61
     Averages          2.15        1.80    1.93     2.02        0.32   1.37
                           (2) 1970Q4 - 1983Q4
     Australia         3.36        2.97    3.28     2.77        0.11   1.68
     Canada            2.00        1.47    1.73     1.71        0.43   1.75
     France            1.61        1.44    1.53     1.49        0.51   0.97
     Germany           2.12        1.87    2.01     2.20        0.07   1.60
     Italy             1.86        1.34    1.81     2.08        0.78   2.05
     Japan             2.66        1.78    2.08     2.23        0.50   1.57
     United Kingdom    2.05        2.05    2.21     2.29        0.14   1.96
     United States     2.00        1.42    1.14     2.41        0.72   2.29
     Averages          2.21        1.79    1.97     2.15        0.41   1.74
                           (3) 1984Q1 - 2005Q1
     Australia         1.63        1.44    1.68     1.65        0.05   1.08
     Canada            1.95        1.45    1.80     1.87        0.28   1.31
     France            1.40        1.34    1.45     1.49        0.40   0.87
     Germany           1.34        1.28    1.25     1.41        0.06   1.16
     Italy             2.13        1.61    1.71     1.35        0.40   0.87
     Japan             2.02        1.38    1.46     1.63        0.37   1.16
     United Kingdom    2.02        2.07    2.33     1.96        0.06   1.13
     United States     1.41        1.19    1.30     1.33        0.31   0.96
     Averages          1.74        1.47    1.62     1.59        0.24   1.07




                                      32
                                 Figure 1. Impulse responses from King, Plosser and Rebelo Model
                       0.8


                       0.7


                       0.6
percentage deviation




                       0.5

                                                               Consumption response to a permanent shock
                       0.4                                     Output response to a permanent shock
                                                               Consumption response to a transitory shock
                                                               Output rseponse to a transitory shock
                       0.3


                       0.2


                       0.1


                        0
                         0   5      10            15              20            25         30           35   40
                                                       quarters after the shock
                                          Figure 2. Impulse Response
                                          Functions ECM/BM Model

                  Australia                                                    Canada

  1                                                             1


0.5                                                           0.5


  0                                                             0
   0      10         20         30   40                          0      10        20         30   40

                                                                              Germany
                  France
 1
                                                                1

0.5
                                                              0.5

 0                                                              0
                                                   c-perm           0   10        20         30   40
      0   10         20         30   40
                                                   y-perm
                                                   c-trans
                   Italy                                                        Japan
1.5                                                y-trans
                                                              1.5

 1                                                              1

0.5                                                           0.5

 0                                                              0
  0       10        20        30     40                          0      10       20          30   40

               United Kingdom                                                United States
1.5                                                           1.5

  1
                                                                1
0.5
                                                              0.5
  0

      0   10         20         30   40                         0
                                                                 0      10        20         30   40
                                 Figure 3. Business cycle estimates for select countries
                  Australia                                                                Canada
10                                                             8

                                                               6
 5
                                                               4

                                                               2
 0
                                                               0
 -5                                                            -2

                                                               -4
-10
                                                               -6

-15                                                            -8
 1960   1970     1980         1990      2000                   1960        1970        1980          1990   2000

                                                  BN-ECM
                                                  HP
                                                  SAVING RATE
               United Kingdom                                                        United States
15                                                             5


10


 5
                                                               0
 0


-5


-10                                                           -5
 1960   1970     1980         1990      2000                  1960        1970        1980          1990    2000
