                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  ADVERSE SELECTION, REPUTATION AND SUDDEN COLLAPSES IN SECONDARY
                           LOAN MARKETS

                                             V.V. Chari
                                           Ali Shourideh
                                          Ariel Zetlin-Jones

                                        Working Paper 16080
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16080


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




We are grateful to Kathy Rolfe for editorial assistance and Hugo Hopenhayn, Roozbeh Hosseini, Larry
Jones, Patrick Kehoe, Guido Lorenzoni, Chris Phelan as well as seminar participants at ASU, Kellogg,
Yale, the 2009 SED Meeting, New York and Minneapolis Fed, the Conference on Money and Banking
at University of Wisconsin, and XII International Workshop in International Economics and Finance
in Rio for helpful comments. Chari and Shourideh are grateful to the National Science Foundation
for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, or the Federal Reserve System, or the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by V.V. Chari, Ali Shourideh, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Adverse Selection, Reputation and Sudden Collapses in Secondary Loan Markets
V.V. Chari, Ali Shourideh, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 16080
June 2010
JEL No. E44,E50,G01,G14,G18,G38

                                            ABSTRACT

Banks and financial intermediaries that originate loans often sell some of these loans or securitize
them in secondary loan markets and hold on to others. New issuances in such secondary markets collapse
abruptly on occasion, typically when collateral values used to secure the underlying loans fall. These
collapses are viewed by policymakers as signs that the market is not functioning efficiently. In this
paper, we develop a dynamic adverse selection model in which small reductions in collateral values
can generate abrupt inefficient collapses in new issuances in the secondary loan market. In our model,
reductions in collateral values worsen the adverse selection problem and induce some potential sellers
to hold on to their loans. Reputational incentives induce a large fraction of potential sellers to hold
on to their loans rather than sell them in the secondary market. We find that a variety of policies that
have been proposed during the recent crisis to remedy market inefficiencies do not help resolve the
adverse selection problem.


V.V. Chari                                         Ariel Zetlin-Jones
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
University of Minnesota                            University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall                                   4-101 Hanson Hall
271 - 19th Avenue South                            1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455                              Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER                                           zetli001@umn.edu
varadarajanvchari@gmail.com

Ali Shourideh
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
shour004@umn.edu
1    Introduction

Following the sharp decline in the volume of new issuances in the U.S. secondary loan market in

the fall of 2007, policymakers argued that the market was not functioning normally and proposed

and carried out a variety of policy interventions intended to restore the normal functioning of

this market. Here we construct a model in which new issuances in the secondary loan market

abruptly collapse and this collapse is associated with an increase in inefficiency. We also argue that

reductions in the value of the collateral used to secure the underlying loans are particularly likely to

trigger sudden collapses associated with increased inefficiency. Since sudden collapses are associated

with increased inefficiency, our model is consistent with policymakers’ views that the market was

functioning poorly. We use this model to analyze proposed and actual policy interventions and

argue that these interventions typically do not remedy the inefficiency associated with the market

collapse.

    In our model, the main economic function of the secondary loan market is to allocate originated

loans to institutions that have a comparative advantage in holding and managing the loans. This

economic function is disrupted by informational frictions. In our model, loan originators differ in

their ability to originate high quality loans. The originators are better informed about their ability

to generate high quality loans than are potential purchasers. This informational friction creates an

adverse selection problem. The focus of our analysis is to examine the extent to which reputational

considerations ameliorate or intensify the adverse selection problem in these markets. In order to

analyze these reputational considerations, we develop a dynamic adverse selection model of the

secondary loan market.

    Our main finding is that our model has fragile outcomes in which sudden collapses in the volume

of new issuances in secondary loan markets are associated with increased inefficiency. We say that

outcomes are fragile if the model has multiple equilibria or if a large number of originators change

their decisions in response to small changes in aggregate fundamentals.

    In terms of fragility as multiplicity, we show that our baseline dynamic adverse selection model

with reputation has multiple equilibria for a range of reputation levels. In one of these equilibria,

labeled the positive reputational equilibrium, high quality loan originators have incentives to sell at

a current loss in order to improve their reputations and command higher prices for future loans.


                                                   2
In the other equilibrium, labeled the negative reputational equilibrium, loan originators who sell

their loans are perceived by future buyers to have low quality loans. These perceptions induce high

quality loan originators to hold on to their loans. Since low quality originators always sell their

loans, the volume of new issuances is larger in the positive reputational equilibrium than in the

negative reputational equilibrium.

   To see that the multiplicity of equilibria implies that our model can generate sudden collapses

in the volume of new issuances, consider some exogenous event that induces originators and buyers

to switch from the positive to the negative reputational equilibrium. If many originators have

reputation levels in the multiplicity region, this event induces a sudden collapse in the volume of

new issuances. We provide conditions under which the positive reputational equilibrium yields

higher welfare than the negative reputational equilibrium (both in the interim and ex-ante sense

of efficiency as in Holmstrom and Myerson (1983).) Therefore, our model can generate sudden

collapses associated with increased inefficiency.

   While the multiplicity of equilibria has the attractive feature that it implies that the model can

be consistent with observations of sudden collapses, such multiplicity makes it difficult to conduct

policy analysis. We propose a refinement adapted from the coordination games literature (see

Carlsson and Van Damme (1993) and Morris and Shin (2003)). Our refinement is also motivated

by the idea that sudden collapses in the volume of new issuances in loan markets are associated

with falls in the value of the collateral that supports the underlying loans. These considerations

lead us to add fluctuations in the collateral value and to assume that the collateral value is observed

with an arbitrarily small error.

   We show that fluctuations in the collateral value make the outcomes of our model consistent

with our second notion of fragility, namely, a large fraction of loan originators choose to change

their decisions on whether to sell or hold their loans in response to small changes in collateral

values. In this sense, reductions in collateral values can induce sudden collapses in the volume of

new issuances for the market as a whole.

   Both adverse selection and the dynamics induced by reputation acquisition play central roles in

generating sudden collapses from small changes in collateral values. A simple way of seeing the role

of adverse selection is to note that the version of our model with symmetrically informed originators

and buyers does not produce sudden collapses in new issuances. With asymmetrically informed

                                                    3
agents, originators with high reputations receive higher prices for their loans and are therefore more

willing to sell their loans. We show that a fall in collateral values makes high quality originators less

willing to sell their loans. This result follows because the market price, being a weighted average

of the loans sold by low and high quality originators, falls by a larger amount than does the return

to a high quality originator to holding a loan. A fall in collateral values tends to induce originators

who were close to being indifferent about selling versus holding to hold. Small changes in collateral

values can induce a large number of originators to switch to holding from selling only if they are

all close to the point of indifference. In a static model, we have no reason to expect that the

distribution of originators by reputation levels will be concentrated close to the indifference point.

   In a dynamic model with learning by market participants, we argue that originators’ reputations

are likely to be clustered. The reason is that in models like ours, the reputation levels of high quality

originators have an upward trend over time resulting in the reputation levels of many high quality

originators tending to become similar in the long run. We show that in an infinitely repeated

version of our model, the long run or invariant distribution of reputation levels displays significant

clustering. This clustering in turn implies that small changes in fundamentals can lead a large

number of originators to change their decisions when the fundamentals are close to the point of

indifference. A related result is that small changes in collateral values when these values are far

away from the point of indifference do not lead to large changes in the volume of new issuances.

   The fragility of equilibrium in our model implies that it is consistent with the observed large

fluctuations in the volume of new issuances in the market for asset backed securities. Figure 1

displays the volume of new issuances of asset-backed securities for various categories from the first

quarter of 2000 to the first quarter of 2009. The figure shows that the total volume of new issuances

of asset-backed securities rose from roughly $50 billion in the first quarter of 2000 to roughly $300

billion in the fourth quarter of 2006. The volume of new issuances fell abruptly to roughly $100

billion in the third quarter of 2007 and then fell again to near zero in roughly the fourth quarter

of 2008. The figure also shows similar large fluctuations in the volume of new issuances for each

category.

   Ivashina and Scharfstein (2008) document a similar pattern for new issues of syndicated loans.

Figure 1, Panel-A of their paper shows that syndicated lending rose from roughly $300 billion in

the first quarter of 2000 to roughly $700 billion in the second quarter of 2007. This lending declined

                                                   4
                 $Bln                                                                                      $Bln
                 350                                                                                       350
                                Other
                 300            Non-U.S. Residential Mortgages*                                            300
                                Student Loans
                                Credit Cards
                 250            Autos
                                                                                                           250
                                Commercial Real Estate
                 200            Subprime Home Equity                                                       200

                 150                                                                                       150

                 100                                                                                       100

                   50                                                                                      50

                     0                                                                                     0
                         2000    2001     2002     2003      2004       2005   2006   2007   2008   2009
                  *No reliable data for Non-US RMBS after Q3 '08
                  Source: Morganmarkets, JP Morgan Chase




         Figure 1: New Issuance of Asset Backed Securities (Source: JP Morgan Chase)


sharply thereafter and fell to roughly $100 billion by the third quarter of 2008.

   The reduction in the volume of new issuances in the secondary market roughly coincided with

a reduction in collateral values. One way of seeing this coincidence is to consider the Case-Shiller

home price index (available at http://www.standardandpoors.com/indices). This index stopped

growing in late 2006 and declined through 2007. The coincidence of the reduction in the volume of

new issuances and the reduction in collateral values is consistent with our model.

   White (2009) has argued that the United States experienced a boom bust cycle in securitization

of real estate assets in the 1920’s similar to its recent experience. Figure 2 displays the change in

the outstanding stock in real estate bonds in the 1920s based on data in Carter and Sutch (2006).

Such bonds were issued against single large commercial mortgages or pools of commercial or real

estate mortgages and were publicly traded. To make this data comparable to more recent data, we

scale the data from the 1920s by nominal GDP in 2009. Specifically, we multiply the change in the

nominal stock of outstanding debt in each year by ratio of the nominal GDP in 2009 to that in the

relevant year. This figure shows that the changes in the stock rose dramatically from essentially



                                                                    5
0 in 1919 to an average of 145 billion dollars in the period from 1925 to 1928. The market then

collapsed sharply and changes in the stock fell to roughly 50 billion dollars in 1929. Such large

changes in the stock are likely to have been associated with similar large changes in the volume of

new issuances.



                 $Bln                                                                                                 $Bln
                 200                                                                                                200
                 180                                                                                                180
                 160                                                                                                160
                 140                                                                                                140
                 120                                                                                                120
                 100                                                                                                100
                  80                                                                                                80
                   60                                                                                               60
                   40                                                                                               40
                   20                                                                                               20
                    0                                                                                               0
                           1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930
                 Note: Data is annual change in real estate bonds divided by Nominal GDP at relevant year multiplied by
                 Nominal GDP 2009.
                 Source: Carter, et. al., Historical Statistics, (2006)Series Dc904




                    Figure 2: Change in Stock of Real Estate Bonds 1920-1930



   We have argued that our model is consistent with abrupt collapses in secondary loan markets.

Our model is also consistent with the widespread view among policymakers that such abrupt

collapses were associated with sharp increases in the inefficiency of the operation of such markets.

For example, the Treasury Department, in its Fact Sheet dated March 23, 2009 releasing details of

a proposed Public-Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets asserts,


     “Secondary markets have become highly illiquid, and are trading at prices below where

     they would be in normally functioning markets.” (Treasury Department 2009)


   Similarly, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in a White Paper dated March 3, 2009 making

the case for the Temporary Asset Loan Facility (TALF) asserts that

                                                                    6
      “Nontraditional investors such as hedge funds, which may otherwise be willing to invest

      in these securities, have been unable to obtain funding from banks and dealers because

      of a general reluctance to lend.” (TALF White Paper 2009)


   In the wake of the 2007 collapse of secondary loan markets, policymakers proposed a variety

of programs intended to remedy inefficiencies in the market for securitized assets. Some of these

programs, such as the proposed Public-Private Partnership for purchasing assets held by distressed

financial institutions, were not implemented. Others, such as TALF, were implemented. This

program allows participants to purchase securitized assets by borrowing from the Federal Reserve

and using the assets as collateral. To the extent that the interest rate charged by the Federal Reserve

is below market interest rates, this program is effectively a subsidy for the private purchase of assets

in the secondary loan market. To the extent that the interest rate charged by the Federal Reserve

is at market interest rates, it is not clear why this program would be effective.

   We use our model to evaluate the effects of various policies. One such policy which resembles

the Public-Private Partnership and the TALF program is that the government offers to purchase

loans at prices at or above existing market values. Another policy, which is intended to capture

the effects of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy actions, is to change the time path of interest

rates. In terms of purchase policies, we show that if the price is set below that level that prevails in

the positive reputational equilibrium, the policy by itself does not change equilibrium outcomes but

it does involve transfers to banks and implies that the government makes negative profits. If the

purchase price is set at a sufficiently high level, this policy can eliminate the fragility of equilibria.

At this high level, the policy also involves transfers to banks and implies that the government makes

negative profits.

   In terms of policies that change the time path of interest rates, we show that temporary decreases

in interest rates worsen the adverse selection problem. Interestingly, anticipated decreases in interest

rates in the future can have beneficial current effects by reducing the range of reputations over which

the economy has multiple equilibria.




                                                    7
1.1   Related Literature

Our work here is related to an extensive literature on adverse selection in asset markets, in-

cluding the work of Myers and Majluf (1984), Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), and

Garleanu and Pedersen (2004) as well as to the related securitization literature, specifically, the

work of DeMarzo and Duffie (1999) and DeMarzo (2005). We add to this literature by analyzing

how reputational incentives affect adverse selection problems.

   Our assumption that buyers have less information concerning the loan quality of a bank is in

line with a descriptive literature that argues that secondary loan markets feature adverse selection

(see, for example, the work of Dewatripont and Tirole (1994), Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008),

and Arora et al. (2009)). Also, a growing literature provides data on the presence of adverse

selection in asset markets. For example, Downing et al. (2009) find that loans which banks held on

their balance sheets yielded more on average relative to similar loans which they securitized and

sold. Drucker and Mayer (2008) argue that underwriters of prime mortgage-backed securities are

better informed than buyers and present evidence that these underwriters exploit their superior

information when trading in the secondary market. Specifically, the tranches that such underwriters

avoid bidding on exhibit much worse-than-average ex-post performance than the tranches that they

do bid on.

   Our work is also related to an extensive literature on reputation. Kreps and Wilson (1982) and

Milgrom and Roberts (1982) argue that equilibrium outcomes are better in models with reputa-

tional incentives than in models without them. In the banking literature, Diamond (1989) develops

this argument. More recently, Mailath and Samuelson (2001) analyze the role of reputational incen-

tives in infinite horizon economies and provide conditions under which they can improve outcomes.

In contrast, Ely and Välimäki (2003) and Ely et al. (2008) describe models in which reputational

incentives can worsen outcomes. Our work here combines the results in this literature by showing

that reputational models can have multiple equilibria. In some of these equilibria, reputational

incentives can generate better outcomes; in others, worse. Furthermore, using techniques from

the global games literature, we develop a refinement that produces a unique, fragile equilibrium.

Perhaps the work most closely related to ours is that of Ordoñez (2008). An important difference

between our work and his is that our model has equilibria that are worse than the static equilib-



                                                 8
rium, so that reputational incentives can lead to outcomes that are ex-post less efficient than in a

model without these incentives.

    Our analysis of policy is closely related to recent work by Philippon and Skreta (2009) who

analyze a variety of policies in a model with adverse selection. The main difference with our work

is that we focus on the incentives induced by reputation while they analyze a static model.



2     Reputation in a Secondary Loan Market Model

We develop a finite horizon model of the secondary loan market and use the model to demonstrate

how adverse selection and reputation interact to yield abrupt collapses with increased inefficiency.

    We begin with a static version of our benchmark model. We use the unique equilibrium of

this model to construct equilibria in a repeated finite horizon model. We show that reputational

equilibria typically exhibit dynamic coordination problems in the sense that for a wide range of pa-

rameters, the repeated model has multiple equilibria. Although reputation is always valued, across

the different equilibria loan originators choose different actions based on the different inferences

future buyers draw from the current actions of originators.


2.1     Static Model: A Unique Equilibrium

We start with the static model. This model can also be interpreted as describing the last period

of a finite horizon model. We show that the static model has a unique equilibrium in which the

equilibrium outcomes depend on the informed originator’s reputation.


2.1.1    Agents and Timing

The model has three types of agents: a loan originator referred to as a bank, a continuum of buyers,

and a continuum of lenders. All agents are risk neutral.

    The bank is endowed with a risky loan indexed by π. The loan can also be thought of more

generally as an investment opportunity such as a project, a mortgage, or an asset-backed security.

Each loan requires q units of inputs, which represents the loan’s size. A loan of type π yields a

return of v = v̄ with probability π and v = v with probability 1 − π at the end of the period. For

the analysis in this section, we normalize v to 0. Later, when we allow for aggregate shocks and


                                                 9
introduce our refinement, we will allow v to be a random variable, possibly different from zero. We

assume that π ∈ {π, π̄} with π < π̄. We refer to a bank which has a loan of type π̄ as a high quality

bank and one with a loan of type π as a low quality bank. We assume that πv̄ ≥ q so that each loan

has positive net present value if sold.

   The bank can either sell the loan in a secondary market or it can hold the loan. Selling the

loan at a price p yields a payoff to the bank of p − q. The purchaser of the loan is entitled to the

resulting return. If the bank chooses to hold the loan, it must borrow q from lenders to finance

the loan and repay q(1 + r) at the end of the period, where r is the within-period interest rate

paid to lenders. We allow r to be positive or negative in order to examine the effects of various

policy experiments described below. If the bank holds the loan it is entitled to the return from

its projects; however, the bank then incurs a cost of holding the loan, c, in addition to the cost of

repaying its debt, q(1 + r).

   Besides the quality of its loan, the bank is indexed by a cost type, which represents the costs,

relative to the marketplace, that the bank incurs when it holds the loan to maturity. We intend the

cost of the loan to represent funding liquidity costs, servicing costs, renegotiation costs in the event

of a loan default, and costs associated with holding a loan that may be correlated in a particular

way with the rest of the bank’s portfolio, among other potential factors. We assume that c ∈ {c, c̄}

with c < −qr < 0 < c̄. We refer to a bank of type c̄ as a high cost bank and a bank of type c as a

low cost bank. We normalize the cost of holding and managing the loan for the market to be zero.

We assume the quality type and cost types are drawn independently of each other.

   Hence, the model has four types of banks: (π, c) ∈ {π, π̄} × {c, c̄}. We refer to the different

types of banks, (π̄, c̄), (π̄, c), (π, c̄), (π, c), as, HH, HL, LH, LL banks, respectively.


Timing of the Static Game

We formalize the interactions in this economy as an extensive form game with the following timing.


   1. Nature draws the quality and cost types of the bank.

   2. Buyers simultaneously offer a price to purchase a loan, p.

   3. The bank sells the loan to one of the buyers or holds the loan to maturity.



                                                     10
   We assume that, as perceived by buyers and lenders, the bank has quality type π̄ with probability

µ2 and quality type π with probability 1 − µ2 . (The subscript 2 on the probability is meant to

indicate that these are the beliefs of lenders associated with the second period of our two period

model described below.) Following the work of Kreps and Wilson (1982) and Milgrom and Roberts

(1982), we refer to µ2 as the bank’s reputation. Also, buyers believe that the bank has cost type

c with probability α and cost type c̄ with probability 1 − α. The cost and quality types are

independently drawn.


2.1.2   Strategy and Equilibrium

A strategy for the bank consists of a decision of whether to sell or hold its loan, and which buyer

to sell to if the bank chooses to sell. Clearly, the bank will choose the buyer offering the highest

price if the bank decides to sell, so we suppress this aspect of the bank’s strategy. Let a denote

the decision of the bank whether to sell or hold the loan. If the bank chooses to sell, we denote the

decision by a = 1, and if the bank chooses to hold the loan, we denote the decision by a = 0. A

strategy for the bank is a function a(·) which maps the highest offered price, p, into a decision of

whether to sell or hold the loan. The payoffs to a type (π, c) bank are given by


                         w2 (a|p, π, c) = a(p − q) + (1 − a) [πv̄ − q(1 + r) − c]


   A strategy for a buyer consists of the choice of a price to offer a bank for its loan. The payoffs

to a buyer with an accepted price p and a strategy a2 (·|π, c) for each type of bank is


                                 u2 (p|a2 ) = Eπ,c [v|a2 (p|π, c) = 1] − p.


Since buyers move simultaneously, they engage in a form of Bertrand competition, so that the price

is equal to the expected return of the loan.

   A (pure strategy) Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium is a price p2 and a strategy for each bank type,

a2 (·|π, c), such that for all p, each bank type chooses the optimal loan decision and buyers offer the

highest price that yields a payoff of 0; i.e., p2 ∈ max{p|u2 (p|r, a2 ) = 0}.

   Before characterizing the equilibria of this game, we characterize the outcomes under full in-



                                                    11
formation, when the bank’s type is known by buyers. When buyers and lenders are informed of

the bank’s type, (π, c), Bertrand competition among buyers implies that the price in the secondary

loan market is p = πv̄. Consider the decision of whether to sell or hold a loan by a bank of type

(π, c). Facing a price p, the bank chooses to sell the loan in the secondary market if and only if


                                       p − q ≥ πv̄ − q(1 + r) − c.


Since Bertrand competition implies that the price p = πv̄ , the bank sells if and only if


                                               qr + c ≥ 0


which can also be written as c ≥ −qr. Since we have assumed that c < −qr < 0 < c̄, in equilibrium

if the bank has a high cost, it sells its loan while if it has a low cost it holds its loan.

   Notice that the equilibrium allocation under full information is ex-post efficient. Low cost banks

have a comparative advantage (over the market) in holding loans to maturity while the market has

a comparative advantage over high cost banks. The full information equilibrium allocates loans to

agents with a comparative advantage in holding and managing the loan. Thus, if the bank has a

low cost of holding and managing the loan, it holds its loan, and if the bank has a high cost of

holding and managing the loan, it sells its loan.

   Next, we characterize the equilibria of the game with private information. For expositional

simplicity, we focus on the decisions of the high quality, high cost bank (HH) and restrict the

strategy sets of the low cost type banks as well as the low quality, high cost bank. Specifically,

we assume that the low cost type banks hold their loans while the LH bank sells its loan. In

Proposition 3 below, we show that, if c is sufficiently negative, the assumed strategies for these

three types of banks are indeed optimal. In terms of the strategy of the HH bank, we show that

it can be characterized by a threshold level of µ2 , which we denote by µ∗2 , such that below µ∗2 , the

high quality, high cost type bank holds its loan, and above µ∗2 , this type sells its loan.

   Consider now the loan decision of the high quality, high cost (HH) bank. The HH bank sells if

and only if

                                       p − q ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄.                               (1)



                                                    12
     Note that (1) implies that if the HH bank is willing to sell at any price, it is also willing to sell

at a higher price. This result implies that, in any equilibrium, Bertrand competition drives buyers

profits to zero. In terms of buyers’ decisions, note that at any candidate equilibrium price, the HH

bank either sells or holds its loan. Consider a candidate price at which the HH bank sells. Then,

with probability µ2 , the selling bank is a high quality bank. Since we have assumed that a low

quality high cost bank always sells, with probability (1 − µ2 ) the selling bank is low quality. Thus,

Bertrand competition among buyers implies that any candidate equilibrium price at which the HH

bank sells must satisfy the following equality:


                                      p̂(µ2 ) := [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄.                             (2)


At a candidate price at which the HH bank holds, only the low quality bank sells so that the

equilibrium price must satisfy

                                                   p = πv̄.                                           (3)

     When facing the highest possible price, p̂(µ2 ), the HH bank sells if and only if


                                      p̂(µ2 ) − q ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄


or, substiuting from (2),


                              [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄ − q ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄.                     (4)


Let µ∗2 be the value of reputation such that the HH bank is indifferent between selling and holding

at p̂(µ2 ). Then, at any interior value of reputation, µ∗2 must satisfy


                              [µ∗2 π̄ + (1 − µ∗2 )π] v̄ − q = π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄


or
                                                          qr + c̄
                                            µ∗2 = 1 −              .                                  (5)
                                                        (π̄ − π)v̄

Clearly for µ2 ≥ µ∗2 , our model has an equilibrium in which the HH bank sells its loan at a price



                                                      13
p̂(µ2 ). If µ2 < µ∗2 , our model has an equilibrium in which the HH bank holds its loan and buyers

offer a price p = πv̄. To see that this equilibrium is unique, note that if µ2 ≥ µ∗2 , if the offered price

is below p̂(µ2 ), one of the buyers can deviate and offer a price just below p̂(µ2 ) and induce the HH

bank to sell. This deviation yields strictly positive profits.

    We use this characterization of the static equilibrium to calculate the payoffs associated with

a given level of reputation µ2 at the beginning of the period before a bank’s cost type is realized.

These payoff calculations play a crucial role in our dynamic game. They are given by
                       
                        π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − Ec,                                          µ2 < µ∗2
                       
          V2 (µ2 ) =                                                                                   (6)
                        (1 − α) {[µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π]v̄ − q} + α[π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c], µ2 ≥ µ∗2 .
                       


    Similarly, we can define the value of the equilibrium for a low quality bank type:
                       
                        (1 − α) [πv̄ − q] + α[πv̄ − q(1 + r) − c],                      µ2 < µ∗2
                       
          W2 (µ2 ) =
                        (1 − α) {[µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π]v̄ − q} + α[πv̄ − q(1 + r) − c], µ2 ≥ µ∗2 .
                       


    It is clear that V2 is weakly increasing and convex in µ2 . We have proved the following propo-

sition.


Proposition 1 If πv̄ > q and qr + c̄ > 0, then for any µ ∈ [0, 1], the static model has a unique

equilibrium. Let µ∗2 be defined by (5). For µ2 < µ∗2 , the equilibrium price is πv̄ and the HH bank

holds its loan. For µ2 ≥ µ∗2 , the equilibrium price is [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄ and the HH bank sells its

loan. Furthermore, the payoff to the HH bank given in (6) is weakly increasing and convex in µ2 .


    Note that we have modeled buyers as behaving strategically. This modeling choice plays an

important role in ensuring that the static game has a unique equilibrium. Suppose that rather

than modeling buyers as behaving strategically, we had instead simply required that market prices

satisfy a zero profit condition. One rationale for this requirement is that buyers take prices as given

and choose how many loans to buy as in a competitive equilibrium. It is easy to show that with

this requirement the economy has multiple equilibria in the static game if µ2 ≥ µ∗2 . One of these

equilibria corresponds to the unique equilibrium of our game. In the other equilibrium, the buyers

offer a price of πv̄. At this offered price, the HH bank holds its loan and only the low quality,


                                                      14
high cost banks sells its loan. We find multiplicity of this kind unattractive in our model because

obvious bilateral gains to trade are not being exploited. Each of the buyers has a strong incentive

to offer a price slightly below [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄. At this offered price, the HH bank strictly prefers

to sell, and the buyer making such an offer makes strictly positive profits. In our formulation, with

strategic behavior by the buyers, this low price outcome cannot be an equilibrium.

   While we prefer our strategic formulation, we emphasize that our results that reputational

incentives induce multiplicity do not rely on the static game having a unique equilibrium. We

chose a formulation in which the static game has a unique equilibrium in order to argue that

reputational incentives by themselves can induce multiplicity.


2.2    Two Period Benchmark Model

Consider now a two-period repetition of our static game in which the bank’s quality type is the

same in both periods. We assume that the bank’s second period payoffs are discounted at rate β.

In period 1, a continuum of buyers who are present in the market for only one period choose to

offer prices for loans sold in that period. In period 2, a new set of buyers each offer prices for loans

sold in that period. This new set of buyers observes whether the bank sold or held its loan in the

previous period, and, if the bank sold its loan, buyers observe the realized value of the loan. If the

loan is held, we assume that period 2 buyers do not observe the realized value of the loan.

   The timing of the game is an extension of that described in the static game. As in that game,

at the beginning of period 1, nature draws the bank’s quality and cost type. We assume that the

bank’s quality type is fixed for both periods. At the beginning of period 2, nature draws a new

cost type for the bank. In any period, the bank’s quality and cost types are unknown to buyers.

The timing within each period is the same as in the static game. We also assume that the returns

to successful loans, v = v̄, and to unsuccessful loans, v = 0, are the same in both periods.

   In order to define an equilibrium in this repeated game, we must develop language that will

allow us to describe how second period buyers update their beliefs about the bank’s type based on

observations from period 1. To do so, we let the public history at the beginning of period 2 be

denoted by θ1 where θ1 ∈ {h, s0, sv̄} where θ1 = h denotes that the bank held its loan in period 1,

θ1 = s0 denotes that the bank sold its loan and the loan paid off v = 0, and θ1 = sv̄ denotes that

the bank sold its loan and the loan paid off v = v̄.

                                                    15
   As in the static game, we focus on the strategic incentives of the HH bank and restrict the

strategy sets of the low cost type banks as well as the low quality, high cost bank. Specifically, we

assume that the low cost type banks must hold their loans while the LH bank must sell its loan. A

strategy for the high cost, high quality bank is now given by a pair of functions, a1 (p1 ) representing

the decision in period 1 and a2 (p2 , θ1 ) representing the loan decision in period 2, if the bank realizes

a high cost in period 2, as a function of offered prices.

   Consider next how the buyers in the last period update their beliefs about the bank’s type.

This update depends through Bayes rule on the prior belief of the buyers, the loan decision of the

bank and the loan return realization if the bank sold, as well as on the first period strategies chosen

by the HH bank and period 1 buyers. From Bayes rule, these posterior probabilities are given by

                                                      µ1 (α + (1 − α)(1 − a1 (p1 )))
             µ2 (µ1 , θ1 = h, a1 (·), p1 ) =                                                           (7)
                                              µ1 (α + (1 − α)(1 − a1 (p1 ))) + (1 − µ1 )α
                                                          µ1 a1 (p1 )(1 − α)π̄
            µ2 (µ1 , θ1 = sv̄, a1 (·), p1 ) =                                                          (8)
                                              µ1 a1 (p1 )(1 − α)π̄ + (1 − µ1 )(1 − α)π
                                                             µ1 a1 (p1 )(1 − α)(1 − π̄)
            µ2 (µ1 , θ1 = s0, a1 (·), p1 ) =                                                           (9)
                                              µ1 a1 (p1 )(1 − α)(1 − π̄) + (1 − µ1 )(1 − α)(1 − π)

   For notational convenience, we suppress the dependence on strategies and priors and let µh

denote the posterior associated with the bank holding its loan, and µsv̄ and µs0 denote the posteriors

associated with selling and yielding a high or low return.

   Given the updating rules, the period 1 payoffs for the HH bank are given by


                          w1 (a|p) =a [p − q + β (π̄V2 (µsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 ))]

                                        + (1 − a) [(π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄) + βV2 (µh )]


where µh , µsv̄ , and µs0 are given by equations (7), (8), and (9). Buyers’ payoffs associated with an

accepted price, p, in period t are given by

                                              µt (1 − α)at (p)π̄ + (1 − µt )(1 − α)π
                       ut (p|r, at , µt ) =                                          v̄ − p.
                                               µt (1 − α)at (p) + (1 − µt )(1 − α)

   A Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium is a first period price, p1 , a first period loan decision for the

high quality, high cost bank a1 (·) which maps accepted prices into loan decisions, updating rules


                                                          16
µh , µsv̄ , µs0 which map observations on loan decisions into posterior beliefs, a second period price,

p2 , which maps second period beliefs into prices, and a second period loan decision a2 (·) which

maps accepted prices and histories into loan decisions such that


   1. for all p, the HH bank chooses the optimal action in period 1 so that w1 (a1 (p)|p) ≥ maxa′ w1 (a|p),

   2. for all p, the HH bank chooses the optimal action in period 2 so that w2 (a1 (p)|p) ≥ maxa′ w2 (a|p),

   3. the first period price, p1 satisfies p1 ∈ max{p|u1 (p|a1 ) = 0},

   4. the second period price, p2 satisfies p2 ∈ max{p|u2 (p|a2 ) = 0},

   5. the updating rules, µh , µsv̄ , µs0 satisfy Bayes’ Rule, namely, (7), (8), and (9).


   Next, we characterize the set of equilibria in the two period game under the following assump-

tion,


Assumption 1 α and β satisfy β(1 − α) ≤ 1.


   Later we provide a partial characterization of the set of equilibria when this assumption is

relaxed.

   We show that the game has two equilibria for a range of period 1 reputations, µ1 around the

static threshold, µ∗2 . In one equilibrium, the HH bank chooses to sell its loan in period 1. The

posteriors associated with selling now depend non-trivially on the realized values of the loan. In

particular, when the loan has a high realized value, the bank is rewarded with a higher posterior,

and when the loan has a low realized value, the bank’s posterior is lower than its prior. The

posterior associated with holding the loan is exactly equal to the bank’s period 1 reputation. These

posteriors provide reputational incentives for the HH bank to sell the loan in order to signal its type

and receive a higher period 2 reputation. Notice, for an HH bank with initial reputation above the

static threshold, µ∗2 , the bank’s equilibrium strategy coincides with repetition of the static perfect

Bayesian equilibrium, but for HH banks with reputations below the static threshold, reputational

incentives dominate their static incentives.

   In the second type of equilibrium, the HH bank chooses to hold its loan. In this equilibrium,

uninformed agents believe that the only type of bank that sells its loan is the LH bank. Hence,


                                                   17
regardless of the return of the loan, if the bank sells it receives a posterior reputation of 0. Because

uninformed agents believe that high quality banks hold their loans, the posterior associated with

holding the loan is higher than the prior reputation. These posteriors provide reputational incen-

tives for the bank to hold its loan in order to signal its type. In this equilibrium, the action of HH

banks with reputations below the static threshold coincides with repetition of the static perfect

Bayesian equilibrium. High quality, high cost banks with reputations above the static threshold

now hold their loan because of reputational concerns. In this sense, reputation is harmful as it

induces high quality, high cost banks to hold their loans while in a static setting the market place

can offer a sufficiently high price to induce these banks to sell their loans.

    To see these results, consider first supporting equilibria in which the HH bank chooses to sell

its loan in period 1. In this case, the period 1 price is given by equation p̂(µ1 ). Given this price,

selling is optimal if the difference in payoffs between selling and holding the loan is non-negative,

or if the following incentive constraint is satisfied:


    (µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π) v̄ − q + β (π̄V2 (µsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 )) ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄ + βV2 (µh )   (10)


or if

             µ1 (π̄ − π)v̄ + β (π̄V2 (µsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 ) − V2 (µh )) ≥ (π̄ − π)v̄ − (qr + c̄)

    where

                                        µ1 π̄                             µ1 (1 − π̄)
              µh = µ1 , µsv̄ =                      , and µs0 =                                             (11)
                                 µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π             µ1 (1 − π̄) + (1 − µ1 )(1 − π)

    We will show that there is some value of µ, denoted µ < µ∗2 such that for all µ1 ≥ µ, the

inequality in (10) holds so that the HH bank sells its loan in period 1. To show this result, the

following lemma is useful. This lemma also plays a key role in our proof that in an infinite horizon

version of our model, reputation levels tend to cluster.


Lemma 1 If the HH bank sells its loan in the first period, then π̄µsv̄ + (1 − π̄)µs0 ≥ µh .


Proof. From (11) we have (as an implication of Bayes Rule) that if the HH bank sells its loan in




                                                       18
the first period, the reciprocal of the posterior beliefs is a martingale. Formally, we have

                                           π̄    1 − π̄   1    1
                                               +        =    =
                                          µsv̄    µs0     µ1   µh

Since 1/µ is a convex function, it follows that


                                       π̄µsv̄ + (1 − π̄)µs0 ≥ µ1 = µh .                                     (12)




   Let the reputational gain be defined as


                            ∆g (µ1 ) = β (π̄V2 (µsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 ) − V2 (µh ))


Recall from Proposition 1 that V2 is a convex function, so that π̄V2 (µsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 ) ≥

V2 (π̄µsv̄ + (1 − π̄)µs0 ). This convexity together with Lemma 1 implies that at µ∗2 , ∆g (µ∗2 ) > 0 so

that the left side of (10) is strictly greater than the right side. This result implies that, as we show

in the Appendix, our model has an equilibrium in which there is some value of µ, denoted µ < µ∗2

such that at µ, (10) holds as an equality and for all µ1 ≥ µ, the inequality in (10) holds.

   Now consider the equilibrium in which the HH bank holds its loan in period 1. In this case the

equilibrium price is given πv̄. A bank holds its loan if and only if


    (µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π) v̄ − q + β (π̄V2 (µsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 )) ≤ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄ + βV2 (µh )   (13)


where
                                             µ1
                                µh =                   , and µsv̄ = µs0 = 0
                                       µ1 + (1 − µ1 )α

If the inequality in (13) is reversed, there is a deviation by buyer to price p̂(µ1 ) that would break

down the equilibrium. Analogously to the positive equilibrium, we define the reputational gain as


                                        ∆b (µ1 ) = β(V2 (0) − V2 (µh ))


Since µh > µ1 ,using Proposition 1, ∆b (µ∗2 ) < 0 so that (13) holds as a strict inequality. This


                                                       19
result implies that, as we show in the Appendix, our model has an equilibrium in which there is

some value of µ, denoted µ̄ > µ∗2 such that at µ̄, (13) holds as an equality and for all µ1 ≤ µ̄, the

inequality in (13) holds.

   We have proved the following proposition.


Proposition 2 (Multiplicity of Equilibria) Suppose Assumption (1) is satisfied and 0 < µ∗2 < 1.

Then, there exist µ and µ̄ with µ < µ∗2 < µ̄ such that


  1. if µ1 ∈ [µ, µ̄), the model has two equilibria: in one the HH bank sells its loan, and in the other

     the HH bank holds its loan,

  2. if µ1 < µ, the model has a unique equilibrium in which the HH bank holds its loan in period

     1,

  3. if µ1 ≥ µ̄, the model has a unique equilibrium in which the HH bank sells its loan in period 1.


   Next we provide a partial characterization of the set of equilibria when we relax Assumption

(1). We show that even when this assumption is relaxed, the game has a region of multiplicity near

µ∗2 . We have also shown that multiplicity can arise for values of µ close to 1. Details are available

upon request.


Proposition 3 (Region of Multiplicity). There exist µ and µ̄ with µ < µ∗2 < µ̄ such that if

µ1 ∈ [µ, µ̄), the game has two equilibria: in one the HH bank sells its loan, and in the other the HH

bank holds its loan.


   Therefore, we have shown that introducing reputation as a device for mitigating lemons problems

results in equilibrium multiplicity, that is, reputation can both be a blessing and a curse. The game

has a positive reputational equilibrium in which, encouraged by reputational incentives, banks with

a high quality asset sell their asset. In this equilibrium, reputation helps sustain market activity

in a market that would be illiquid without reputational incentives. The game also has a negative

reputational equilibrium in which reputational incentives discourage selling and banks with a high

quality asset hold on to their asset. In this equilibrium, reputation helps depress market activity

in a market that would be liquid without reputational incentives.


                                                 20
   It is straightforward to extend this two period model to a multi-period model. (Indeed, we

extend a version of the model with a refinement that produces a unique equilibrium to a multi-

period model below). It is also straightforward to see that a version of our model with three or

more periods will feature multiple equilibria. In addition to the multiplicity demonstrated in the

two period model, a model with three or more periods will feature multiplicity induced by trigger

strategies as in Benoit and Krishna (1985).

   A version of our model with three or more periods can generate sudden collapses in the volume

of loans sold in secondary markets. To see these sudden collapses, consider a version of our model

with three or more periods. The equilibrium outcomes in the last two periods of such a model clearly

coincide with the equilibrium outcomes of our two period model. Suppose that in the first period

of the three period model, the equilibrium coincides with the analog of the positive reputational

equilibrium so that new issue volumes are large. Suppose that in the next to last period, banks

and buyers observe a ‘sunspot’ at the beginning of the period. This sunspot acts as a coordinating

device which allows agents to select amongst the equilibria. If the sunspot is such that private

agents choose the positive equilibrium, the volume of loans that are sold in secondary markets is

high, while if the sunspot is such that private agents choose the negative equilibrium, the volume of

loans sold in secondary markets is low. In this sense, a multi-period version of our model generates

sudden collapses in the volume of trade.

   To draw an analogy to models of reputation as incomplete information, our model nests

features of the model in Mailath and Samuelson (2001) and Ordoñez (2008) as well as that of

Ely and Välimäki (2003). In Mailath and Samuelson (2001) and Ordoñez (2008), strategic types

are good and want to separate from non-strategic types - though in Mailath and Samuelson (2001)

reputation generally fails to deliver this type of equilibria. Nevertheless, in their environments,

there is no long run reputational loss from good behavior. Ely and Välimäki (2003), share the

property that strategic types are good and want to separate, however, structure of learning is such

that good behavior never implies long-run positive reputational gains and therefore reputational

incentives exacerbate bad behavior in equilibrium.

   Recall that thus far, we have restricted the strategies of all bank types except the HH type.

Under a sufficient condition that c is sufficiently negative, we can show that the assumed strategies

are optimal. This sufficient condition is given by

                                                 21
Assumption 2

                                    (π̄ − π) v̄ + qr + max ∆g (µ1 ) < −c                                     (14)
                                                        µ1 ∈[0,1]

   We then have the following Proposition.

Proposition 4 Suppose Assumption 1 and Assumption (2) hold. Then the unique equilibrium of

the static game described in Proposition 1 and the multiple equilibria of the dynamic game described

in Proposition 2 are also equilibria of the associated games when all bank types behave strategically.


2.3   Sudden Collapses and Increased Inefficiency

In this section, we study the efficiency properties of the positive and the negative reputational equi-

libria. We provide sufficient conditions under which the positive reputational equilibrium Pareto

dominates the negative reputational equilibrium in the sense of interim utility (see Holmstrom and Myerson

(1983)), and sufficient conditions under which the positive equilibrium dominates the negative equi-

librium in the sense of ex-ante utility. In this sense, sudden collapses of trade volume in our model

due to switches between equilibria are associated with increased inefficiency.

   In order to develop these sufficient conditions, suppose that µ1 ∈ [µ, µ∗2 ] and that in the negative

equilibrium, posterior beliefs conditional on future buyers observing a hold decision by a bank in

the first period, µnh , are less than the static cutoff, µ∗2 . Consider the difference in utility level of

high quality high cost bank in the two equilibria. This difference is given by:


            ∆U (π̄, c̄) = p̂(µ1 ) − (π̄v̄ − qr − c̄) + β [π̄V2 (µpsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µps0 ) − V2 (µnh )]


where µpsv̄ and µps0 are the posterior beliefs in the positive equilibrium. Since, µnh , µph ≤ µ∗2 and

V2 (·) is constant for µ ≤ µ∗2 , it follows that V2 (µnh ) = V2 (µph ). Then, from (10), it is clear that

∆U (π̄, c̄) ≥ 0. The difference in utility level of a low quality high cost bank is given by


      ∆U (π, c̄) = p̂(µ1 ) − πv̄ + β [πW2 (µpsv̄ ) + (1 − π)W2 (µps0 ) − πW2 (µnsv̄ ) + (1 − π)W2 (µns0 )]


Note that µnsv̄ = µns0 = 0. Therefore, the difference in continuation value is positive. Since the price

in the positive equilibrium is higher, we must have ∆U (π, c̄) ≥ 0. Moreover, since µnh , µph ≤ µ∗2 ,

the continuation values for low cost types is the same in the two equilibrium and since they are

                                                         22
holding in the first period, their utility levels are the same. Since buyers make zero profits in both

equilibria, we have established the following proposition:

                                                    π
Proposition 5 Suppose that (1 − α)/(π̄ α −          π̄ )   < β(1 − α) and suppose µ1 is close to µ. Then,

the utility level for each type of bank and the buyers in the positive equilibrium is at least as large

as the utility level for the corresponding type of bank and the buyers in the negative equilibrium.

                                                            π
   In the appendix, we show that (1 − α)/(π̄ α −            π̄ )   ≤ β(1 − α) is a sufficient condition for µnh

to be less than or equal to µ∗2 .

   In the case that µnh > µ∗2 , one can show that the utility level of the low cost types is lower

in the positive reputational equilibrium than in the negative reputational equilibria. Hence, the

two equilibria are not comparable in interim utility terms. However, under appropriate sufficient

conditions, the positive equilibrium yields a higher ex-ante utility than the negative equilibrium.

Consider, the allocations in the two equilibria in the first period. The only difference in allocations

is that, in the positive equilibrium the high quality high cost type sells while in the negative

equilibrium this type holds. Thus difference in ex-ante utility (or social surplus) in the first period

between the two equilibria is given by


                                              (1 − α)µ(qr + c̄).


   Clearly, first period utility is higher in the positive equilibrium than in the negative equilibrium.

However, in the second period social surplus is higher in the negative equilibrium than in the

positive equilibrium because the high cost types always sell in the negative equilibrium whereas in

the positive equilibrium they hold the asset some fraction of the time - when the signal quality is

bad in the first period or after a hold decision in the first period. Therefore, the change in social

surplus in the second period is given by


                                −µ(1 − α)((1 − α)(1 − π̄) + α)(qr + c̄)


Thus, the overall change in the social surplus is given by


                                    µ(1 − α)(1 − β(1 − π̄(1 − α)))(qr + c̄)

                                                      23
Clearly, this overall change is positive if and only if β(1 − π̄(1 − α)) < 1. We have established the

following proposition:


Proposition 6 Suppose that β(1 − π̄(1 − α)) < 1. Then the ex-ante utility of the bank is higher in

the positive reputational equilibrium than in the negative reputational equilibrium and the ex-ante

utility of the buyers is the same in the two equilibria.



3    Adding Aggregate Shocks

Consider a version of our benchmark model with aggregate shocks to collateral values, namely the

default value of the loans banks originate. One motivation for adding aggregate shocks is that

sudden collapses seem to be associated with reductions in collateral values. Specifically, we will

assume that v fluctuates randomly. Notice that under our formulation, in the event of no default,

the payoff from the loan, v̄, is not random while in the event of default, the payoff from the loan, v

is subject to aggregate shocks. In the event of no default, the payment on a loan such as a mortgage

is known in advance, while in the event of default the amount the lender collects depends on the

value of the collateral. To the extent that this value is correlated across different types of loans,

the payoff in the event of default fluctuates in the same way across a wide variety of loans. The

obvious example is that of a mortgage on residential or commercial property. The value of such

property is often subject to aggregate shocks.

    We begin with a version of our static model. Suppose that v is drawn from some distribution

F (v) with finite mean at the beginning of the period. We will show that in the static model, the

unique equilibrium is characterized by a cutoff threshold µ∗2 (v) such that banks with reputation

models above µ∗2 (v) sell their loans and banks below this threshold hold their loans and a fall in v

raises µ∗2 (v). In this sense a fall in collateral values worsens the adverse selection problem. To see

this result, note that an HH bank sells its loan if and only if


                              p̂(µ2 ) − q ≥ π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v − q(1 + r) − c̄.                     (15)


where

                   p̂(µ2 ) := [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄ + [µ2 (1 − π̄) + (1 − µ2 )(1 − π)] v.       (16)


                                                     24
Substituting for p̂(µ2 ) from (16) into (15) and simplifying, we obtain


                         [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] (v̄ − v) − q ≥ π̄(v̄ − v) − q(1 + r) − c̄.                      (17)


From (17), we obtain that µ∗2 (v) is given by

                                                              qr + c̄
                                         µ∗2 (v) = 1 −                    .
                                                         (π̄ − π)(v̄ − v)

Clearly µ∗2 (v) is decreasing in v.

    The dynamic model with aggregate shocks has multiple equilibria. Consider a version of our

dynamic model in which the default value v t , t = 1.2 is drawn independently over time from a

distribution F with finite mean. The argument for multiplicity is essentially the same as in the

dynamic model without aggregate shocks. The proof of the following Proposition mirrors the proof

of Proposition 2 and is omitted.


Proposition 7 For every v 1 such that 0 < µ∗2 (v 1 ) < 1, there exists functions µ(v 1 ) and µ̄(v 1 )

satisfying µ(v 1 ) < µ∗2 (v 1 ) < µ̄(v 1 ) such that for all µ1 ∈ [µ(v 1 ), µ̄(v 1 )], the model with aggregate

shocks has two equilibria. In one equilibrium, the HH bank sells its asset in period 1 and equilibrium

price is pH
          1 (v 1 ) = [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄ + [µ2 (1 − π̄) + (1 − µ2 )(1 − π)] v 1 (= p̂(µ2 ; v 1 )). In the other

equilibrium, the HH bank holds the loan period 1 and the equilibrium price is given by pL
                                                                                        1 (v 1 ) =

πv̄ + (1 − π)v 1 .


    Thus, since the model with aggregate shocks has multiple equilibria, it suffers from the same

Dynamic Coordination Problem as the model without aggregate shocks.



4    Aggregate Shocks and Imperfect Observability

In this section, we use a perturbation of the model with aggregate shocks in order to select a unique

equilibrium. The method used is in the spirit of the refinement literature on static coordination

games (see, for example, Carlsson and Van Damme (1993), Morris and Shin (2003).)

    We use a refinement which selects a unique equilibrium for two reasons. One reason is that we

would like to understand how outcomes in the model respond to various kinds of policy interven-


                                                         25
tions. As is typically the case in models with multiple equilibria, comparative static exercises are

not meaningful. Therefore, we seek a refinement that allows us to select a unique equilibrium. The

other reason is that we want to establish a well defined notion of fragility. In many macroeconomic

environments with multiple equilibria, small shocks to the environment can cause sudden changes

in behavior. Without a selection device, multiplicity leads to a lack of discipline on how equilibrium

behavior changes in response to shocks. Techniques adapted from the literature on coordination

games, however, enable us to impose such discipline. We demonstrate the precise nature of fragility

in our environment using the unique equilibrium selected by our perturbation described below.

   We adapt techniques from the literature on cordination games because, as we have noted in

Chari et al. (2009), we think of the multiplicity of equilibria in our environment as arising from a

coordination problem between future buyers and current banks, and hence refer to it as a Dynamic

Coordination Problem. To see the sense in which lack of coordination leads to multiplicity, suppose

that in period 1, period 2 buyers could commit to buy the asset in period 2 at pre-specified prices

contingent on observed realizations of asset quality. Then a bank whose quality type is just below

the quality threshold µ∗2 has an incentive to sell the asset in period 1. Such commitment would

eliminate the multiplicity of equilibria. The unique equilibrium with commitment is the positive

reputational equilibrium. This argument suggests that coordination failure is at the root of the

multiplicity result. This interpretation helps us develop a refinement concept similar to that in the

coordination games literature.

   Consider the following model with aggregate shocks and imperfect observability. In each period

t = 1, 2, an aggregate shock v t ∼ F (v t ) with finite mean is drawn. These shocks are drawn

independently across periods. Banks and buyers at the beginning of each period observe a noisy

signal of v t given by vt = vt + σεt where εt ∼ G(εt ) with E [εt ] = 0 is i.i.d. across periods and

σ > 0. We assume that F and G have full support over R.

   The timing of the game is as follows:


  1. At the beginning of each period t, agents observe v t−1 . Buyers do not observe previous period

     signals vt−1 or the market price pt−1 . (We believe that our uniqueness result goes through if

     future buyers receive a noisy signal about previous prices.)

  2. The new aggregate state v t is drawn, the bank and current period buyers do not observe the

                                                 26
         current state, v t , but they do observe the noisy signal, vt .

   3. Buyer offer prices.

   4. The bank decides whether to sell or hold.


    The payoffs of holding to a high cost high quality bank in period t is


                                         π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v t − q(1 + r) − c̄


    Hence, when selling occurs, the payoff from holding to the bank which has observed the signal

vtd is

                                     π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)E [v t |vt ] − q(1 + r) − c̄

    When σ > 0, the updating rules for the signal are given by

                                                                                              
                                                                                   v̂1 − v 1
                           Pr(v1 ≤ v̂1 |v 1 ) = Pr(v 1 + σε1 ≤ v̂) = G
                                                                                       σ
                                                R v̂1               
                                                               v1 −v
                                                  −∞  f (v)g     σ     dv
                           Pr(v1 ≤ v̂1 |v 1 ) = R                       = H(v̂1 |v 1 )
                                                  ∞            v1 −v
                                                  −∞ f (v)g      σ     dv


Assumption 3 (Monotone Likelihood Ratio) The posterior belief function H(v 1 |v1 ) is a decreasing

function of v1


    The assumption implies that when the signal, v1 , about the shock is high, the value of the shock,

v 1 , is likely to be high. Straightforward algebra can be used to show that this assumption is satisfied

if a monotone likelihood ratio property on g holds, namely that for any v1 > v1′ , g(v1 −v1 )/g(v1′ −v1 )

is increasing in v 1 .

    To develop conditions under which the equilibrium is unique, we begin with the second period.


Proposition 8 In the second period, given a reputation level µ2 and a default value signal v2 , there

is a unique equilibrium outcome in which bank’s decision is given by:
                                                 
                                                  1 if µ2 ≥ µ∗ (v2 )
                                                 
                                                              2
                                          a2 =
                                                  0 if µ2 < µ∗2 (v2 )
                                                 


                                                         27
and the market price is given by
                  
                   [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄ + [µ2 (1 − π̄) + (1 − µ2 )(1 − π)] v2 if µ2 ≥ µ∗ (v2 )
                  
                                                                                           2
           p2 =
                                             πv̄ + (1 − π)v 2                                      if µ2 < µ∗2 (v2 )
                  
                  


where
                                                                                
                                                                 qr + c̄
                            µ∗2 (v2 )   = max min 1 −                          ,1 ,0
                                                            (π̄ − π)(v̄ − v2 )

    The equilibrium in the subgame in the second period is similar to the previous section. The

payoff from holding to a HH bank is


                                          π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v2 − q(1 + r) − c̄


since E [v 2 |v2 ] = v2 and the payoff from selling is [µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π] v̄+[µ2 (1 − π̄) + (1 − µ2 )(1 − π)] v2 −

q (:= p̂(µ2 ; v2 ) − q.µ∗2 (v2 )) is defined as the value of reputation that makes the bank indifferent be-

tween selling and holding. The equilibrium in the sub-game implies the following value function

for the bank:


   V̂2 (µ2 , v2 ) = α [π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c] + (1 − α) max{p̂(µ2 ; v2 ) − q, π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v2 − q(1 + r) − c̄}


    and the ex-ante value of period 2 reputation is

                                                                                  
                                                                        v2 − v 2
                                           Z Z
                              V2 (µ2 ) =         V̂2 (µ2 , v2 )dG                      dF (v 2 )                       (18)
                                                                           σ

    Proving that the perturbed game has a unique equilibrium is easiest when F is an improper

uniform distribution, U [−∞, ∞]. However, an improper uniform implies that the ex-ante value

function, V2 (µ2 ), is not well-defined. To ease the exposition, in the next proposition we assume

that v t is distributed independently but not identically across periods. In particular, we assume

v 1 is drawn from the improper uniform distribution while v 2 is drawn from a proper distribution

F . In section 4.2, we state our result for the case where v t is i.i.d across periods and F is a proper




                                                         28
distribution. Notice that if v 1 is drawn from an improper uniform distribution,

                                                                            
                                                                  v̂1 − v1
                                           H(v1 |v̂1 ) = G
                                                                      σ

   The next proposition states our uniqueness result.


Proposition 9 For each σ > 0 and V2 (µ2 ) given by (18), the game with uniform improper priors

has a unique equilibrium in which in period 1, HH bank’s action is characterized by a cutoff v1∗ (σ) ∈

R and is given by                                 
                                                   1 if v1 ≥ v ∗ (σ)
                                                  
                                                               1
                                     a1 (v1 ) =
                                                   0 if v1 < v1∗ (σ)
                                                  

and the market price is given by
                                           
                                                  p̂(µ1 ; v1 )        if v1 ≥ v1∗ (σ)
                                           
                                           
                             p∗1 (v1 ) =
                                            πv̄ + (1 − π)v1 if v1 < v1∗ (σ)
                                           


   We prove this proposition using a similar method to that in (Carlsson and Van Damme (1993).

We begin by restricting attention to switching strategies in which the bank sells for all default values

above a threshold and holds for all default values below that threshold. We show that the game

has a unique equilibrium in switching strategies. We then prove that the equilibrium switching

strategy is the only strategy that survives iterated elimination of strictly dominant strategies so

that we have a unique equilibrium.

   The intuition for the iterated elimination argument is as follows. Note that we can define

equilibrium as a strategy for the bank in period 1, and a belief - about the bank’s action in period

1 - by period 2 buyers used for Bayesian updating. In equilibrium beliefs have to coincide with

strategies. Obviously reputational incentives depend on future buyers’ beliefs. When v1 is very

large, independent of future buyers’ beliefs, an HH bank sells the asset. Similarly, when v1 is very

low, an HH bank holds onto the asset, independent of future beliefs. This argument establishes

two bounds v̂ 1 > ṽ 1 , such that any equilibrium strategy must prescribe a sale for v1 higher than v̂ 1

and holding for v1 lower than ṽ 1 . This result means that the set of beliefs by future buyers have

to satisfy the same property. Limiting the set of beliefs puts tighter upper and lower bounds on


                                                         29
reputational incentives, which in turn implies new bounds v̂ 2 > ṽ 2 . We show that iterating in this

manner implies that the bounds v̂ n and ṽ n converge to a common limit.

   Here we sketch the steps of the proof and leave the details to the Appendix.


4.1   Outline of Proof with Improper Priors

  1. Unique Equilibrium in Switching Strategies


      (a) Switching Strategies

           Restrict attention to Bank strategies of the following form:
                                                          
                                                           1 v1 ≥ k
                                                          
                                               dk (v1 ) =
                                                           0 v1 < k
                                                          


           where k represents the switching point. We characterize the best response of the HH

           bank when future buyers use dk to form their posteriors over the bank’s type. To do so,

           we must define Bayesian updating.

      (b) Bayesian Updating

           Consider an arbitrary belief â1 (·) by period 2 buyers about the HH bank’s period 1

           action. Based on the observed history and signal v 1 , Bayesian updating implies the

           following rules:
                                                                         
                                                     R               v −v
                                             µ1 π̄     â1 (v1 )dG 1 σ 1
                   µsg (v 1 ; â1 ) =                              
                                              R               v −v
                                        µ1 π̄ â1 (v1 )dG 1 σ 1 + (1 − µ1 )π
                                                                                   
                                                                 R            v −v
                                                   µ1 (1 − π̄) â1 (v1 )dG 1 σ 1
                   µsd(v 1 ; â1 ) =                                     
                                                    R                v −v
                                        µ1 (1 − π̄) â1 (v1 )dG 1 σ 1 + (1 − µ1 )(1 − π)
                                                   h                                     i
                                                               R                   v −v
                                                µ1 (1 − α) [1 − â1 (v1 )] dG 1 σ 1 + α
                    µh (v 1 ; â1 ) =       h                                         i
                                                      R                     v −v
                                        µ1 (1 − α) [1 − â1 (v1 )] dG 1 σ 1 + α + (1 − µ1 )α




                                                         30
   For switching strategies, these formulas simplify to
                                                           h              i
                                                                     k−v1
                                                     µ1 π̄ 1 − G        σ
                      µsg (v 1 ; dk ) =            h              i                                                   (19)
                                                              k−v1
                                             µ1 π̄ 1 − G       σ       + (1 − µ1 )π
                                                                     h              i
                                                                                k−v1
                                                         µ1 (1 − π̄) 1 − G       σ
                      µsd (v 1 ; dk ) =                   h               i
                                                                     k−v 1
                                             µ1 (1 − π̄) 1 − G         σ      + (1 − µ1 )(1 − π)
                                                         h                       i
                                                                        k−v1
                                                     µ1 (1 − α)G          σ    +  α
                      µh (v 1 ; dk ) =           h                        i
                                                                k−v1
                                             µ1 (1 − α)G         σ      +  α  + (1 − µ1 )α


(c) Characterizing the Gain from Reputation

   Given any belief â1 , we define the gain from reputation as

                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                     v1 − v 1
                      Z
   ∆(v1 ; â1 ) = β        [π̄V2 (µsg (v 1 ; â1 )) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µsd (v 1 ; â1 )) − V2 (µh (v 1 ; â1 ))] dG
                                                                                                                        σ
                                                                                                                        (20)

   In the appendix we prove the following Lemma which characterizes the gain from repu-

   tation for general strategies and for switching strategies..

   Lemma 2 The gain from reputation ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is uniformly bounded and strictly increas-

   ing in â1 according to a point-wise ordering on beliefs. In particular, if â1 is a switching

   strategy, dk , then ∆(v1 ; dk ) is strictly decreasing in k. Moreover, when â1 is a switching

   strategy, ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is strictly increasing in v1 .

(d) Equilibrium in Switching Strategies

   Facing a switching strategy belief of future buyers, dk , clearly, the HH bank sells if and

   only if

                          p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; dk ) ≥ π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1 − q(1 + r) − c̄.                           (21)

   Note that the value of selling, given by the left side of (21) is increasing in v1 and

   its partial derivative with respect to v1 is at least the derivative of p̂(µ1 ; v1 ), given by

   µ1 (1 − π̄) + (1 − µ1 )π. The value of holding, given by the right side of (21) is increasing

   in v1 and its derivative is 1 − π̄. Since the derivative for the value of selling is greater




                                                      31
      than the value of holding, there exists a unique solution, b(k), that solves the equation


                   p̂(µ1 ; b(k)) − q + ∆(b(k); dk ) = π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)b(k) − q(1 + r) − c̄.


      Hence, the best response of the HH bank to a switching strategy belief of future buyers,

      dk , is a switching strategy, db(k) in which the bank sells for all returns above b(k) and

      holds for all return values below b(k). An equilibrium in switching strategies must be a

      fixed point of the above equation, so an equilibrium switching point, k∗ satisfies


                      p̂(µ1 ; k∗ ) − q + ∆(k∗ ; dk∗ ) = π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)k∗ − q(1 + r) − c̄.


      In the Appendix, we prove the following lemma.

      Lemma 3 The best response function b(k) has a unique fixed point k∗ which is globally

      stable.

      Hence, the game with switching strategies has a unique equilibrium.


2. Restriction to Switching Strategies is Without Loss of Generality


   (a) Limit Dominance Regions

      We show that regardless of future buyers belief functions, the bank has a dominant

      strategy for extreme values of default values. Consider two numbers v̂ < ṽ. We define

      an extreme monotone strategy to be a strategy that calls for selling when v1 ≥ ṽ and

      holding for v1 ≤ v̂. We define Av̂,ṽ to be the set of such strategies. Notice that A−∞,∞

      is the set of all strategies. Define the Best Response set operator on a subset of beliefs,

      A, as


       BR(A) = {a1 |a1 (v1 ) = 1 ⇔ p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; â1 ) ≥ π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1 − q(1 + r) − c̄}


      We show that there exist bounds v̂ 0 < ṽ 0 such that the HH bank holds for v1 ≤ v̂ 0 and




                                                32
   it sells the asset for v1 ≥ ṽ 0 , independent of future buyers’ belief function â1 . That is


          ∀â1 , v1 ≥ ṽ 0 ; p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; â1 ) ≥ π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1 − q(1 + r) − c̄              (22)

          ∀â1 , v1 ≤ v̂ 0 ; p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + −q + ∆(v1 ; â1 ) ≤ π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1 − q(1 + r) − c̄


   Using the result from Lemma (2) that ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is uniformly bounded in (22), it follows

   that these bounds exist. We have established that any equilibrium strategy must be an

   extreme monotone strategy with cutoffs v̂ 0 < ṽ 0 . That is,


                                           BR(A−∞,∞ ) ⊆ Av̂0 ,ṽ0 .


   Thus, we can restrict attention to extreme monotone strategies without loss of generality.

(b) Best Response Sets Converge.

   We show that the best response set operator is decreasing in the sense that it induces

   a best response set which is a strict subset of any arbitrary set of extreme monotone

   beliefs. Repeatedly applying this operator induces a decreasing sequence of sets which

   converges to a unique equilibrium.

   To show that the best response set operator is decreasing, we show that for any v̂ < ṽ,

   BR(Av̂,ṽ ) ⊆ Ab(v̂),b(ṽ) ⊂ Av̂,ṽ . Since ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is increasing in â1 , for all â1 ∈ Av̂,ṽ we

   have


        p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; dṽ ) ≤ p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; â1 ) ≤ p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; dv̂ )


   because â1 first order stochastically dominates dṽ and is dominated by dv̂ . This result

   implies that


                      π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1 − q(1 + r) − c̄ ≥ p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; â1 )


   if

                      π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1 − q(1 + r) − c̄ ≥ p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) − q + ∆(v1 ; dv̂ )



                                                 33
              This result implies that if a1 is the best response to â1 , then


                                                               ∀v1 < b(v̂),     a1 (v1 ) = 0


              Similarly, we can show that the best response to â1 must satisfy a1 (v1 ) = 1 for all

              v1 ≥ b(ṽ). We have proved that BR(Av̂,ṽ ) ⊆ Ab(v̂),b(ṽ) . Since b(k) is globally stable,

              Ab(v̂),b(ṽ) ⊂ Av̂,ṽ so that BR(Av̂,ṽ ) ⊆ Ab(v̂),b(ṽ) ⊂ Av̂,ṽ . Finally, because b(k) has a unique

              fixed point, Anb(v̂),b(ṽ) converges to Ak∗ ,k∗ = {dk∗ } so that BRn (A−∞,∞ ) also converges

              to {dk∗ } .


4.2     Uniqueness Result with Proper Priors

In this section, we provide a characterization of equilibria in the limiting perturbed game with

general proper priors. In particular, we prove that in the perturbed game as σ → 0, the set of

period 1 equilibrium strategies converges to a unique strategy. We use the method of Laplacian

beliefs introduced by Frankel et al. (2003) and reviewed by Morris and Shin (2003) to prove our

uniqueness result. In fact we show that the game described above is equivalent to a game discussed

by Morris and Shin (2003). We then use their result to prove the following theorem. The proof is

in the Appendix.


Proposition 10 Given the value function V2 (µ2 ) given by (18), as σ → 0 the set of first period

equilibrium strategies in the game with proper priors converges to a unique strategy by the HH bank

given by                                                          
                                                                   1 if v1 ≥ v ∗
                                                                  
                                                                               1
                                                       a1 (v1 ) =
                                                                   0 if v1 < v1∗
                                                                  

where v1∗ satisfies:

                        Z       1
p̂(µ1 ; v1∗ ) − q + β               [π̄V2 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µ̂sd (l)) − V2 (µ̂h (l))] dl = π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1∗ − q(1 + r) − c̄
                            0




                                                                      34
and

                                                µ1 π̄l
                           µ̂sg (l) =
                                        µ1 π̄l + (1 − µ1 )π
                                                    µ1 (1 − π̄)l
                           µ̂sd (l) =
                                        µ1 (1 − π̄)l + (1 − µ1 )(1 − π)
                                                µ1 [(1 − α)(1 − l) + α]
                            µ̂h (l) =
                                        µ1 [(1 − α)(1 − l) + α] + (1 − µ1 )α


5     The Multi-Period Model

In this section, we extend the model to many (possibly an infinite number of) periods. The

qualitative properties of the model are very similar to the model with two periods. In particular,

we show that the game with noisy signal has a unique equilibrium in the limit as the observation

error converges to zero.

    The extension of the model to multi periods is as follows: time is discrete and t = 1, · · · , T . At

t = 0, the bank draws a quality type π ∈ {π, π̄} where Pr(π = π̄) = µ0 is given - µ0 is the initial

reputation level of the bank. In each period t the bank also draws a cost shock ct ∈ {c, c̄} where ct

is i.i.d. over time and Pr(ct = c) = 1 − α. In each period, the bank originates a loan. When the

bank’s quality type is given by π, the loan yields a return of v̄ with probability π and a return of

v t with probability 1 − π, where v t ≤ v̄. The return v t is an i.i.d. stochastic process that is drawn

from F (v t ) in each period. The economy is also populated by a continuum of buyers who live for

one period. The information structure of the game is as in the two period model in section 4. In

each period before trading occurs, all agents in the economy observe vt = v t + σt εt where εt is

i.i.d. and distributed according to G(ε). They do not, however, observe v t . Given this information,

the agents trade in the market. After the trade, the default value of the return v t becomes public

information. Previous prices are not observed by current buyers. Based on observables, agents

update their beliefs at the end of period t.

    Let VT (µT ) denote the last period’s ex-ante value function VT (µT ). Note that, the equilibrium

strategy in the last period is a cutoff strategy with cutoff vT∗ (µT ) given by

                                                            qr + c̄
                                    vT∗ (µT ) = v̄ −
                                                       (1 − µT )(π̄ − π)



                                                       35
and hence,

                                                    Z    ∗ (µ )
                                                        vT   T
                     VT (µT ) = (1 − α)                              {π̄v̄ + (1 − π)v t − q(1 + r) − c̄} dF (v t )
                                                        −∞
                                                            Z    ∞
                                          +(1 − α)                        {p̂(µT ; v t ) − q} dF (v t )
                                                                 ∗ (µ )
                                                                vT   T



From Proposition 10 , as σT −1 converges to zero, the set of equilibrium strategies in period T − 1

converges to a cutoff strategy with cutoff vT∗ −1 (µT −1 ) given by

                                         R1
                           qr + c̄ + β    0   [π̄VT (µ̂sg (l; µT −1 )) + (1 − π̄)VT (µ̂sg (l; µT −1 )) − VT (µ̂h (l; µT −1 ))] dl
vT∗ −1 (µT −1 )   = v̄ −
                                                                     (1 − µT −1 )(π̄ − π)

    Notice that for σT −1 small and given the above cutoff strategy, the value function at period

T − 1, VT −1 (µT −1 ; σT −1 ) is given by

                                                     ∗
                                              Z Z   vT −1 (µT −1 )−v t
                                                          σT −1
VT −1 (µT −1 ; σT −1 ) = (1 − α)                                             {π̄v̄ + (1 − π)v t − q(1 + r) − c̄
                                              vt   −∞
                                                                                vT∗ −1 (µT −1 ) − v t
                                                                                                     
                                          +βVT          µ̂h 1 − G                                              dG(εT −1 )dF (v t ) +
                                                                                        σT −1
                                                     ∗
                                              Z Z   vT −1 (µT −1 )−v t
                                                          σT −1
                                (1 − α)                                      {p̂(µT −1 ; v t ) − q
                                              vt   −∞
                                                              vT∗ −1 (µT −1 ) − v t
                                                                                 
                                     +β π̄VT µ̂sg 1 − G
                                                                      σT −1
                                                                    ∗
                                                                      v     (µT −1 ) − v t
                                                                                         
                                     +β(1 − π̄)VT µ̂sb 1 − G T −1                               dG(εT −1 )dF (v t )
                                                                             σT −1
                                   Z Z ∞
                                +α        {π̄v̄ + (1 − π)v t − q(1 + r) − c̄
                                     vt       −∞
                                                                                vT∗ −1 (µT −1 ) − v t
                                                                                                     
                                          +βVT          µ̂h 1 − G                                              dG(εT −1 )dF (v t )
                                                                                        σT −1

and hence, the above formula becomes the following as σT −1 → 0:




                                                                          36
                                               ∗
                                              vT −1 (µT −1 )
                                          Z
VT −1 (µT −1 ) = (1 − α)                                       {π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v t − q(1 + r) − c̄ + βVT (µ̂h (0))} dF (v t )          (23)
                                              −∞
                                              Z ∞
                            +(1 − α)                            {p̂(µT −1 ; v t ) − q + β π̄VT (µ̂sg (1)) + β(1 − π̄)VT (µ̂sd (1))} dF (v t )
                                                ∗
                                               vT −1 (µT −1 )
                                         ∗
                                        vT −1 (µT −1 )
                                   Z
                            +α                           {π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v t − q(1 + r) − c + βVT (µ̂h (0))} dF (v t )
                                   Z−∞
                                     ∞
                            +α                          {π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v t − q(1 + r) − c + βVT (µ̂h (1))} dF (v t )
                                        ∗
                                       vT −1 (µT −1 )



    The value functions in each period can be constructed in a similar maneer. If the value function

in period t, Vt is increasing the same proof as in Proposition 10 applies. Therefore, we can state

the following theorem:


Proposition 11 If Vt+1 (µt+1 ) is increasing in µt+1 , for each µt , there is a unique equilibrium

strategy in period t as σt → 0. The equilibrium strategy in period t is given by a cutoff strategy as

follows:                                                                 
                                                                          1 vt ≥ v ∗ (µt )
                                                                         
                                                                                   t
                                                         at (vt ; µt ) =
                                                                          0 vt < vt∗ (µt )
                                                                         


where vt∗ (µt ) satisfies the following

                    Z       1
p̂(µt ; vt∗ )−q+β               [π̄Vt+1 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄)Vt+1 (µ̂sb (l)) − Vt+1 (µ̂h (l))] dl = π̄v̄+(1−π̄)vt∗ −q(1+r)−c̄
                        0


and Vt+1 (·) is defined recursively as in (23).


    It is straightforward to show that the part of the value function associated with the type (π̄, c̄)

is increasing by proving that both the value of selling and holding is increasing in µt and therefore

that part is increasing. However, whether the part associated with the type (π̄, c) is increasing

requires further assumptions on the set of parameter values - one assumption is that α is relatively

small. For all of our numerical examples, Vt (µt ) is an increasing function.




                                                                           37
6        Fragility

We think of equilibrium outcomes as fragile in two ways. One notion of fragility is simply that the

economy has multiple equilibria so that sunspot-like fluctuations can induce changes in outcomes.

A second notion of fragility is that small changes in fundamentals induce large changes in aggregate

outcomes.

        Equilibrium outcomes in our unperturbed game are clearly fragile under the first notion because

that game has multiple equilibria. They are also fragile under the second notion if agents in the

model coordinate on different equilibria depending on the realization of the fundamentals and if a

large mass of agents have reputation levels in the multiplicity region.

        Since our perturbed game has a unique equilibrium, it is not fragile under the first notion.

We argue that it is fragile under our second notion. In our multi-period model, the history of

past outcomes induces dispersion in the reputation levels of different banks. In order for our

equilibrium to display fragility under the second notion, we must have that either banks with a

wide variety of reputation levels change their actions in the same way in response to aggregate

shocks or that the reputation levels of banks cluster close to each other. We conducted a wide

variety of numerical exercises and found that the clustering effect is very strong in our model. This

clustering effect clearly depends on the details of the history of exogenous shocks. To abstract from

these details, we consider the invariant distribution associated with our model and show that this

invariant distribution displays clustering. The invariant distribution is that associated with the

infinite horizon limit of our multi-period model. We allow for a small probability of replacement in

order to ensure that the invariant distribution is not concentrated at a single point.

        Figure 3 displays the cutoff values for each reputation type for the ergodic set associated with

the invariant distribution.1 This ergodic set contains reputation levels between roughly 0.25 and

0.85. For collateral values above the cutoffs shown in Figure 3, banks sell their loans and below the

cutoffs banks hold their loans. This figure illustrates that as the collateral value falls, the adverse

selection problem worsens in the sense that banks with a wider range of reputations hold their

loans. For example, at a collateral value of 5, banks with reputation levels below roughly 0.4 hold
    1
     The parameters used in this simulation are the following: π̄ = 0.8, π = 0.3, v̄ = 7, c̄ = 0.5, c = −3, α = 0.15, q =
.1, r = 0.5, β(1 − λ) = .99, λ = .4, µ0 = .6 where λ represents the exogenous probability of replacement and µ0 is
reputation of a newly replaced bank. The distribution of v is N (0, 2).



                                                           38
their loans and the banks with higher reputation levels sell their loans. At a collateral value of 4,

banks with reputation levels below roughly 0.65 hold their loans and banks with higher reputation

levels sell their loans. Thus, a fall in collateral values from 5 to 4 induces banks with reputation

levels roughly between 0.4 and 0.65 to switch from selling to holding their loans.

   Figure 4 displays the invariant distribution of reputation levels for high quality banks. This

figure shows that the invariant distribution displays significant clustering. Roughly 70 per cent of

high quality banks have reputation levels between 0.8 and 0.85. Small fluctuations in the default

value of loans around the cutoff values for such banks can induce a large mass of banks to alter

their behavior.

   Figure 5 plots the volume of trade, measured as the fraction of all banks that sell their loans.

A decrease in the default value from 1.3 to 1.1 induces a 50 per cent decrease in the volume of

trade. In this sense, Figure 5 suggests that equilibrium outcomes in our model are fragile under

the second notion.

                   v
                       6


                       5                                       SELL
                                             v∗ (µ)
                       4


                       3
                                                HOLD
                       2


                       1


                       0
                           0          0.2         0.4         0.6         0.8        1
                                                                                     µ


                               Figure 3: Cutoff thresholds for high quality banks.


   Next we analyze the forces that induce clustering in our model. Recall from Lemma 1 that,
                                                                                     1
conditional on a high quality, high cost bank selling, Bayes rule implies that       µt   is a martingale.
        1
Since   µt   is a convex function, Jensen’s inequality implies that the reputation of a bank, µt , is a


                                                        39
   0.5

  0.45

   0.4

  0.35

   0.3

  0.25

   0.2

  0.15

   0.1

  0.05

     0
         0          0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8          1
                                                                  µ


Figure 4: Invariant Distribution of reputations of high quality banks.




     1


   0.9


   0.8


   0.7


   0.6


   0.5


   0.4



         0      1         2          3         4          5      6
                                                                     v


 Figure 5: Volume of Trade as a function of shock to default value.



                                    40
submartingale so that µt tends to rise. Conditional on a high quality, high cost bank holding,

the analysis of our equilibrium implies that the reputation of such a bank also rises. These forces

imply that the reputation of a high quality bank displays an upward trend. This upward trend

is dampened by replacement. Since all high quality banks tend to have an upward trend in their

reputations, these reputations tend to cluster towards each other.

    This reasoning suggests that fragility under the second notion does not depend on the particular

equilibrium that we have selected. In both the positive and the negative reputational equilibria,

the reputations of high quality banks rises over time and tend eventually to cluster together. This

clustering tends to make them react in the same way to fluctuations in the default value of the

underlying loans. We conjecture that any continuous selection procedure will produce periods of

high volumes of new issuances followed by sudden collapses.

    We have analyzed the effect of other aggregate shocks in our model. In particular, we allowed

the comparative advantage cost, c̄, to be subject to aggregate shocks. In that version of the model,

we found that banks with a wide variety of reputations tend to have cutoffs that are very close to

each other. That model displays fragility under our second notion because small fluctuations in

holding costs around a critical value induce large changes in actions by banks with a wide variety

of reputations. (Details are available upon request).



7    Policy Exercises

In this section, we use our model to evaluate the effects of various policies intended to remedy

problems credit markets that have been proposed since the 2007 collapse of secondary loan markets

in the U.S. We focus on the effects of policies in which the government would purchase asset backed

securities at prices above existing market value, such as the Public-Private Partnership plan as well

as on policies which decreased the costs of holding loans to maturity, including changes in the Fed

Funds target rate, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), and increased FDIC

insurance.

    We first consider policies in which the government attempts to purchase so-called toxic assets

at above-market values. Consider the following government policy in the limiting version of the

perturbed game as σ → 0. The government offers to buy the asset at some price p in the first


                                                 41
period.

   Suppose first, that p ≤ p̂(µ1 ; v1 ). We claim that the unique equilibrium without government is

also the unique equilibrium with this government policy. To see this claim, note that the equilibrium

in the second period is the same with and without the government policy so that the reputational

gains are the same with and without government policy. Consider the first period and a realization

of first period return v1 < v1∗ . In the game without the government, the HH bank found it optimal

not to sell at a price p̂(µ1 ; v1 ). Since the reputational gains are the same with and without the

government policy, in the game with the government, it is also optimal for the HH not to sell at

this price. A similar argument implies that the equilibrium strategy of the HH bank is unchanged

for v1 > v1∗ . Thus, this government policy has no effect on the equilibrium strategy of the HH bank.

Of course, under this policy, the government ends up buying the asset from low quality banks. The

only effect of this policy is to make transfers to low quality banks.

   Suppose next that the price set by the government, p, is sufficiently larger than p̂(µ1 ; v1 ).Then,

the HH bank will find it optimal to sell and will enjoy the reputational gain associated with a

policy of selling. In this sense, if the government offers a sufficiently high price, it can ensure that

reputational incentives work to overcome adverse selection problems. Note however that this policy

necessarily implies that the government must earn negative profits.

   Consider now a policy which reduces interest rates in period 1 and leaves period 2 interest rates

unchanged. We begin the analysis with the unperturbed game. Such a policy increases the static

payoff in period 1 from holding loans which worsens the static incentives for the HH bank to sell its

loan. Specifically, this policy raises both the threshold µ below which banks find it optimal to hold

in the positive reputational equilibrium and the threshold µ̄ below which banks find it optimal to

hold their loans in the negative reputational equilibrium. Thus, this policy serves only to aggravate

the lemons problem in secondary loans markets.

   Consider next a policy under which the government commits to reducing period 2 interest rates

but leaves period 1 interest rates unchanged. Obviously, this policy increases incentives for banks

to hold their loans in period 2 and thereby increases the threshold below which banks hold their

loans, µ∗2 . In this sense, it makes period 2 allocations less efficient. We will show that this policy

reduces the region of multiplicity in period 1 and in this sense can improve period 1 allocations.

To show the reduction in the region of multiplicity, consider the reputational gain in the positive

                                                  42
reputational equilibrium evaluated at µ:


                               β (π̄V2 (µsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 ) − V2 (µh ))


Using 6, it is straightforward to see that an arbitrarily small reduction in interest rates of dr in

period 2 reduces V2 (µsv̄ ) by αqdr since µsv̄ > µ∗2 . Moreover, since µs0 and µh are strictly less than

µ∗2 , V2 (µs0 ) and V2 (µh ) fall by qdr. As a result, the reputational gain falls by β π̄(1 − α)qdr. This

decline in reputational gain induces an increase in the threshold µ. Similarly, we can show that

the policy induces a fall in the threshold µ̄. Thus, the region of multiplicity shrinks and in this

sense can improve period 1 allocations. Interestingly, such a policy is time inconsistent because the

government has a strong incentive in period 2 not to make period 2 allocations less efficient.

    An alternative policy which has not been proposed is to consider forced asset sales in which the

government randomly forces banks to sell their loan. Such a policy in our model would mitigate

the lemons problem in secondary loan markets by generating a pool of loans in secondary markets

consistent with the ex-ante mix of loan types. While this is a standard intervention directed at

increasing the price and volume of trade in markets that suffer from adverse selection, in our

model such an intervention comes at the cost of misallocating loans to those without comparative

advantage. Specifically, some banks with low costs of holding loans will be forced to sell to the

marketplace.

    It is straightforward to show that a policy under which the government commits to purchase

assets in period 2 at prices which are contingent on the realization of the signals can eliminate the

multiplicity of equilibria and support the positive reputational equilibrium. While such a policy

would be desirable, the feasibility of such a policy can only be analyzed by developing a model in

which private agents cannot commit but the government can.



8    Conclusion

This paper is an attempt to make three contributions: a theoretical contribution to the literature

on reputation, a substantive contribution to the literature on the behavior of financial markets

during crises, and a contribution to analyses of proposed and actual policies during the recent



                                                     43
crisis. In terms of the theoretical contribution, we have combined insights from the literature that

emphasizes the positive aspects of reputational incentives (see Mailath and Samuelson (2001)) with

the literature that emphasizes the negative aspects of reputational incentives (see Ely and Välimäki

(2003)) to show that multiplicity of equilibria naturally arise in reputation models like ours. We

have also shown how techniques from the coordination games literature can be adapted to develop

a refinement method that produces a unique equilibrium. In terms of the literature on the behavior

of financial markets during crises, we have argued that sudden collapses in secondary loan market

activity are particularly likely when the collateral value of the underlying loan declines. In terms

of policy, we have argued that a wide variety of proposed policy responses would not have averted

either the sudden collapse or the associated inefficiency. An important avenue for future work is to

analyze policies which might in fact remedy the inefficiencies.




                                                 44
9    Appendix

Proposition 2. (Multiplicity of Equilibria) Suppose Assumption (1) is satisfied and 0 < µ∗2 <

1. Then, there exist µ and µ̄ with µ < µ∗2 < µ̄ such that if µ1 ∈ [µ, µ̄), the model has two equilibria:

in one the HH bank sells its loan, and in the other the HH bank holds its loan, if µ1 < µ, the model

has a unique equilibrium in which the HH bank holds its loan in period 1, if µ1 ≥ µ̄, the model has

a unique equilibrium in which the HH bank sells its loan in period 1.

    Proof : We show that our economy has a positive reputational equilibrium. Using Lemma 1

and the result from Proposition 1 that V2 is nondecreasing, it follows that ∆g (µ1 ) ≥ 0. Next we

show that there is some critical value of µ1 denoted µg < µ∗2 such that for all µ1 in the interval

µg < µ1 ≤ µ∗1 , ∆g (µ1 ) is strictly positive and increasing in µ1 and ∆g (µ1 ) = 0 for µ1 ≤ µg . To

obtain these results, define µg implicitly by

                                                           µg π̄
                                            µ∗2 =                      .
                                                    µg π̄ + (1 − µg )π

That is µg denotes that initial reputation level such that if the HH bank sells and receives a good

signal, its reputation level would rise to µ∗2 .Since π̄ > π, µg < µ∗2 . To see that for all µg < µ1 ≤ µ∗1 ,

∆g (µ1 ) is strictly positive and increasing in µ1 , rewrite the reputational gain as


                    ∆g (µ1 ) = β (π̄(V2 (µsv̄ ) − V2 (µh )) + (1 − π̄)(V2 (µs0 ) − V2 (µh ))) .


Since µh = µ1 and µs0 < µ1 , from Proposition 1 it follows that for all µg < µ1 ≤ µ∗1 , V2 (µs0 ) =

V2 (µh ) Since µsv̄ > µh = µ1 , it follows that ∆g (µ1 )is positive and since µsv̄ is strictly increasing

in µ1 it follows that ∆g (µ1 ) is strictly increasing. To see that ∆g (µ1 ) = 0 for µ1 ≤ µg , note that

µsv̄ ≤ µ∗2 so that V2 (µsv̄ ) = V2 (µh ).

    Next, rewrite (10) as


                          (µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π) v̄ − q + ∆g (µ1 ) ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄                (24)


Consider µ1 ≤ µ∗2 . Since ∆g (µ1 ) is a nondecreasing function of µ1 in this range and (µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π) v̄

is a strictly increasing function of µ1 , it follows that the left side of (24) is strictly increasing in



                                                         45
this range. Since ∆g (µ∗1 ) is strictly positive, using (5) the left side of (24) is strictly greater than

the right side of this inequality at µ∗1 . Since ∆g (µg ) = 0 and µg < µ∗2 , the left side is strictly less

than the right side at µg . Thus, there is a unique value of µ at which (24) holds as an equality. For

µ1 > µ∗2 , (µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π) v̄ − q > π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄ and ∆g (µ1 ) ≥ 0 so that (24) is satisfied. We

have established that our model has an equilibrium in which all HH banks with reputation levels

above µ1 ≥ µ sell.

    To obtain the negative reputational equilibrium, define µb implicitly by

                                                         µb
                                           µ∗2 =                   .
                                                   µb + (1 − µb )α

That is µb denotes that initial reputation level such that if the HH bank holds, its reputation level

would rise to µ∗2 . Clearly µb < µ∗2 .

    Since µh = µ1 /(µ1 + (1 − µ1 )α) is greater than µ1 , it follows that ∆b (µ1 ) is negative for µ1 > µb .

If µ1 ∈ [µb , µ∗2 ], selling has a static cost, i.e. p̂(µ2 ) − q ≤ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄ as well as a loss from

reputation, i.e. ∆b (µ1 ) < 0 so that the HH bank prefers to hold the asset. If µ1 ∈ (µ∗2 , 1], there are

benefits from selling the asset, i.e. p̂(µ2 )− q ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1+ r)− c̄, while there is a loss from reputation

∆b (µ1 ) < 0. Assumption (1) ensures that when µ1 = 1, the static benefit outweighs the loss from

reputation, i.e. (13) is reversed at µ1 = 1. Moreover, Since µh = µ1 /(µ1 + (1 − µ1 )α),it is easy to

show that (µ2 π̄ + (1 − µ2 )π) v̄ − q + ∆b (µ1 ) is a strictly convex function of µ1 for µ1 ∈ [µ∗2 , 1]. Since

the value of this function is strictly less than π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄ at µ1 = µ∗2 and weakly higher when

µ1 = 1, there exists a unique µ̄ ∈ (µ∗2 , 1] , at which (13) holds with equality. For µ1 ≤ µ̄, (13) holds

and for µ1 > µ̄ (13) is violated. Q.E.D.

    Proposition 4. Suppose Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 hold. Then the unique equilibrium

of the static game described in Proposition 1 and the multiple equilibria of the dynamic game

described in Proposition 2 are also equilibria of the associated games when all bank types behave

strategically.

    Proof: Consider the static game. It is sufficient to show that given the constructed equilibrium

and specified strategies for all agents, there is no profitable deviation by any agent. Note that in

the proof of Proposition 2 we show that ∆g (µ1 ) ≥ 0 for all µ1 ∈ [0, 1]. Hence, Assumption 2 implies




                                                       46
that

                                             µ1 (π̄ − π) v̄ + qr < −c

or

                                 [µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π]v̄ − q < πv̄ − q(1 + r) − c                             (25)

Inequality (25) implies that facing break even prices the low cost type bank would like to hold.

Moreover a deviation by a buyer must attract these types of bank and (25) implies that buyers

must offer a price higher than the actuarially fair price. Hence, there is no deviation by any buyer

or a low cost bank type. Moreover, an LH bank wants to sell even at the lowest possible price, πv̄,

since c̄ > 0. Thus there are no profitable deviation from the specified strategies in the static game.

     Consider the positive equilibrium of the dynamic game. Given future beliefs, the value of selling

to a low quality bank adjusted by the future reputational gain from holding is given by


                     [µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π]v̄ − q + β [πV2 (µgsv̄ ) + (1 − π)V2 (µgs0 ) − V2 (µ)]


where µsv̄ = π̄µ1 /(µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π) and µgs0 = (1 − π̄)µ1 /((1 − π̄)µ1 + (1 − π)(1 − µ1 ). The value

of selling to a high quality bank is given by


                                       [µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π]v̄ − q + ∆g (µ1 )


     From assumption (14) and β [πV2 (µgsv̄ ) + (1 − π)V2 (µgs0 ) − V2 (µ)] = ∆g (µ1 ), we have


       [µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π]v̄ − q + β [πV2 (µgsv̄ ) + (1 − π)V2 (µgs0 ) − V2 (µ)] ≤ πv̄ − q(1 + r) − c

                                           [µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π]v̄ − q + ∆g (µ1 ) ≤ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c


     Hence, there is no profitable deviation by the low cost types. As for the LH type bank, note

that in the positive equilibrium


       [µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π]v̄ − q + β [π̄V2 (µgsv̄ ) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µgs0 ) − V2 (µ)] ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄   (26)


     We use the above inequality to show that the LH type bank does not have a profitable deviation.


                                                         47
There are two possible cases: Case 1. c̄ + qr ≥ (π̄ − π)v̄. In this case, µ∗2 = 0 and V2 (µ) is a constant

function. Therefore, ∆g (µ1 ) = 0 for all µ1 and β [πV2 (µgsv̄ ) + (1 − π)V2 (µgs0 ) − V2 (µ)] = 0. In this

case, we are back to the static game and as we have shown before, the LH bank finds it optimal to

sell always. Case 2. c̄ + qr < (π̄ − π)v̄ < v̄. In this case, we have


        β [V2 (µsv̄ ) − V2 (µs0 )] ≤ β(1 − α) {[µsv̄ π̄ + (1 − µsv̄ )π]v̄ − q − π̄v̄ + q(1 + r) + c̄}

                                   = β(1 − α) {−(1 − µsv̄ )(π̄ − π)v̄ + qr + c̄}


The last expression is increasing in µ1 and therefore maximized at µ1 = 1. Hence, we must have


                               β [V2 (µsv̄ ) − V2 (µs0 )] ≤ β(1 − α)(qr + c̄) < v̄


Therefore,

                                −β(π̄ − π) [V2 (µsv̄ ) − V2 (µs0 )] > −v̄(π̄ − π)

Adding this inequality to (26) , we get


        [µ1 π̄ + (1 − µ1 )π]v̄ − q + β [πV2 (µgsv̄ ) + (1 − π)V2 (µgs0 ) − V2 (µ)] ≥ π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄


which implies that the LH type bank does not have a profitable deviation in the constructed

equilibrium.

   As for the negative equilibrium, it is clear that a bank with low cost does not want to sell its

loan, since selling only punishes the bank. Therefore, it is sufficient to show that the LH bank

wants to sell its loan. That is, we need to show that for all µ1 ∈ [0, µ̄], we have


                              πv̄ − q + β[V2 (0) − V2 (µbh )] ≥ πv̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄                         (27)


where µbh = µ1 /(µ1 + (1 − µ1 )α). To do so, we first show that this inequality is satisfied at µ1 = µ̄.

Now, since ∆b (µ1 ) = β[V2 (0) − V2 (µbh )] is decreasing, this implies that (27) holds for all µ1 ∈ [0, µ̄].

By definition, µ̄ satisfies


                              πv̄ − q + β[V2 (0) − V2 (µbh )] = π̄v̄ − q(1 + r) − c̄


                                                       48
Obviously, this equality leads to the above inequality. Therefore, we have shown that LH bank still

finds it optimal to sell in the negative equilibrium. Q.E.D.

    Proposition 5. Suppose that (1 − α)/(π̄ α − ππ̄ ) ≤ β(1 − α). Then, the utility level for each
                                                      

type of bank and the buyers in the positive equilibrium is at least as large as the utility level for

the corresponding type of bank and the buyers in the negative equilibrium.

   Proof: Here we show that if (1 − α)/(π̄α − π) ≤ β(1 − α), then µnh ≤ µ∗2 . The Proposition

follows from the discussion in the text. To see this result, notice that if (1 − α)/(π̄α − π) ≤ β(1 − α)

then
                                             1 − ππ̄
                                                     ≤ 1 + β π̄(1 − α)
                                             α − ππ̄

Let λ =         1
          1+β π̄(1−α) .   Then, λ(1 − ππ̄ ) ≤ α −   π
                                                    π̄   or λ + (1 − λ) ππ̄ ≤ α. Now consider the following two

linear functions, f1 (µ) = λ + (1 − λ)(µ + (1 − µ) π̄π ) and f2 (µ) = µ + (1 − µ)α. The value of the two

function coincide at µ = 1. Moreover, at µ = 0, by the above inequalities f1 (0) ≤ f2 (0). Hence, we

must have for all µ ∈ [0, 1], f1 (µ) ≤ f2 (µ). In other words:


                                              µ                         µ
                                                                ≥
                                  λ + (1 − λ)(µ + (1 − µ) ππ̄ )   µ + (1 − µ)α

   Therefore, by Jensen’s inequality - E X1 ≥              1
                                                          EX ,   we must have that

                                                µ                       µ
                           λµ + (1 − λ)                   ≥                                               (28)
                                          µ + (1 − µ) ππ̄   λ + (1 − λ)(µ + (1 − µ) π̄π )

   Note that by definition of µ, we must have

                                                                   
                              p̂(µ) + β(1 − α)π̄ V2 (µsv̄ ) − V2 (µ) = π̄v̄ − qr − c̄


   Further simplification of the above implies that

                                     1            β π̄(1 − α)         µ
                                             µ+                                 = µ∗2
                             1 + β π̄(1 − α)    1 + β π̄(1 − α) µ + (1 − µ) ππ̄

   Then, by (28), we must have µ∗2 ≥ µnh . Q.E.D.

Lemma 2 The reputation gain ∆(v1 ; â1 ) has the following properties:




                                                            49
   1. ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is continuous in v1 and â1 . Furthermore, if â1 is point-wise higher than â′1 , ∆(v1 ; â1 ) ≥

      ∆(v1 ; â′1 ). Moreover, if â1 (v1 ) 6= â′1 (v1 ) for a positive measure subset of v1 ’s, ∆(v1 ; â1 ) >

      ∆(v1 ; â′1 ). In particular ∆(v1 ; dk ) is decreasing in k.

   2. If â1 is switching strategy, ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is increasing in v1 .

                                                                 ¯ such that for all v1 ∈ R and â1 , we
   3. ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is bounded in the sense that there exists ∆ < ∆
                              ¯
      have ∆ ≤ ∆(v1 ; â1 ) ≤ ∆.


    Proof: 1. Consider the set A = {v1 ; â1 (v1 ) > â′1 (v1 )}. Then

                                                                                                                          
                                     v1 − v̄1                                   v1 − v̄1                            v1 − v̄1
              Z                                         Z                                          Z
                  â1 (v1 )dG                       −       â′1 (v1d )dG                      =           dG                      ≥0
                                        σ                                          σ                   A               σ

with equality only if A is measure zero. Given the Bayesian updating formulas, this inequality

implies that for any v̄1 ,


                µsg (v̄1 ; â1 ) ≥ µsg (v̄1 ; â′1 ), µsd (v̄1 ; â1 ) ≥ µsd(v̄1 ; â′1 ), µh (v̄1 ; â1 ) ≤ µh (v̄1 ; â′1 )


with strict inequalities only if A is zero measure. Therefore, for each v1 , the integrand in (20) is

higher for â1 and therefore ∆(v1 ; â1 ) ≥ ∆(v1 ; â′1 ) with equality only if A is measure zero.

    2. If â1 is a switching strategy with switching point k,from (19) it is straightforward to see that

µsg (v̄1 ; â1 ), µsd (v̄1 ; â1 ) are strictly increasing and µh (v̄1 ; â1 ) is strictly decreasing in v̄1 . Thus the

integrand in (20)c is increasing in v̄1 . Since we have assumed that H(v̂1 |v1 ) is decreasing in v1 ,

from first order stochastic dominance, it follows that ∆(v1 ; â1 ) is strictly increasing.

    3. To show boundedness, we first show that for all µ2 , V2 (µ2 ) is well defined and continuous.

Since µ2 lies in a compact set, it follows that V2 (µ2 ) is bounded. To show continuity, note that

when v2 ≥ (µ∗ )−1 (µ2 ), V2 (µ2 , v2 ) = p̂(µ2 ; v2 ) − q and if v2 < (µ∗ )−1 (µ2 ), V2 (µ2 , v2d ) = π̄v̄ + (1 −




                                                                      50
π̄)v2d − q(1 + r) − c̄. Therefore,

                             "Z
                         ∞         ∞                                                  
                                                                            v2 − v̄2
                    Z
      V2 (µ2 ) =                               {[p̂(µ2 ; v2 ) − q} dG                                                     (29)
                        −∞        µ∗−1 (µ2 )                                   σ
                             µ∗−1 (µ2 )                                                                  #
                                                                                               v2 − v̄2
                         Z
                     +                    {π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v2 − q(1 + r) − c̄} dG                               dF (v2 )
                          −∞                                                                      σ
                = {p̂(µ2 ; v2 ) − q}
                     Z ∞ Z µ∗−1 (µ2 )                                                      
                                                                                   v2 − v̄2
                  +                   {(1 − µ2 )(π̄ − π)(v̄ − v2 ) − qr − c̄} dG              dF (v̄2 ).
                      −∞ −∞                                                           σ

   Using our assumption that the random variable v2 has a finite mean with respect to G in (29),

it follows that V2 (µ2 ) is bounded. Continuity follows by inspection of (29) noting that so that G
                                                             ¯ such that for any v1 , â1
and F are continuous functions. Thus, there exist bounds ∆ ≤ ∆


                                                                                                       ¯
                 ∆ ≤ π̄V2 (µsv̄ (v̄1 ; â1 )) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µs0 (v̄1 ; â1 )) − V2 (µh (v̄1 ; â1 )) ≤ ∆.


Q.E.D.

Lemma 3 The best response function b(k) satisfies the following:


   1. b(k) is continuous and strictly increasing in k.

   2. There exists a unique v1∗ , such that b(v1∗ ) = v1∗ .

   3. For all k > v1∗ , b(k) < k and for all k < v1∗ , b(k) > k.


   Proof: 1.. b(k) satisfies the following


                    p̂(µ1 ; b(k)) − q + ∆(b(k); dk ) = π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)b(k) − q(1 + r) − c̄                                (30)


   Since ∆(b; dk ) is continuous in b and k, it is obvious that b(k) is continuous. An increase in k,

causes the function ∆(b; dk ) to decrease by Lemma 2. Since p̂(µ1 ; b) − (1 − π̄)b is increasing in b,

from (30), b(k) must be an increasing function of k.

   2. Any fixed point of b(k), v1∗ must satisfy


                         p̂(µ1 ; v1∗ ) − q + ∆(v1∗ ; dv1∗ ) = π̄v̄ + (1 − π)v1∗ − q(1 + r) − c̄


                                                               51
Now, notice that under dv1∗ , from the Bayesian updating rules, the updating rules are functions of
           ∗     
            v −v̄
only 1 − G 1 σ 1 . Therefore, we can rewrite ∆(v1∗ ; dv1∗ ) as the following

                                       ∞
                                         v1∗ − v̄1
                                                   
                                                                         ∗       
                                                                                v1 − v̄1
                                 Z
    ∆(v1∗ ; dv1∗ )
               =β      π̄V2 µ̂sg 1 − G                 + (1 − π̄)V2 µ̂sd 1 − G
                   −∞                        σ                                     σ
                     ∗            ∗        
                       v1 − v̄1          v1 − v̄1
        −V2 µ̂h 1 − G                dG
                          σ                  σ

                                      
                            v1∗ −v̄1
Let l = 1 − G                   σ       . Then the above integral becomes

                                                    Z   1
                            ∆(v1∗ ; dv1∗ )     =β           [π̄V2 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µ̂sd (l)) − V2 (µ̂h (l))] dl
                                                    0


and v1∗ must satisfy

        Z       1
−q +β               [π̄V2 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µ̂sd (l)) − V2 (µ̂h (l))] dl = π̄v̄+(1−π)v1∗ − p̂(µ1 ; v1∗ )−q(1+r)−c̄
            0


The left side of the above equation does not depend on v1∗ and the right side is strictly decreasing

in v1∗ . Since the right side ranges from plus infinity to minus infinity, there exists a unique v1∗ that

satisfies the above equation. Now, notice that under dv1∗ , from the Bayesian updating rules, the
                                            ∗    
                                            v −v̄
updating rules are functions of only 1 − G 1 σ 1 . Therefore, we can rewrite ∆(v1∗ ; dv1∗ ) as the

following

                       Z ∞                ∗                              ∗      
                                             v1 − v̄1                             v − v̄1
    ∆(v1∗ ; dv1∗ ) = β      π̄V2 µ̂sg 1 − G               + (1 − π̄)V2 µ̂sd 1 − G 1
                                                σ                                    σ
               −∞  ∗                  ∗        
                           v1 − v̄1           v1 − v̄1
      −V2 µ̂h 1 − G                      dG
                               σ                 σ

and v1∗ must satisfy

        Z       1
−q+β                [π̄V2 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µ̂sd (l)) − V2 (µ̂h (l))] dl = π̄v̄+(1−π)v1∗ − p̂(µ1 ; v1∗ )−q(1+r)−c̄.
        0


The left side of the above equation does not depend on v1∗ and the right side is strictly decreasing

in v1∗ . Since the right side ranges from plus infinity to minus infinity, there exists a unique v1∗ that

satisfies the above equation.



                                                                            52
    3. Suppose k < v1∗ and b(k) ≤ k. Since limk→−∞ b(k) = v̂ 0 > −∞. Then by continuity of b(·),

there must exists k ∈ (−∞, k] such that b(k̂) = k̂. Contradicting part 2. Similarly, we can show

that for all k > v1∗ , b(k) < k. Q.E.D.

    Proposition 10: Given the value function V2 (µ2 ) given by (18), as σ → 0 the set of first period

equilibrium strategies in the game with proper priors converges to a unique strategy by the HH

bank given by                                                      
                                                                    1 if v1 ≥ v ∗
                                                                   
                                                                                1
                                                        a1 (v1 ) =
                                                                     0 if v1 < v1∗
                                                                   
                                                                   

where v1∗ satisfies:

                        Z       1
p̂(µ1 ; v1∗ ) − q + β               [π̄V2 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄)V2 (µ̂sd (l)) − V2 (µ̂h (l))] dl = π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v1∗ − q(1 + r) − c̄
                            0


and

                                                                  µ1 π̄l
                                           µ̂sg (l) =
                                                          µ1 π̄l + (1 − µ1 )π
                                                                      µ1 (1 − π̄)l
                                           µ̂sd (l) =
                                                          µ1 (1 − π̄)l + (1 − µ1 )(1 − π)
                                                                  µ1 [(1 − α)(1 − l) + α]
                                            µ̂h (l) =
                                                          µ1 [(1 − α)(1 − l) + α] + (1 − µ1 )α

    Proof: We prove Proposition 10 by mapping our environment into that described in Morris and Shin

(2003) and show that their requirements for existence of a unique equilibrium in the limit are sat-

isfied.

    Given a value function V2 (µ2 ), consider an equilibrium strategy profile in the first period

(a1 (·), â1 (·), p1 (·)). In a game with full information about shocks to returns, when agents in period

2 believe that HH bank sells with probability l in the first period 1, the HH bank’s differential gain

from selling is given by


   π̂(v1 , l) = p̂(µ1 ; v1 ) + qr + c̄ − π̄v̄ − (1 − π̄)v1 + β [π̄V2 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄) V2 (µ̂sd (l)) − V2 (µ̂h (l))]

                                                                            R
    Then, in the game with private information, l =                             â1 (v1 )dH(v1 |v̄1 ) is a random variable. We,

then, show that π̂ satisfies the conditions A1-A3, A4*, A5, and A6 in Morris and Shin (2003).


                                                                      53
We then can apply Proposition 2.2 in Morris and Shin (2003) and that completes the proof of our

Propoisition. It is easy to see that µ̂sg (l) and µ̂sd (l) are increasing in l and µ̂h (l) is decreasing in

l. Since, V2 (µ2 ) is non-decreasing in µ2 , π̂(v1 , l) is non-decreasing in l - condition A1. Obviously

π̂(v1 , l) is increasing in v1 - condition A2. Since π̂(v1 , l) is separable in v1 and l, and π̂(v1 , l) is linearly
                                                                 R
increasing in v1 , there must exist a unique v1∗ such that π̂(v1∗ , l)dl = 0 - condition A3. Since V2 (µ2 )

is a continuous function over a compact set [0, 1], β [π̄V2 (µ̂sg (l)) + (1 − π̄) V2 (µ̂sd (l)) − V2 (µ̂h (l))] is
                                   ¯ respectively. Now let
a bounded above and below by ∆ and ∆,


                                                                               ¯ −ε
                           0 = −p̂(µ1 ; v 1 ) − qr + π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v 1 − c̄ − ∆

                           0 = −p̂(µ1 ; v̂1 ) − qr + π̄v̄ + (1 − π̄)v̂1 − c̄ − ∆ + ε


Then, if v1 ≤ v 1 , π̂(c1 , l) ≤ −ε for all l ∈ [0, 1]. Moreover, if v1 ≥ v̂1 , π̂(v1 , l) ≥ −ε for all l ∈ [0, 1] -

condition A4*. Continuity of V2 implies that π̂(v1 , l) is a continuous function of v1 and l. Therefore,
R1
 0 g(l)π̂(v1 , l)dl is a continuous function of g(·) and v1 - condition A5. Moreover, by definition of

F (·) and G(·), noisy signal v1 has a finite expectation, E[v1 ] ∈ R - condition A6. Therefore, we can

rewrite proposition 2.2 in Morris and Shin (2003) for our environment:
                            R
Proposition Let v1∗ satisfy π̂(v1∗ , l)dl = 0. For any δ > 0, there exists a σ̄ > 0 such that for all

σ ≤ σ̄, if strategy a1 survives iterated elimination of dominated strategies, then a1 (v1 ) = 1 for all

v1 ≥ v1∗ + δ and a1 (v1 ) = 0 for all v1 ≤ v1∗ − δ.

    Q.E.D.



References

Arora, S., B. Boaz, M. Brunnermeier, and R. Ge (2009): “Computational Complexity and

  Information Asymmetry in Financial Products,” Working Paper, Princeton University, Depart-

  ment of Computer Science.

Ashcraft, A. and T. Schuermann (2008): “Understanding the securitization of subprime

  mortgage credit,” 2:3, 191–309.

Benoit, J. and V. Krishna (1985): “Finitely Repeated Games,” Econometrica, 53, 905–922.



                                                        54
Carlsson, H. and E. Van Damme (1993): “Global games and Equilibrium selection,” Econo-

  metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 989–1018.

Carter, S. and R. Sutch (2006): Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to

  the Present, Cambridge University Press.

Chari, V. V., A. Shourideh, and A. Zetlin-Jones (2009): “Moral Hazard, Reputation, and

  Fragility in Credit Markets,” Working Paper, University of Minnesota.

DeMarzo, P. (2005): “The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed intermedia-

  tion,” Review of Financial Studies, 18, 1.

DeMarzo, P. and D. Duffie (1999): “A liquidity-based model of security design,” Econometrica,

  67, 65–99.

Dewatripont, M. and J. Tirole (1994): The Prudential Regulation of Banks, MIT Press.

Diamond, D. (1989): “Reputation acquisition in debt markets,” The Journal of Political Economy,

  97, 828–862.

Downing, C., D. Jaffee, and N. Wallace (2009): “Is the Market for Mortgage-Backed Secu-

  rities a Market for Lemons?” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2257.

Drucker, S. and C. Mayer (2008): “Inside Information and Market Making in Secondary Mort-

  gage Markets,” Tech. rep., working paper, Renaissance Technologies LL3 and Duke University.

Ely, J., D. Fudenberg, and D. Levine (2008): “When is reputation bad?” Games and Eco-

  nomic Behavior, 63, 498–526.

Ely, J. and J. Välimäki (2003): “Bad Reputation*,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118,

  785–814.

Frankel, D., S. Morris, and A. Pauzner (2003): “Equilibrium selection in global games with

  strategic complementarities,” Journal of Economic Theory, 108, 1–44.

Garleanu, N. and L. Pedersen (2004): “Adverse selection and the required return,” Review

  of Financial Studies, 17, 643–665.


                                               55
Glosten, L. and P. Milgrom (1985): “Bid, ask and transaction prices in a market-maker market

  with heterogeneously informed traders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 71–100.

Holmstrom, B. and R. Myerson (1983): “Efficient and Durable Decision Rules with Asym-

  metric Information,” Econometrica, 51, 1799–1899.

Ivashina, V. and D. Scharfstein (2008): “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008,”

  Tech. rep., Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Kreps, D. and R. Wilson (1982): “Reputation and Imperfect Information,” Journal of Economic

  Theory, 27, 253–279.

Kyle, A. (1985): “Continuous auctions and insider trading,” Econometrica, 53, 1315–1335.

Mailath, G. and L. Samuelson (2001): “Who wants a good reputation?” The Review of

  Economic Studies, 68, 415–441.

Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1982): “Predation, Reputation, and Entry Deterrence,” Journal

  of Economics Theory, 27, 280–312.

Morris, S. and H. Shin (2003): “Global Games: Theory and Applications,” 1, 56–114.

Myers, S. and N. Majluf (1984): “Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms

  have informationthat investors do not have,” .

Ordoñez, G. (2008): “Fragility of Reputation and Clustering in Risk Taking,” Working Paper,

  University of California Los Angeles.

Philippon, T. and V. Skreta (2009): “Efficient Interventions in Markets with Adverse Selec-

  tion,” Working Paper, NYU.

White, E. N. (2009): “Lessons from the Great American Real Estate Boom and Bust of the

  1920s,” .




                                               56
