                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 UNDERSTANDING POLICY IN THE GREAT RECESSION:
                     SOME UNPLEASANT FISCAL ARITHMETIC

                                         John H. Cochrane

                                       Working Paper 16087
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16087


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




I thank Michael Woodford for helpful comments, and Francisco Vaquez-Grande for the surplus plot.
I acknowledge research support from CRSP. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Understanding Policy in the Great Recession: Some Unpleasant Fiscal Arithmetic
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 16087
June 2010
JEL No. E3,E31,E4,E5,E52,E6

                                             ABSTRACT

I use the valuation equation of government debt to understand fiscal and monetary policy in and following
the great recession of 2008-2009, to think about fiscal pressures on US inflation, and what sequence
of events might surround such an inflation. I emphasize that a fiscal inflation can come well before
large deficits or monetization are realized, and is likely to come with stagnation rather than a boom.


John H. Cochrane
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16087
1      Introduction
I oﬀer an interpretation of the macroeconomic events in the great recession of 2008-2009, and
the subsequent outlook, focused on the fiscal stance of the U. S. government and its link to
potential inflation. What happened? How did policies work? Are we headed for inflation or
deflation? Will the Fed be able to follow an “exit strategy?” Will large government deficits
lead to inflation? If so, what will that event look like?
   I base the analysis on two equilibrium conditions, some form of which hold in almost
every model of money and inflation: the valuation equation for nominal government debt
and a money demand equation,
                                          Z ∞
                         +                  Λ+
                                     =             (+ − + )               (1)
                                           =0 Λ
                         (  ·) =                                         (2)
where  is money,  is debt, Λ is a stochastic discount factor,  is tax revenue including
seigniorage, and  is government spending. Sargent and Wallace (1981) (also Sargent 1992)
used these two equations to analyze disinflation in the 1980s. I follow a similar path.
    Monetary economists studying the postwar U.S. typically do not pay much attention to
fiscal issues, feeling with some justification that fiscal issues are not a serious constraint to
monetary policy. But these are new times, with massive fiscal deficits, credit guarantees,
and Federal Reserve purchases of risky private assets. At some point (rises in  , declines in
 −  ) fiscal constraints must take hold. There is a limit to how much taxes a government
can raise, a top of a Laﬀer curve, a fiscal limit to monetary policy. At that point, inflation
must result, no matter how valiantly the central bank attempts to split government liabilities
between money and bonds. Long before that point, the government may choose to inflate
rather than further raise distorting taxes or reduce politically important spending. Argentina
has found these fiscal limits. So far, the U. S. has not, at least recently. But unfamiliarity
does not mean impossibility, the future may be diﬀerent from the recent past, and fiscal
constraints may change how monetary policy and inflation work.
    After a quick review of the theory underlying the fiscal equation, I analyze the current
situation, common forecasts, and policy debates. I make the following points:

    1. Why did a financial crisis lead to such a big recession? We understand how a surge in
       money demand, if not accommodated by the Fed, can lead to a decline in output. I
       argue that we saw something similar — a “flight to quality,” a surge in the demand for all
       government debt and away from goods, services and private debt. In the fiscal context
       of (1), this event corresponds to a decrease in the discount rate for government debt.
       Many of the Government’s policies can be understood as ways to accommodate this
       demand, which a conventional swap of money for government debt does not address.
       This story is in contrast to “lending channel” or “financial frictions” stories for the
       recession, essentially falls in aggregate supply.
    2. Winter 2009 saw the announcement of dramatic fiscal stimulus programs in the U. S., U.
       K., and many other countries, along with academic controversy over their eﬀectiveness.

                                                2
      (a) Will “fiscal stimulus” stimulate? In this analysis, deficits “stimulate” if and only
          if people do not expect future taxes to pay oﬀ the increased debt. Unlike conven-
          tional “Ricardian equivalence,” we do not need irrationality or market failure for
          this expectation, since our government debt is nominal.
      (b) Much stimulus debate revolves around the fact that fiscal expenditures cannot
          happen quickly. In this analysis, prospective deficits are just as “stimulative” as
          current deficits.

  3. With interest rates near zero, monetary policy turned to quantitative easing: large
     additional purchases of government debt. I show that quantitative easing cannot inflate
     without fiscal cooperation. If the government wants inflationary stimulus, it must
     somehow convince people that the government will not raise taxes or cut spending to
     pay oﬀ deficits. If people expect extra money to be soaked up by later taxes, they are
     happy simply to hold it.
  4. I examine the mechanisms and scenarios that could bring us inflation.

      (a) Can the Fed undo the massive money expansion with open market purchases, or
          will it be hard to sell trillions of additional Treasury bills? The fiscal analysis does
          not suggest substantial impediments. If quantitative easing makes little diﬀerence
          on the way up, it is easy to reverse on the way down. If inflation comes, then, it
          is more likely to result from the fiscal mechanism.
      (b) What will a fiscal inflation look like? I extend the simple fiscal equation (1) to long-
          term debt, and I analyze a stylized shock to expected surpluses. In a plausible
          scenario, long-term interest rates rise with the shock, but inflation only comes
          slowly after a few years.
      (c) Credit guarantees and nominal commitments to government employees make mat-
          ters worse than actual deficits suggest. On the other hand, they imply that a
          smaller inflation has a larger eﬀect on government finances.
      (d) If taxes have any eﬀect on growth, the ‘Laﬀer limit’ of taxation may come much
          sooner than static analysis suggests. The present value of taxes is strongly influ-
          enced by growth. The big inflation danger is a long period of slow growth.
      (e) Many commentators argue that fiscal inflation is remote, since the US debt/GDP
          ratio is still reasonable. Since prospective deficits matter in (1), I point out that
          debt/GDP ratios are not a good guide to fiscal safety.

  5. Last, but perhaps most important: Will a fiscal inflation come with a boom or stagfla-
     tion? I argue that the fiscal valuation equation acts as the “anchor” for monetary
     policy, or the “expectation” that shifts the Phillips curve. A fiscal inflation is there-
     fore likely to lead to the same stagflationary eﬀects as any loss of “anchoring.”

    I focus on equations (1) and (2) because they are common to a wide array of fully
fleshed-out models. It is also nice to see that we can begin to understand many events
in their relatively frictionless context. However, equations (1) and (2) are the beginning,

                                               3
not the end of analysis, and I do not mean to imply otherwise. In particular, monetary
models also include a description of dynamics, and price-stickiness or other mechanism that
sometimes translates inflation into real output, which I only touch on at the end of this essay.
Additional frictions, to consider stimulative eﬀects of tax or real debt-financed government
spending, and additional financial frictions can easily be added to this style of analysis.


2       Fiscal review

2.1     The government debt valuation equation
The government debt valuation equation1 states that the real value of nominal government
debt must equal the present value of future primary surpluses. In the simplest case that the
government issues floating-rate or overnight debt, it reads
                                     Z ∞       µ                  ¶
                       +              Λ+               +
                                =              + + +                           (3)
                                     =0 Λ                +
where  is money,  is government debt, Λ+ Λ is the real stochastic discount factor
between periods  and  +  ,  is the nominal interest rate and  =  −  denotes real
primary surpluses. The web appendix (Cochrane 2010) derives this and related equations.
In particular, it explains that we can also discount at the ex-post real rate of return on gov-
ernment debt, i.e. we may substitute 1+ for Λ+ Λ , which is useful for thinking about
discount-rate eﬀects more concretely. Seigniorage    is small for the U. S. economy,
and I will ignore it in most application and discussion.
    The description of price-level determination in (3) is not unusual or counterintuitive. If,
at the current price level, the real value of government debt is greater than expected future
surpluses, people try to get rid of that debt and purchase private assets and goods and
services instead. This is “aggregate demand” or a “wealth eﬀect of government debt.”
    Our most pressing question is, how might debt and deficits translate into inflation?
Equation (3) gives an unusual answer and a warning: Expected future deficits + cause
inflation today. Inflation need not wait for large deficits to materialize, for large debt to GDP
ratios to occur, for monetization of debt or for explicit seigniorage. As soon as people figure
out that there will be inflation in the future, they try to get rid of money and government
debt now.
    More specifically, the flow version of (3) says that the government prints money to redeem
maturing debt, and then soaks up that money with current surpluses and by issuing new
debt. If expected future surpluses decline, then people forecast future inflation, when those
deficits really are directly monetized. Nominal interest rates rise, and hence the government
raises less revenue from today’s debt sales. Now, the new money used to redeem maturing
debt today is no longer all soaked up by current surpluses or new debt sales. (Selling more
debt today won’t help, because that requires raising promised future surpluses.) Instead,
    1
   Many of the points in this section are treated at more length in Cochrane (1998), (2001), (2005). These
papers also contain bibliographic reviews, which more properly attribute credit for the ideas.

                                                    4
that money must chase goods and services. In this way, diﬃculties in rolling over short-term
debt in the face of higher interest rates are one of the first signs of a fiscal inflation driven
by expected future deficits, and a central mechanism by which future deficits induce current
inflation. A rise in the discount rate or risk premium for government debt can have the
same inflationary impact as bad news about future surpluses.
    One might well ask, “What surpluses?” as the U.S. has reported continual deficits for a
long time. However, equation (3) refers to primary surpluses, i.e. net of interest expense.
Figure 1 presents a simple estimate of the primary surplus, taken from the NIPA accounts,
and expressed as a percentage of GDP. In fact, positive primary surpluses are not rare.
From the end of the second world war until the early 1970s, the US typically ran primary
surpluses, and paid oﬀ much of the WWII debt in that way. 1973 and especially 1975
were years of really bad primary deficits, on the tail of a downward trend, and suggestively
coinciding with the outbreak of inflation. The “Reagan deficits” of the early 1980s don’t
show up much, especially controlling for the natural business cycle correlation, because much
of those deficits consisted of very high interest payments on a stock of outstanding debt. The
return to surpluses in the late 80s and the strong surpluses of the 1990s are familiar, and
suggestively correlated with the end of inflation. Our current situation resembles a cliﬀ,
motivating some of the concerns of this paper.
    Though suggestive, the association of primary surpluses with the emergence and end of
inflation in Figure 1 requires a subtle analysis. Equation (3) holds in every macroeconomic
model, both ex-ante and ex-post, so success in such matching is in some sense guaranteed,
especially once one takes into account the rate of return on government debt. In any worked-
out model, current surpluses are a bad indicator of the present value of future surpluses, as
governments raise debt (run deficits) by credibly promising higher future surpluses.

                                                   Real Primary Surplus / GDP

                                 6




                                 4




                                 2
                      Percent




                                 0




                                −2




                                −4




                                −6



                                     1950   1960   1970       1980              1990   2000   2010
                                                             Date




Figure 1: Real primary surplus/GDP. Primary surplus is current receipts - current expendi-
tures + interests expense, deflated with the GDP deflator. Source: NIPA.


                                                           5
2.2    Monetary and fiscal policy
To capture the idea that monetary policy can aﬀect the price level by the split of government
liabilities between money and debt, we also need a money demand function, that captures
the “special” nature of money,
                                ¡         ¢
                                   +   (  ·) =                              (4)
The notation (  ·) reminds us that many variables can aﬀect velocity as well as interest
rates; “precautionary” or “flight to quality” shifts in money demand. I include   because
money demand theories typically predict that inside money   (checking deposits) matter
as well as the monetary base, direct government liabilities  .
    Equations (3) and (4) each involve the price level. Thus, government must arrive at a
“coordinated policy” by which monetary and fiscal policy agree on that price level, a choice
of {     } (and controls on   ; or equivalent interest-rate policy) such that both (3)
and (4) hold. Successful monetary policy needs an appropriate fiscal backing; successful
fiscal expansion needs monetary cooperation.
    Conventional treatments of monetary policy specify that the taxing authorities will always
adjust surpluses + ex-post to validate any price level chosen by monetary authorities
through (4), thus assuming away any force for (3). We’re here to think about what happens
when (3) exerts more force on the price level. This may happen when debt, deficits and
distorting taxes become large, or by choice, when monetary regimes become passive.
    The government debt valuation equation (3) influences the price level in some unusual
ways, that contrast with many classic monetary doctrines. First, except for the small
seigniorage term (   ), there is no diﬀerence between money and bonds in (3), so open
market operations have no eﬀects on the price level. Second, only government money and
debt matter for the price level. People can generate arbitrary inside claims   with no
inflationary pressure, and the government need not control such claims — ban banknotes,
require reserves, etc. — in order to control the price level. In fact, the price level can remain
determined even at the frictionless limit, say with all transactions mediated by debit cards
on interest-paying funds,  = 0, or with money that pays market interest. Third, the
government can follow a real-bills doctrine: If the government issues money  or debt 
in exchange for assets of equal value, which can retire that debt in time, no inflation results.
The price level also remains determinate with an interest-rate peg, or other “passive money”
policies.
     We do not have to specify how monetary-fiscal coordination is achieved. We do not
have to make a choice or diagnosis of “regime.” We need not argue what is “exogenous” or
“endogenous.” In particular, analyzing equation (3) does not require us to assume that sur-
pluses are “exogenous” in any sense. Surpluses are always a choice, though one that involves
distorting taxes and politically diﬃcult spending decisions. Studying events conditional on
such decisions does not assume that those decisions do not exist. We are never “choosing
which equation holds.” Both (3) and (4) hold in every equilibrium or regime. Our question
is, how? Even one thinks the Fed is in charge of the price level through (4), and Congress and
the Treasury pledge to respond with the appropriate surpluses in (3), it’s useful to examine
that implicit fiscal backing to see if it is vaguely plausible that it will or can be provided.

                                               6
2.3     Sargent, Wallace, seigniorage and nominal debt
My analysis of (3) and (4) diﬀers from Sargent and Wallace’s (1982) and many other joint
fiscal-monetary analyses, in that I explicitly consider nominal government debt — debt is
only a promise to pay U.S. dollars.
    To see the importance of nominal vs. real debt, we can rewrite (3) (see the Appendix) as
                               Z ∞       µ                       ¶
                                  Λ+                  +
                         =               + − + +                              (5)
                               =0 Λ                    +

counting seigniorage by money creation rather than interest savings. With real debt, this
equation reads                Z ∞       µ                     ¶
                                   Λ+                +
                       =             + − + +                             (6)
                                =0 Λ                  +
where  denotes the real amount of debt, which does not change if the price level changes.
   Sargent and Wallace, examining (6), argued that looming + − + problems would
have to be met by seigniorage, + + . That money creation, through +  (·) =
+ + would create inflation at time  +  . Finally, that future inflation could be brought
back to the present time  by hyperinflation dynamics   [ (  )] =   .
    With nominal debt, as in (5), inadequate future + − + can raise the current price
level  directly. This rise lowers the outstanding value of nominal government debt, reestab-
lishing equation (5). This channel is absent with real debt. (State-contingent debt or an
explicit default can also accomplish such a revaluation, but Sargent and Wallace sensibly
assumed that the U.S. government would inflate rather than explicitly default.)
    Most commentators assume that inflation can only come after money creation, whether
induced by seigniorage needs or by policy mistakes. In fact, with nominal debt, not only can
inflation come before the seigniorage, as pointed out by Sargent and Wallace, it can come
without any current or past money creation2 at all,  = 0 in (5). A fiscal or “flight from
the dollar” inflation can occur based directly on expectations of future fiscal trouble.
    Nominal debt works like equity: its price can absorb shocks to expected future cashflows,
and its price reflects expectations of future events. Real debt works like debt, which must
be repaid or explicitly default. There is sense in the view that exchange rates and inflation
reflect “confidence” in the government, output, productivity and fiscal prospects, all having
nothing to do with central banks’ arrangement of the maturity and liquidity structure of
government debt.
    2
      A clarification:  here refers to money, held despite an interest cost. In a frictionless model, inflation
still comes from “monetization,” in the sense that the government prints money to pay oﬀ debt, larger than is
soaked up by taxes and debt sales if the price level is too low. This extra money then puts upward pressure on
prices. In the frictionless limit, this happens instantaneously, and nobody holds any dominated-rate-of-return
debt overnight, so there is no seignorage.




                                                       7
2.4    Long term debt and inflation dynamics
Equation (3) describes the simple case of floating-rate or overnight debt. The dynamic
relationship between debt, surpluses and inflation can be quite diﬀerent with long-term
debt. These diﬀerences are important to understand, in order to apply these ideas to the U.
S. economy. In particular, they suggest that a fiscal inflation will not consist of price-level
jumps, and fiscal price determination does not mean that the price level must display the
volatility and unpredictability of stock prices. Instead, fiscal inflation will likely consist of a
smooth increase in inflation presaged by higher long-term interest rates.
   As an extreme but simple example, suppose that debt consists of a single perpetuity:
A constant coupon  is redeemed each period, with no other debt purchases or sales and
no money. In this case, the price level is the ratio of the nominal coupon coming due each
period to the real surpluses that can redeem it,
                                            
                                              =                                     (7)
                                           
In this case, inflation only happens when the actual poor surpluses + are realized, and not
in anticipation of those surpluses as in (3) or (5).
   With long-term debt, the present-value equation (3) still holds, in the form
                             R ∞ () ()         Z ∞
                                  
                              =0                    Λ+
                           =                =             +               (8)
                                               =0 Λ
                                              R ∞ () ()
(again, simplifying to no money), where  = =0    denotes the market value of
                               ()
nominal government debt,           denotes maturity  debt and
                                                 µ          ¶
                                          ()       Λ+ 
                                         = 
                                                    Λ +
denotes the nominal price at  of -year debt. With long -term debt, the market value of
debt as well as the price level can absorb expected-surplus shocks. In the extreme perpetuity
example (7), bad news about a future surplus + raises only the future price level + .
                                         ()
Future inflation lowers bond prices  , so bond prices in the numerator of (8) do all the
adjusting at  rather than time-t prices  in the dominator. In general, both eﬀects will
occur.
    With long-term debt, the government can also trade current for future inflation, holding
fixed the surplus stream, by selling additional long-term debt. This new debt dilutes the
claims of existing long-term debt, giving the government some resources to avoid current
inflation. However, by increasing the stock of long-term debt it makes the eventual inflation
worse. By contrast, with floating-rate or overnight debt, the government can still freely
choose the future price level {+ }, with no change in surpluses, by changing + . Changing
nominal debt without changing surpluses is the same thing as a currency reform. However,
this action does not aﬀect the current price level  , as you can see in (3).
   The maturity structure of outstanding long-term debt gives the “budget constraint” to
the government’s options for trading inflation today for inflation at future dates by such

                                                 8
surplus-neutral debt sales and purchases. This statement is easiest to digest in the case of
a constant real rate so Λ = − Λ . Then (8) reads
                       Z ∞ µ          ¶               Z ∞
                                  1      − ()
                                         =         − +                 (9)
                        =0     +                    =0

By buying and selling debt at date  and later, after  + is revealed, the government
can achieve any sequence  (1+ ), consistent with this equation, without making any
                                                                             ()
changes in surpluses. The more long-term debt outstanding — the greater  relative to
  (0)
 — the better the tradeoﬀ. (For a proof, see Cochrane 2001 p. 88).


2.5     An inflation scenario
How will inflation react to a negative shock in expected surpluses? This is our central
question. To answer this question, we have to measure the maturity structure of outstanding
debt, and take a stand on how the government will attempt to smooth inflation via debt
sales, as follows.
    If the U.S. only had overnight or floating-rate debt, the answer would be simple: A
sudden change in expectations about the present value of future surpluses implies a jump
in the price level  , by (3). The government can choose any path { (1+ )} after that,
by appropriately choosing the path of nominal debt, and it might well choose no additional
inflation. However, long-term debt allows the government to avoid price-level jumps. Price-
level jumps are not desirable either, and that may be a good reason why our government
issues long-term debt.
   Suppose that the economy starts at a steady-state price level  , and there is a single
expected-surplus shock ∆ at date ,
                                             Z ∞
                          ∆ ≡ ( − −∆ )     − +  
                                                      =0

With long-term debt from (9), the subsequent price level paths {+ } must satisfy
                          Z ∞       µ         ¶
                                −    1    1     ()
                                         −       = ∆ 
                           =0        + 

We can rewrite this condition in a convenient dimensionless form as
                             Z ∞Ã 1 − 1!
                                     +       ()    ∆
                                          1      =                                  (10)
                               =0        
                                                          

where
                                                        ()
                                     ()          − 
                                         ≡ R∞             ()
                                             =0
                                                   −  
denotes the fraction of the market value of debt due to maturity-j debt.

                                              9
    Holding the path of surpluses constant, the government can still choose any path {+ }
                                                               ()
consistent with (10). With outstanding long-term debt   0, the government can trade
less inflation now  for more inflation later + . To display the response to a surplus shock,
then, we have to take a stance on which path the government will choose. Our government
seems to prefer steady inflation to highly variable inflation or price level jumps, and for good
reasons. To get a sense of the possibilities, I suppose the government holds inflation to zero
for T years, and then allows a constant inflation  ,

                                  + =  ;   
                                  + =   (−) ;  ≥ 

To find the required inflation  for a given surplus shock ∆ , we must have
                            Z ∞ µ                 ¶
                                        1            ()   ∆
                                       (− )
                                               − 1   =                                 (11)
                             =                          

II suppose a 10% negative shock to the present value of expected surpluses, ∆ = −10%.
                                                                   ()
I form an estimate of the maturity structure of outstanding debt  . Then, for each  , I
find the value of   that solves equation (11).
                                            ()
    To estimate the maturity structure  , I use every bond, bill, or note in the CRSP
mbx database on Jan 31, 2009. I assign coupons to the month in which they come due,
     ()
so  includes both principal and coupon payments coming due at time  + . This is a
very crude measure: I do not include Federal Reserve liabilities, nor oﬀsetting government or
Federal Reserve assets. I do not include credit guarantees, nor the nominal value of unused
depreciation allowances and other nominal commitments. I do not include nominally-sticky
salaries and pension or health benefits of government workers. However, this is a useful
starting place. It lets us begin to think about how much of a long-term debt cushion the
U.S. government has, and thus how quickly surplus shocks must feed in to inflation.
    Figure 2 plots three possibilities. First, I plot (red triangles) a one-time 11% price-level
jump. This is the solution with no long-term debt, and it remains available in the presence
of long-term debt; it is a solution of (10).
   Next, I plot (blue circles) a steady 2.75% inflation starting immediately (   = 0).
This is a much more plausible path. To arrange it, the government sells long-term debt to
meet the surplus shock. This inflation path soon brings about higher future price levels than
the one-time jump, which is how it still satisfies (10).
    Finally, I plot (black triangles) a postponed inflation. Here, the government sells even
more long term debt immediately, so as to have no inflation at all for four years. In the fifth
year, it allows the necessary inflation to emerge. Since there isn’t that much long-term debt
outstanding at this maturity, the resulting inflation and cumulative price-level increases are
also much larger.
    Again, the government can choose which one of these paths to follow, with no diﬀerence
in surpluses, by its long-term debt operations. Which one will our government choose?
Certainly not the price level jump. The delayed-inflation scenario seems plausible to me.


                                                  10
                                                             Three Inflation Paths
                             12

                             10

                              8             ← 10% s shock




                   Percent
                              6

                              4

                              2

                             0
                             2007   2008   2009    2010        2011          2012     2013   2014   2015   2016
                                                                      Date

                                                            Three Price Level Paths
                             30

                             25

                             20             ← 10% s shock
                   Percent




                             15

                             10

                              5

                             0
                             2007   2008   2009    2010        2011          2012     2013   2014   2015   2016
                                                                      Date




Figure 2: RThree possible reactions to a 10% expected surpluse shock ∆ =
              ∞
( − −∆ )  =0 − +  . Red triangles display a time-t price level jump followed by
no additional inflation. Blue circles display a steady inflation starting at time t Black tri-
angles display a steady inflation starting 4 years after the shock. The choices are calibrated
to an estimate of the US Federal debt maturity structure.

(Of course, one could try to estimate this behavior, or solve an optimal inflation-smoothing
exercise after adding some frictions, but either is a lengthy exercise.)
    To further bring the postponed-inflation possibility to life, Figure 3 plots the correspond-
ing time series of inflation and bond yields. The vertical line indicates the date of the surplus
shock. First, long term bond yields rise. As the inflation approaches, shorter term rates rise
as well. Finally, 5 years after the surplus shock, the steady inflation actually materializes.


    When you think of fiscal inflation, then, think at least of this possibility, not a price-level
jump. The “news” here is a collective decision by investors that the US is likely not to
solve its long-term deficit problems, or a rise in the discount rate applied to U.S. debt. Such
“news” is seldom independently visible. Thus, we are likely first to see a puzzling rise in long-
term interest rates. Shorter rates will follow, and steady inflation will follow that, on a on a
time scale roughly coincident with the average maturity of government debt. The longer the
government puts oﬀ the inevitable inflation, the larger the cumulative price increase must be.
Price stickiness or other frictions can further smooth inflation. In section 16 below, I consider
the output consequences of this inflation path in a standard New-Keynesian model. Since
the inflation is expected, the inflationary episode corresponds to low output, to “stagflation”
or an adverse Phillips curve shift, not to a boom or movement along that curve.
   In sum, long-term debt changes the dynamics substantially. However, the simple floating-

                                                                   11
                                                              Bond yield reaction
                          12



                                         ← s shock
                          10
                                               20


                                               10
                           8



                                               5
                  Yield


                           6
                                               4

                                                                                Inflation
                           4
                                               3          2        1




                           2




                          0
                          2007   2008   2009       2010        2011           2012      2013   2014   2015   2016
                                                                       Date




Figure 3: Bond yields and inflation, from a 10% shock to expected surpluses ∆, when the
government sells debt to postpone inflation for 5 years. Numbers indicate the maturity of
the bond yields. The vertical line indicates the date of the surplus shock. I assume a 2%
constant real rate.

rate case remains a useful guide, if we remember to apply it on a scale of several years, and
I will do that in the following discussion.


3    The great recession, and “more of both” policy
With this conceptual framework in mind, we can examine the events of the great recession,
try to understand policy actions, and speculate about the future.
   The first issue is, why was there such a large fall in output? For once in macroeconomics
we actually know exactly what the shock was — there was a “run” in the shadow banking
system (See for example Gorton and Metrick, 2009b, or Duﬃe, 2010). But how did this
shock propagate to such a large recession?
    We have long understood that a sharp precautionary increase in money demand, if not
met by money supply, would lead to a decline in aggregate demand. With price-stickiness
or dispersed information, a decline in aggregate demand can express itself as a decline in real
output rather than a decline in the price level. This is in essence Friedman and Schwartz’s
explanation for the great depression. However, this story cannot credibly apply to the 2008-
2009 recession. The Federal Reserve flooded the country with money (reserves). There is no
evidence for a flight to money at the expense of government bonds. There was no run on
commercial banks as in the great depression; in fact bank deposits increased substantially.


                                                                   12
    There is instead evidence for a broader “flight to quality,” a flight to all government debt
at the expense of private debt and goods and services. In the fiscal analysis of (3), this is
a decline in the discount rate for government debt, which lowers aggregate demand. We
also can interpret many actions by the US and other governments as eﬀorts to exchange
government debt for private debt to satisfy that demand, as Friedman and Schwartz would
have had them exchange government debt for money.
    This analysis may seem conservative; it rehabilitates a view of the recession close to a
standard monetary one, based on a notion of “aggregate demand” with real eﬀects, rather
than focusing on a “lending channel” or other credit frictions. However, it is also novel,
since demand and supply of all government debt take center stage, not demand and supply
for money.


3.1    Money supply and demand
To evaluate money supply and demand, Figure 4 shows the behavior of the Federal Funds
and 3 month Treasury bill rates. Figure 5 presents M1, currency and deposits, and Figure
6 describes Federal Reserve assets and liabilities
                                                      Federal Funds and T bill Rates
                                 5
                                                                                                 3 Month T Bill
                                                                                                 Federal funds
                                4.5                                                              Target


                                 4


                                3.5


                                 3
                      Percent




                                2.5


                                 2


                                1.5


                                 1


                                0.5


                                 0

                                      Jan08   Apr08     Jul08         Oct08            Jan09   Apr09          Jul09




                  Figure 4: Federal Funds and 3 month Treasury bill rates

    As the financial crisis took oﬀ in the third week of September 2008, the Federal reserve
swiftly cut the Federal Funds target to a range between 0 and 25 bp, and signaled it would
leave interest rates there for a long time (Figure 4). Inflation declined, never turned to
deflation so real rates on these assets remained near zero. M1, currency and deposits,
standard measures of money all increased substantially, shown in Figure 5. M1 rose $250b,
currency rose $100b and deposits spiked to $200b and leveled oﬀ about $120b. In percentage
terms, currency rose 15% and M1 rose 20%, all despite a fall in GDP. The expansion of

                                                                13
                                    Dollar increase in money from Jan 07                                                           Percent increase in money from Jan 07
               300
                         M1                                                                                               M1
                         Currency                                                                                20       Currency
                         Deposits                                                                                         GDP

               250


                                                                                                                 15
               200



                                                                                                                 10
   $ Billion




                                                                                                       Percent
               150




               100                                                                                                5




                50
                                                                                                                  0


                 0

                                                                                                                 −5
                     Jan08    Apr08                  Jul08   Oct08   Jan09   Apr09   Jul09                            Jan08     Apr08      Jul08      Oct08      Jan09     Apr09   Jul09




                                                                             Figure 5: Money stock
                                                                                      Federal Reserve Assets


                                                      2

                                                                                                                        TALF, CP,
                                                     1.5                                                                Lending, etc.
                                       $,Trillions




                                                      1
                                                                                                                        Foreign                    Mbs

                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                        Treasuries
                                                      0
                                                             Jan08       Apr08       Jul08          Oct08               Jan09            Apr09           Jul09


                                                                                     Federal Reserve Liabilities
                                                                                                                        Other
                                                      2
                                                                                                                        Reserves
                                                     1.5
                                       $,Trillions




                                                                                                                        Treasury
                                                      1


                                                     0.5                                                                Currency

                                                      0
                                                             Jan08       Apr08       Jul08          Oct08               Jan09            Apr09           Jul09




Figure 6: Federal reserve assets and liablilities. Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 release, June
25, 2009.

the Fed’s balance sheet in Figure 6 is the most dramatic. Excess reserves rose from $6b
to $800b. While it’s hard to disprove anything in economics, it certainly seems an uphill
battle to argue that the recession resulted from a failure by the Fed to accommodate shifts
in money demand.


                                                                                             14
3.2    More of both; aggregate demand
Conventional monetary policy only trades money for government debt. It considers demand
for more money and less government debt, and policy that controls this split. The events of
the great recession suggest a large increase in demand for both money and government debt.
All government bond interest rates declined sharply. Dramatic credit spreads opened. For
example, high rated tax-free municipal bonds (including those issued by universities such as
Harvard and Chicago) sold above treasuries. A large liquidity spread opened up between
on-the-run and oﬀ-the-run government issues. The dollar rose, putting a dramatic end to
the “carry trade.”
   Figure 7 presents some of this evidence. You can see the rise in credit and term spreads.
Baa and Aaa rates rise, while the 3 month Treasury Bill rate declines; it was below the
Federal funds rate and even briefly negative as shown in Figure 4 ; 3 month nonfinancial
commercial paper does not change much but financial paper rises sharply. The Fed’s major
currencies index rose from 74.1 on Sept 22, to 82.0 on Nov. 3, a 10.6% rise, while the stock
market was crashing.
    Quantities are harder to document than prices but reports were dramatic of markets that
“froze up” — issuers were unwilling to suﬀer these rates. And this is all despite strong eﬀorts
by the Fed. These events suggest a “flight to quality” or “flight to liquidity” from private
assets to U. S. debt of all maturities.
                                                   Interest Rates
                     10


                      9


                      8


                      7     BAA


                      6
                            AAA

                      5


                      4     10 y govt


                      3     3 mo CP


                      2     FF
                            3 mo govt

                      1


                      0
                          Aug08         Sep08   Oct08           Nov08   Dec08   Jan09




Figure 7: Interest rates. Moody’s BAA and AAA; 10 year Treasury constant maturity and
3 month Treasury bill; 3 month nonfinancial and financial commercial paper

   As one micro motivation for the flight, government bonds became practically the only
security one could easily repo. (Gorton and Metrick 2009). In normal times, if you own a
corporate bond or a mortgage-backed security, you can sell it in a repurchase agreement or use

                                                        15
it as collateral for a loan, thus financing the bond purchase. In the Fall of 2008, suddenly the
collateral requirements increased dramatically. A government bond was as good as a dollar
to a large, cash-strapped financial institution, because if you had a government bond, you
could borrow a dollar.
    The combination of near-zero government rates and reserves paying interest, means that
the distinction between government bonds and money (reserves) was a third-order issue for
financial institutions, especially compared to the very high interest rates, lack of collateral-
izability, and illiquidity of any instrument that carried a whiﬀ of credit risk. If they wanted
more of either, they wanted more of both.
    In short, something like the “special” or “liquidity” services we usually associate with
money applied to all government debt for these central actors. Those services were related
to liquidity, transparency on balance sheets, acceptability as collateral, and absolute security
of nominal repayment, rather than the acceptability as means of payment in transactions
that we usually emphasize in money-demand theories.
     (·) =   does not allow us to address a “flight to quality” of this this sort. We
can understand it in the fiscal framework, however, since that framework treats  and 
symmetrically. A sudden demand for government debt, with no (good) news about surpluses,
means that people are willing to hold that debt despite dramatically lower rates of return.
(Analogously, a sudden precautionary increase in money demand means people are willing
to hold money despite an increase in the interest rate, i.e. a lower relative rate of return for
money holding.) In our fiscal framework,
                                            Z ∞
                               +                1
                                      =                +                           (12)
                                            =0 +

a lower discount rate + raises the right hand side, and lowers aggregate demand on the
left. People want to hold more  and , while holding less private debt and less goods and
services.
   (For the moment, I will not be specific about the mechanism by which a decline in
“aggregate demand” corresponds to a decline in output vs. prices. I’ll look at the simple
monetary and fiscal equations, think about inflationary and deflationary scenarios, and allow
some of that pressure to be reflected in output rather than prices. I return to this question
below.)
    This analysis can apply more generally. First, it gives a new sense of the “reserve cur-
rency” nature of the dollar. In “flight to quality” episodes, people seem to flock to U.S.
debt, sending down long-term interest rates. The “reserve” aspect of the dollar is that for-
eign central banks and other institutions hold a lot of U.S. debt, much of it long-term, and
use this as backing for their own currencies. Arguably, the U.S. has financed a good deal of
trade surplus by this one-time rise in U.S. debt holdings by foreigners, much as a government
might benefit from seigniorage resulting from wider adoption of its currency. All of these
observations apply to debt as well as money, not to U.S. currency; the extra demand is
for U.S. government liabilities not dollar-denominated assets. Equation (12), with a low risk
premium applied to all U.S. government debt makes sense of these observations; a special de-
mand for U.S. currency or dollar-denominated private deposits, a version of  ( ·) =  

                                              16
does not.
    Second, this mechanism for fluctuations in “aggregate demand” may apply more generally
over time. Fluctuations in “aggregate demand” are somewhat mysterious, and fluctuations
in demand for U. S. government debt do not easily line up with reasonable expectations
of future surpluses. But accounting for the history of U. S. stock prices by news about
expected dividends has been an even more catastrophic failure. The asset pricing literature
has concluded that time-varying discount rates account for essentially all stock market price
fluctuations. Perhaps we can similarly account for “aggregate demand” fluctuations by
changes in the discount rate for government debt rather than (or as well as) changes in
expectations of future surpluses. People fly to quality quite generally in recessions.
   This view predicts that a variance decomposition of (12) will find that volatility in the
value of government debt on the left will largely correspond to volatility in expected returns
on the right rather than volatility in expected cashflows, just as Campbell and Shiller (1988),
Cochrane (1992, 2008) and many others find for stocks, and even more analogously, as
Gourinchas and Rey (2007) find for sovereign debt.


3.3    Accommodation and stimulus
We can understand many actions of the Treasury and Fed as attempts to accommodate the
demand for government debt vs. private debt as well as by accommodating the demand for
money relative to bonds.

Open-market debt operations
   The Fed ran “open-market debt operations,” exchanging private debt for government debt
without changing the monetary base. As shown in Figure 6, between 2007 and September
2008, Treasuries and agency debt decline as a fraction of Fed assets (top graph), while the
overall size of the Fed’s balance sheet does not change much. From Jan 3 2007 to Sept. 3
2008, for example, Fed holdings of Treasury securities declined from $779b to $480b while
overall assets only increased from $911b to $946b. The Fed provided the private sector
about $300b of Treasury debt in exchange for corresponding private debt.
    The “Treasury” item in Federal Reserve liabilities, the bottom graph in Figure 6 rep-
resents a similar operation. The rapid rise here represents the Treasury Supplementary
Financing Account. The Treasury sold additional debt and parked the proceeds with the
Fed. Starting with $4b on Sept. 9 2008, the total Treasury account hit a peak of $621b on
Nov. 11 and was $502b on Dec. 12. The Fed turned around and lent this money or bought
assets3 . On net, the government issued Treasury debt in exchange for private debt.
   How might an “open-market debt operation”; a switch of private for government debt
without changing , “stimulate” the economy? Let  denote private debt owned by the
  3
    Lending and asset purchases are in many cases the same. Lending money creates private debt as an
asset on the Fed’s balance sheet.




                                                17
government. Our fiscal equation becomes
                                           Z   ∞
                        +  −                         1
                                    =                              +               (13)
                                           =0   + ( +  ·)
I write ( +  ·) to capture the above idea that people are sometimes willing to hold
government debt despite a low rate of return; the same “quality” premium discussed above.
(Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgenson (2008) give evidence for a Treasury-debt liquidity
demand of this sort.)
    Thus, by increasing the supply of Government debt, the discount rate  rises (or the
increased quantity oﬀsets the deflationary eﬀects of the flight to quality, captured in the ·
terms). Aggregate demand increases, even if government holdings of private debt  oﬀset
greater government debt, so  −  is unchanged, even if money  is unchanged, and even
if there is no surplus news so  is unchanged.

Guarantees
    The government also guaranteed large amounts of private debt, including Fannie and
Freddie, guarantees of TARP bank credit, and guarantees of new securitized debt. The
implicit guarantees of much larger amounts of debt — the widespread perception that no
large financial institution will be allowed to fail — add to this list. To the extent that the
private sector has a liquidity demand for debt with the government’s credit rating, at the
expense of debt which does not carry that guarantee, issuing such guarantees is the same
thing as explicitly issuing Treasury debt in exchange for private debt.

Interest on reserves
    The Fed has also started paying interest on reserves. Reserves that pay interest are
government debt. By creating such reserves the Fed can rapidly expand the supply of short-
term, floating rate debt, without needing any cooperation from the Treasury or a rise in the
Congressional debt limit. It also can execute massive open-market operations at the stroke
of a pen. With a trillion dollars of excess reserves, changing the interest on reserves from 0
to the overnight rate is exactly the same thing as a trillion-dollar open-market operation.

Balance sheet expansion
    In the second phase of accommodation, starting in September 2008, the Fed rapidly
expanded its balance sheet. For the Fed, this means printing money (creating reserves) to
buy assets rather than just exchanging private for Treasury assets. In conventional open-
market operations, we would have seen Treasury debt in Fed assets rise in tandem with the
rise in reserves. Strikingly, the Fed took pains not to increase its holdings of Treasury debt,
and to leave such debt in private hands. Fed holdings of Treasury debt stay low through the
winter of 2009. The Fed funded the entire near-doubling of its liabilities by buying private
assets instead. We can think of this as a nearly $1trillion conventional monetary expansion
coupled with a $1trillion “open-market debt operation.”
   The government also increased the supply of government debt overall. Not only is + −
 rearranged, it’s much larger by the $1.5 trillion fiscal deficit. This might represent fiscal

                                               18
stimulus, described next, but even if + rises enough that there is no such fiscal stimulus,
this action can be seen as helping to accommodate the large demand for government debt.
    In sum, in this analysis, we can read the government’s actions as a much-modified version
of Friedman and Schwartz’s advice for the great depression. In that event, the Fed failed
to accommodate a demand for money at the expense of government debt. In this one, the
government recognized and partially accommodated a massive demand for both money and
government debt, at the expense of private debt.

The Fed view
    This is not how the Fed thinks about its policy actions, at least as I interpret Fed
statements. The first stage, trading private for government debt without increasing money,
was, to the Fed, a way to support private credit markets without the inflationary eﬀect that
increasing  might have had. The Fed wanted to stimulate in a noninflationary way, an
idea beyond my simple analysis.
    Similar thinking lies beyond the Fed’s asset purchases. Starting in October 2008, the Fed
started buying commercial paper, reaching $300b within a month. In early 2009, it started
buying mortgage-backed securities, both directly and via agencies (the thin blue wedge in the
top graph), and it started on an aggressive program of buying long-term treasuries, which
you can see in the rise of the “treasury” component of Figure 6.
    As I read Fed statements, the Fed was trying to attack interest rate spreads in these
individual markets, not just to supply more government debt. The Fed sees somewhat
“segmented” markets with liquidity premia higher than it thinks are appropriate, and it
thinks that it can reduce the premiums in individual markets by buying securities in those
markets. It hoped to do so by small purchases, or through the act of trading — by becoming
the uninformed “noise trader” that liquefies finance models. In the event, it often ended
up being almost the whole market for new issues, a position that makes aﬀecting prices
somewhat easier.
    Whether the Fed was successful in aﬀecting individual premiums in this way is an inter-
esting question. Taylor (2009b) argues not, Ashcraft, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2010) argue
yes. The opposite possibility is that the spreads on these assets represent credit risk and
credit risk premiums; that the markets are not as segmented or liquidity-constrained as the
Fed thinks, so that the Fed’s purchases can do little to lower spreads for very long.
    In turn, as I read Fed statements, these actions will “stimulate” by reducing interest
rates faced by borrowers, also constrained to specific markets. Lower interest rates raise
“demand,” which in the first instance raises output and later leads to inflation by Phillips
curve logic. This channel also requires frictions absent in my analysis.
    Some of the issue is reminiscent of old debates in the analysis of monetary policy. When
the Fed exchanges money for bonds, does it lower interest rates and raise aggregate demand
by aﬀecting the supply of money, or by aﬀecting the supply of bonds? Conventional monetary
economics takes the former view. The issue here is similar: when the Fed trades government
debt for private debt, does this action aﬀect rates and the economy by changing the supply
of that particular form of private debt, or does it do so by changing the supply of government

                                             19
debt? Is the channel to overall demand via the interest rate on a particular form of private
debt, or via the overall demand for government debt? Perhaps some of both; at a minimum
my point is that the latter channel exists.


4     Fiscal - monetary stimulus
Fiscal stimulus
   The U. S. government has also been engaged in a large “fiscal stimulus” designed to raise
aggregate demand, with multi-trillion dollar deficits projected to last many years. From the
view of most macroeconomic theory, the level of government spending and deficit finance
matter, not the part labeled “stimulus,” nor the nature of the spending, which dominate
public debate. Will these deficits actually “stimulate” as promised?
    The fiscal valuation equation
                                               Z   ∞
                                +                    1
                                       =                      +                      (14)
                                               =0   +

oﬀers a twist on the standard view of this issue: If additional debt  +  corresponds
to expectations of higher future taxes or lower spending, it has no “stimulative” eﬀect.
(Again, I leave the nominal/real split for later.) If, however, additional debt corresponds
to expectations that future surpluses will not be raised, then indeed the the debt issue can
raise aggregate demand.
    This sounds like fairly standard “Ricardian equivalence” analysis. However, standard
Ricardian equivalence presumes that the government issues real debt, always corresponding
to higher expected future surpluses, so that some irrationality, market incompleteness or
market failure is needed for any stimulative eﬀect. Here, we realize that the government
issues nominal debt. It can be perfectly rational for people to expect that the government
does not plan to raise future surpluses, but that it plans instead to monetize debt when the
debt comes due. And when they expect debt to be inflated away in the future, they try to
dump it today.
    I am abstracting here from distorting taxes, financial frictions, output composition ef-
fects, and the price-stickiness and multiple equilibria of New-Keynesian models, all of which
potentially have important eﬀects on the analysis of fiscal stimulus.. For example, Uhlig
(2010) emphasizes distorting taxes; Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2010) get large
Ricardian (tax-financed are the same as deficit-financed) multipliers out of a New-Keynesian
model with zero interest rates. My goal is only to analyze what  =   and (14) have
to say about the issue before one adds other considerations, not to deny other channels or
try to have a last word on an 80 year old debate.

Will spending come too late?
    Many critics objected that fiscal stimulus won’t stimulate in time, because the spending
will come too late, after the recession is over. This reflects the standard analysis, enshrined in

                                               20
undergraduate textbooks since the 1970s, that fiscal policy, aﬀects “demand” as it is spent.
Equation (14) suggests the opposite conclusion. In order to get stimulus (inflation) now,
future deficits (+ for large  ) are just as eﬀective as current deficits, and possibly more so.
What matters is to communicate eﬀectively how that future deficits will be large, unlikely
ever to be paid oﬀ with surpluses.

Expectations.
    A fiscal stimulus/inflation is harder than it sounds. Government debt sales are delib-
erately set up to engender expectations that the debt will be paid oﬀ. Most of the time,
governments do not sell debt to inflate; they sell debt to raise real resources that they can
use for temporary expenditures like wars. If a debt sale comes with no change in expected
future surpluses, it only raises interest rates and the price level. It raises no real revenue,
and does not raise the real value of outstanding debt. Governments are usually very careful
to communicate that this is not the case.
    As an extreme contrast, consider a currency reform in which the government redeems the
old currency and issues new currency with three zeros missing. This operation is exactly a
debt rollover in which  = −∆ 1 000, with no change in future surpluses, and no revenue.
A currency reform is designed to communicate expectations that real surpluses will not
change, precisely so that it will move the price level the next day and will not generate any
revenue. The only diﬀerence between a currency reform and a debt sale is the expectations
of future surpluses that each communicates.
   Since the institution of a government debt sale is designed to convey the expectation
that deficits will eventually be paid oﬀ, engendering the opposite expectations may be quite
diﬃcult. Everyone is used to meaningless long-term budget projections, especially in the U.
S.
    Currency reforms also have no output eﬀects. Whatever price-stickiness, information
asymmetry, or coordination problem gives rise to some temporary output rise from inflation,
that mechanism is completely absent when the government undertakes a currency reform.
Thus, the job for fiscal stimulus, in this analysis, is to sell debt while communicating that
future surpluses will not rise — so that there will be some stimulus — but to do so in such a
way that exploits whatever price stickiness or information asymmetry generates an output
eﬀect, which a currency will not do. Considering our knowledge about the precise mechanism
of the Phillips curve, this is a challenging task.

Quantitative easing; Helicopters; Joint Monetary/Fiscal policy; Japan.
   Fiscal stimulus came oﬀ the bookshelf in part because of the widespread view that mon-
etary policy can do no more once interest rates hit zero.
    When interest rates hit zero, the Fed can still pursue “quantitative easing.” It can continue
to buy Treasury or other debt, or lend directly, and thereby increase the money supply, even
if these actions no longer aﬀect short-term rates. People who think in terms of monetary
aggregates rather than interest rates have advocated such easing. The Bank of England
explicitly engaged in a quantitative easing program, and many commentators view the U. S.
reserve expansion in this light.

                                                21
    But in our framework, it’s hard to see how quantitative easing can have any eﬀect. The
Fed can increase reserves  and decrease , but nobody cares if it does so. Agents are
happy to trade perfect substitutes at will. Velocity  will simply absorbs any further changes.
The argument must rest on the idea that  is fixed, but why should the relative demand
for perfect substitutes be fixed? (With interest on reserves, the same logic applies even at
nonzero interest rates, and one would expect the argument to hold as an approximation at
small positive rates.)
    What about a “helicopter drop?” Wouldn’t this increase money  and inflate? A heli-
copter drop is at heart a fiscal operation. To implement a drop in the U. S., the Treasury
would borrow money, issuing more debt. It would spend the money as a government trans-
fer. Then the Federal Reserve would buy the debt, so that the money supply increased. A
real drop of real cash from real helicopters would be recorded as a transfer payment, a fiscal
operation. Conversely, even a helicopter drop would not be “stimulative” if everyone knew
that the money would be soaked up the next day in higher taxes, or by the Fed, i.e. by
future taxes.
    Thus, Milton Friedman’s helicopters have nothing really to do with money. They are
instead a brilliant device to dramatically communicate that this cash does not correspond to
higher future fiscal surpluses; that this money will be left out in public hands as in a currency
reform. To be eﬀective, a monetary expansion at near zero rates must be accompanied by a
non-Ricardian fiscal expansion as well. People must understand that the new debt or money
does not just correspond to higher future surpluses.
    The last time these issues came up was Japanese monetary and fiscal policy in the 1990s,
to escape its long period of stagnation, low inflation and near-zero interest rates. Quantitative
easing and huge fiscal deficits were all tried, and did not lead to inflation or much “stimulus.”
Why not? The answer must be that people were simply not convinced that the government
would fail to pay oﬀ its debts. Critics of the Japanese government essentially point out their
statements sounded pretty lukewarm about commitment to the inflationary project, perhaps
wisely.
    In sum, what matters, especially in an environment of near-zero rates, is the expectation
of future deficits and surpluses. If you cannot persuade people that future surpluses will be
absent, then exchanges of money for debt have no eﬀect, and increases in money or debt have
no eﬀect. If you can convince people that these are lower than the real value of outstanding
debt, then you can get inflation and, perhaps, some real stimulation along the way. But
in that event, whether you drop money or treasury bills from the helicopter makes little
diﬀerence.

Identification
    This analysis implies that historical evaluation of fiscal multipliers suﬀers a (an addi-
tional) deep identification problem. What were expectations in previous events? If people
expected eventual inflation, i.e. that the debt would not be paid oﬀ, we should see increased
aggregate demand, and we would be able to measure the presence or absence of associated
real stimulus. That experience would not inform us about the eﬀects of a stimulus package
that did come with a commitment not to inflate and therefore the expectation that future

                                               22
tax revenues would rise.
    Expectations whether debt will be paid or inflated can vary considerably with the circum-
stances of the event. Wars are quite diﬀerent from recession-fighting stimulus packages, and
those are diﬀerent from large promised social and retirement programs. Furthermore, stimu-
lus packages come with diﬀerent fiscal backgrounds. For example, Chile, with a large positive
net asset position, is likely to face diﬀerent expectations about long-run fiscal solvency of a
large stimulus plan than are Italy or Greece, with larger outstanding debt.



4.1    What are expectations?
With this perspective in mind, what are expectations of future surpluses and deficits?

Government announcements
    On one hand, we can take the Government’s dramatic deficit projections surrounding the
stimulus bill in January and February 2009 as loud announcements “you’d better spend the
money now, because we’re sure not raising taxes or cutting spending enough to soak it up.”
And long-term budget projections remain bleak. On March 20 2009 OMB director Peter
Orszag was quoted to say “Over the medium to long term, the nation is on an unsustainable
fiscal course.” “Unsustainable” literally means that the right hand side of the fiscal equation
is lower than the left. The normally staid Congressional Budget Oﬃce’s (2009) Long Term
Budget Update echoes the sentiment: “Over the long term ... the budget remains on an
unsustainable path,” complete with graphs of exponentially exploding debt.
    On the other hand, the main problem in long-term budget projections are Social Security
and medical entitlements. We’ve known that these programs are on an unsustainable course
for years. This was not news during the winter of 2009. Markets had long had a reasonable
expectation that sooner or later the government would get around to doing something about
them. Furthermore, by spring 2009, the tone of government statements had changed com-
pletely from “stimulus” to concern over long-term budget deficits and a desire to lower them,
not commit to them. OMB director Orszag’s March 20 2009 “unsustainable” comment was
followed quickly by “to be responsible, we must begin the process of fiscal reform now.” It
was delivered at a “Fiscal Responsibility Summit.”
    Most of the Administration’s defense of fiscal stimulus (for example, Bernstein and Romer
2009) cites simple Keynesian flow multipliers from 1960s-vintage ISLM models, not the
sort of fiscal-monetary inflation I have described as “stimulus.” And by May, even these
statements gave way to worries about fiscal sustainability that can be read as dramatically
negative multipliers. For example, the Council of Economic Advisers’ (2009) health policy
analysis states that “slowing the growth rate of health care costs will prevent disastrous
increases in the Federal budget deficit” and will raise the level of GDP by 8%, permanently.
By the winter of 2009-2010 the word “stimulus” disappeared from the Administration’s
lexicon. Arguments for “jobs” and mortgage-relief legislation made no mention of increasing
the deficit, but were defended as microeconomic interventions that would help even if tax-
supported. Chairman Bernanke’s June 3 (2009b) testimony worries about long-term deficits,

                                              23
and thus whether the fiscal backing to contain rather than to produce inflation will be present.
   Furthermore, Chairman Bernanke and the other Federal Reserve Governors are loudly
saying the Fed can and will control inflation. Whether the Fed will be able to do so is another
question, but at least we hear determination to fight and win any game of chicken with the
Treasury. Secretary Geithner went out of his way to assure the Chinese that the dollar will
not be inflated (Cha 2009).
    In sum, government statements do not paint a clear picture. This may reflect an under-
standable indecision on the part of the government facing a Catch-22: In this analysis, the
only way to “stimulate” is to commit forcefully and credibly to an unsustainable fiscal path,
so that people will try to get rid of their government debt including money, and in so doing
drive up demand for goods, services, and real assets. But such an action trades stimulus
today for great financial and economic diﬃculty when deficits and inflation arrive.

Measuring Ricardian expectations
    Ideally, none of this would matter. The bond market should let us measure private ex-
pectations. If the government sells additional debt and the private sector does not believe
that debt will correspond to additional surpluses, then the real value of debt remains con-
stant, the government raises no real revenue from the debt sale, and interest rates rise with
inflation expectations. We know that interest rates and inflation have stayed low, and the
government has raised trillions of dollars of revenue from its debt sales, and the real value
of debt has risen dramatically. These facts suggest that for now, people believe that larger
debt and near-term deficits are matched by expectations of longer-term surpluses. This
observation also means that there hasn’t been much fiscal-monetary stimulus as yet.
   This analysis is clouded a bit by long-term debt. With outstanding long-term debt, the
government can raise revenue from sales of long-term debt, diluting the outstanding long-
term debt, as explained in Section 2.4. However, our government is raising revenue from
short term debt sales, and the Fed actively purchased long-term debt, in an attempt to
lower, not raise, interest rates.
    More plausibly, we have to remember that economics is never easy because supply and
demand both move. Long-term rates may reflect a good deal of flight-to-quality premium —
lower  in the face of lower , as argued above. We know that the expectations model of
the term structure is a poor empirical fit. Thus, it’s not immediately easy to read inflation
expectations from the yield curve, nor to measure how much “stimulus” bond sales drove up
nominal interest rates over what they would otherwise be. Other inflation indicators — the
price of gold, for example — are rising steeply




                                              24
5     Inflation or deflation?

5.1    Money and inflation
Is a large inflation on the way? When the time comes to reverse course, will the Fed be
willing to do so? More troubling, will the Fed be able to do so, or will we discover the fiscal
limits to monetary policy? Will mounting fiscal deficits instead force the Fed to monetize
even more debt? Will we in fact see a fiscal inflation without current monetization, but based
on a flight from the dollar, a fear of future monetization, as (3) describes?
    Opinions through 2009 were certainly mixed. Paul Krugman (2009) argues that “Defla-
tion, not inflation, is the clear and present danger.” Fed oﬃcials have given many comforting
speeches on their “exit strategy.” But Niall Ferguson (2009) Martin Feldstein (2009) and
Anna Schwartz (Satow 2009) think inflation is on its way. Arthur Laﬀer (2009) thinks some-
thing like hyperinflation is on the way. These debates continue, with reports of a heated
discussion within the Federal Reserve (Hilsenrath 2010).

MV = PY
    Some inflation hawks simply look at the vast amount of reserves and the smaller but
substantial increase in M1 and currency, and infer that inflation must follow. Some of
these observers, I think, are echoing a view that in   =   , velocity is stable, but
“long and variable lags” transmit money to inflation, so that past money must imply future
inflation no
           Pmatter what the Fed does subsequently. (Something like the “St. Louis equation”
  =  ∞  =0  − )

   In my view, this is simplistic: We now know that velocity does shift, especially at near-
zero rates, and that today’s money need not mean tomorrow’s inflation if the Fed soaks that
money up fast enough. What the Fed giveth, the Fed can taketh away.
    For example, Laﬀer (2009) thinks M1 is the right aggregate; he worries that the huge
expansion in reserves means more M1 expansion to come. Moreover, he worries that this
process will then be diﬃcult to reverse. If the Fed tries to soak up reserves, he thinks it
will require a massive contraction in bank lending in order to reduce the relevant 1, which
will require a sharp recession that the Fed will not be willing to countenance. In the dove’s
view, we are still in a “liquidity trap” so the extra reserves aren’t going anywhere in the first
place.
    I argued above that banks are just as happy to hold reserves as to hold government
bonds. Their lending activity is disconnected from their reserve holdings. The fact that
reserves now pay interest dramatically changes our interpretation of the data. Reserves that
pay market interest are debt, not money. Finally, one can argue how diﬃcult it will be
for the Fed in fact to soak up aggregates even if the latter do expand. With ample excess
reserves, and much interest-bearing bank financing, there is no necessary connection between
the amount of bank lending or overall credit and the stock of any monetary aggregate. A
cashless economy will still have lots of loans.



                                               25
The Fed’s balance sheet
    Feldstein (2009) points out that the Fed no longer has much Treasury debt, as you can
see in Figure 6. If it wants to soak up reserves, it may be very hard to sell all the illiquid,
long-dated and risky private securities that the Fed has accumulated, and impossible to
sell direct loans. Feldstein writes “..the commercial banks may not want to exchange their
reserves for the mountain of private debt that the Fed is holding and the Fed lacks enough
Treasury bonds with which to conduct ordinary open market operations..”
    I do not think this is much of a constraint—or rather it’s an internal political constraint
not a fundamental economic constraint. There is nothing that stops the Fed and Treasury
together from simply issuing new Treasury debt to soak up the trillion dollars or so of
reserves, even if the Fed has nothing left on its balance sheet. The Treasury can issue new
debt, and simply deposit the proceeds with the Fed, as it already did; the Fed need only
abstain from lending them out again. Furthermore, by raising the interest rate on reserves,
the Fed can essentially create debt and execute an open-market operation with the stroke of
a pen.

Will and ideas
    Many inflation hawks really have in mind political rather than economic constraints,
which my analysis has little to say about. They question whether the Fed will have the will
or political ability to start soaking up reserves or raising short-term interest rates quickly
enough. The “credit crunch” and “financial crisis” were over by mid 2009 — short-term debt
spreads returned if not to normal, at least to functioning levels. The “flight to quality” is
fading as well, and long-term rates rebounded. Yet we will still be in a serious recession for
some time. Commercial real estate, state debt, and some pension funds are still in trouble.
Mortgage foreclosures are continuing. Unemployment will be high for some time. Many
financial institutions will still be on the edge, and many of them make a lot of money by
borrowing low and short and lending long. To the extent that the Fed’s asset purchases
lowered specific rates in commercial paper, mortgage and other markets, now there are
constituencies who can plead for specific support.
    Constraints imposed by ideas and information are a more subtle route to inflation. This
path constitutes the conventional analysis of inflation in the 1970s (For example, see Sargent
1999 and Samuelson 2008). Will the Fed’s “potential GDP” estimates, as in the 1970s,
suggest large and illusory “gaps” remaining to be filled? Will the Fed interpret house and
stock prices below their peaks as “asset price deflation” that counteracts goods and services
inflation? Will the Fed continue to believe that expectations are “anchored” until they
no longer are, when it is too late? The Fed seems focused on “managing expectations” by
announcements rather than direct open market operations in order to control inflation. Will
it continue too long to trust in that ability?

Fiscal constraints on a monetary exit
     I conclude that no substantial monetary or economic problems stop the government from
soaking up whatever assets constitute the  in  =   and removing monetary stimulus,
if it wants to do so and if it can suﬀer the higher short-term interest rates that this action

                                              26
may provoke. The remaining question is fiscal backing — whether the government will be
able to undo monetary expansion.
      For the next several years, the Treasury will still be selling trillions of additional debt
to finance deficits. If investors and the Treasury are also trying to sell, can the Fed sell
additional trillions as well? For example, Laﬀer (2009) writes “If the Fed were to reduce the
monetary base by $1 trillion, it would need to sell a net $1 trillion in bonds. This would put
the Fed in direct competition with Treasury’s planned issuance of about $2 trillion worth of
bonds over the coming 12 months. Failed auctions would become the norm and bond prices
would tumble, reflecting a massive oversupply of government bonds.” By (3), or better (13),
this is false. Prospective investors in new government debt were already holding currency
or reserves, which are just a diﬀerent maturity of government debt. It takes almost no
additional fiscal resources to unwind a reserve or currency expansion. (“Almost” because of
the potentially higher interest cost of non-monetary debt, but seigniorage is tiny; 1% of $1
trillion dollars is $10 billion.) Additional resources, new debt issues matched by higher future
surpluses, are important to a government that needs foreign reserves, gold reserves, etc. in
order to unwind a monetary expansion, but not to a government that wants to unwind an
expansion of domestic reserves.
  I conclude that the U. S. has both the ability and fiscal capacity to rapidly unwind its
monetary expansion, should the government choose to do so.


5.2    Fiscal inflation
A fiscal inflation, the consequence of current and future deficits, are therefore, in this analysis,
a greater inflation danger than monetary policy and the existence of an “exit strategy.”
    Reading the commentators, I think there is in fact widespread agreement on this danger,
just diverging opinion as to its probability. Even Krugman (2009) admits “others claim
that budget deficits will eventually force the U.S. government to inflate away its debt...”
The possibility is that the U. S. will “ drive up prices so that the real value of the debt is
reduced. Such things have happened in the past. For example, France ultimately inflated
away much of the debt it incurred while fighting World War I.” The danger is well described
by (3); he just doesn’t think it will happen.
    How exactly does this work, what are the warning signs? Here again, I think looking at
(3) clarifies some issues and points out some common traps.

Debt/GDP ratios and future deficits
   Krugman and other inflation doves assure us that the U. S. debt/GDP ratio is below
that of many other countries, and our own past experience. The CBO analysis in Elmendorf
(2009), for example, shows our current debt/GDP at 40%, and projected to rise to 60%
during the current recession. This is small compared to the 110% debt/GDP ratio at the
end of WWII, and the ratios over 100% that several European countries and Japan now
experience.
   The long-term U. S. budget outlook is much more bleak. It is unusual that even the

                                                27
CBO’s 10 year forecast does not show steady deficit reduction. However, the long-term
“unsustainable” trends are driven by social security and health expenditures, not recession-
fighting stimulus, and even under the CBO’s more plausible “alternative fiscal scenario” we
only reach 100% of GDP in about 2022 and 200% of GDP in 2035. What’s to worry about?
    Most of all, the fiscal equation (3) does not point to a “sustainable” debt/GDP ratio
— say 100% — and “everything will be fine until you cross this point.” Equation (3) says
that you get inflation now as soon as people think that future debt/GDP ratios will grow
uncontrollably, i.e. the left hand side is greater than the right. If anyone believed the CBO’s
long-term forecasts, inflation would have already happened. People expect that eventually
the government will do something about Social Security, Medicare and entitlements. Other
countries have experienced exchange rate collapses — meaning, their governments were unable
to pledge enough real resources to borrow foreign exchange reserves — with much lower
than 100% current debt/GDP ratios, when markets saw unsustainable prospective deficits.
Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo’s (2001) analysis of the 1997 Asian currency crashes are
a good example, and the international literature finds that current debt/GPD ratios are
generally not a good forecast of currency crashes or their absence. Conversely, even very
large debt is possible if people understand there is a plan to pay it oﬀ. The U.S. could
borrow 120% of GDP at the end of WWII because everyone understood war expenditures
were temporary, we won the war, and that huge deficits would end once that temporary
exigency passed. Finally, the fact that other countries have greater debt could only mean
that they we will all experience inflation.
    GDP is not even a very good divisor. U. S. Federal tax revenues are about 15% of GDP,
so a 60% debt/GDP ratio is a 400% debt/revenue ratio. Comparing debt to GDP only
makes sense across countries with comparable tax systems. To harvest European taxes, the
U.S. would have to institute a national VAT, which will hardly be painless. To put the
observation another way, we can ask what changes in tax rates under the current U.S. tax
system would eliminate forecasted deficits. Congressional Budget Oﬃce Director Peter Orzag
(2008) did this, concluding that the lowest bracket would have to rise from 10 percent to 25
percent; the 25-percent bracket would have rise to 63 percent; and the top rate would have to
rise from 35 percent to 88 percent, before considering any eﬀort or evasion eﬀects. Including
such eﬀects, the needed tax revenues are beyond the top of the Laﬀer curve: “Such tax rates
would significantly reduce economic activity and would create serious problems with tax
avoidance and tax evasion. Revenues would probably fall significantly short of the amount
needed to finance the growth of spending; therefore, tax rates at such levels would not be
feasible.”
    Bond rating agencies use other ratios as well. Graham (2010) reports that Moody’s may
downgrade US government debt from AAA status as soon as 2013, based on CBO projections
that interest will climb to 20% of revenue. Interest expense/revenue is not a sure sign of
fiscal trouble or security as well, but can point in a quite diﬀerent direction from current
debt/GDP.

Crowding out
   Much discussion of the dangers of deficits focuses on the flow of spending, and its potential

                                              28
eﬀect on interest rates through a “crowding out” mechanism; higher deficits compete for
savings. The fact that international debt markets are huge and there is little historical
association between deficits and interest rates has always argued against this mechanism.
    In any case, nothing like this mechanism is mirrored in the fiscal equation (3). One can
have high inflation with no current deficits at all, if expected future deficits are high. The
size of U.S. debt relative to international markets is irrelevant; what matters is the size of
U. S. debt relative to the U. S. ability to run surpluses. Long-term nominal rates do not
rise because flow deficits crowd out private investment. They simply reflect expected future
inflation and a risk premium for government debt.

Seigniorage, monetization, “chicken.”
    Most writing about the dangers of deficits focuses on the idea that the Fed will have to
monetize deficits, this action will raise the money stock, and only then will inflation break
out. Equation (3) emphasizes that we can have inflation now when people expect future
monetization. We do not have to wait for seigniorage. There doesn’t even have to be any
seigniorage.
    Now,  ( ·) =   reminds us that even a fiscal inflation has to be accommodated by
monetary authorities. If  in the fiscal equation rises, but the Fed adamantly refuses to raise
, we have an “uncoordinated policy.” One side must give way in a “game of chicken.” The
Fed gives way automatically when it follows an interest rate target or otherwise passively
adjusts money in response to liquidity needs, as it has been explicitly and aggressively doing
for the past year. Whether it can prevail in a serious fiscal exigency is an interesting and
open question. Would the Fed refuse to monetize if the U.S. ran in to very high interest rates
when trying to roll over debt? Or would it quickly give in, as the ECB did in purchasing
junk-rated Greek bonds?

The picture
   In sum, the fiscal valuation equation
                                                Z   ∞
                             +  −                     1
                                         =                       +  
                                                  =0   +
and experience of past fiscally-induced collapses paints a far diﬀerent picture of a fiscal
inflation than in most commentator’s scenarios. This equation looks (and is) a lot like
the valuation equation for a stock. Hence, a fiscal inflation may well look like a stock
market collapse. The tipping point, where investors change expectations of long-term future
surpluses , valuations of government-held assets , or require larger real risk premiums
 to hold them, can come quickly and unpredictably, without necessarily large current
debt/GDP, large current deficits, large current monetization; without strong “demand” and
small “gaps.” It can come as a surprise to a Federal Reserve and to economists unused to
thinking about fiscal limits to monetary policy. Since the long present value results from
rolling over short-term debt, diﬃculties in that roll over may be one of the first signs.
   Where is the fiscal limit? I don’t know. But there is a fiscal limit, and wherever it is,
we are a few trillion dollars closer to it than we were last year, and we will be another few

                                              29
trillion dollars closer next year. The next two considerations suggest it is closer than we
think.


5.3     Credit guarantees, nominal commitments, and the fiscal limit
If oﬃcial debt-to-GDP ratios are “only” headed to 100% or so, there is still a lot of oﬀ-the-
books nominal debt. Define-benefit pensions, unused nominal depreciation allowances, and
even nominally-sticky government salaries are all forms of nominal debt.
    The U.S. government has made very large credit guarantees. The government has explic-
itly guaranteed Fannie and Freddie debt and underlying mortgages, the TARP banks debt,
student loans, and many others. Implicit guarantees are potentially as large or larger. Fed
Chairman Ben Bernanke4 has pretty much guaranteed that no large financial firm will fail.
Immense bailouts loom of state and local governments, defined-benefit pension plans, and
foreign sovereign debt either directly or via the IMF. For example, Rauh and Novy-Marx
(2009) estimate that state pension obligations are underfunded by $3.23 trillion, dwarfing
the states’ publicly traded debt of $0.94 trillion. The Federal Government is unlikely to let
states or their pensions default.
    Credit guarantees have two eﬀects. First, and most obviously, having to make good on
these guarantees on top of large budget deficits can be the piece of bad news that kicks
expectations over the fiscal limit. Second, nominal credit guarantees and other nominal
or poorly indexed commitments, mean that government finances are much better if there
is inflation. Higher nominal real estate prices will surely make the government’s mortgage
and banking guarantees much easier to fulfill. We can treat these guarantees as additional
nominal debt, or we can count the flows, and recognize that surpluses are not independent
of the price level. In this treatment, our equation is really
                                            Z ∞
                               +             Λ+
                                       =            + (+ )
                                            =0 Λ

with 0 ( )  0. For example, Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2006) find that the Korean
devaluation helped government finances largely by lowering the real value of nominal wages
paid to government workers, rather than devaluing domestically-denominated nominal debt
— the mechanism was ( ) not  . More deeply, guarantees are options with a nonlinear
payoﬀ, making deflation much worse than inflation is helpful for government finances.
    This consideration means that a smaller inflation can solve a larger budget problem, since
a rise in  makes the right side larger as well as the left side smaller. Put another way, the
U.S. problem, large prospective deficits with a relatively small stock of outstanding debt,
would otherwise put us in a real fiscal pickle, since we can’t devalue debt we haven’t issued
yet. Even an infinite price level — a default of all outstanding US debt, cutting future interest
payments to zero — is not enough to pay for the CBO’s projections of Social Security and
   4
     See Bernanke (2009a), and in particular, “..government assistance to avoid the failures of major financial
institutions has been necessary to avoid a further serious destabilization of the financial system, and our
commitment to avoiding such a failure remains firm.”



                                                      30
Medicare deficits. On the other hand, the fact that real surpluses increase with inflation
makes it much more likely that the government will choose inflation rather than explicit
spending cuts. Again, one should not think of surpluses as exogenous in this fiscal analysis.
Really we should think of the Government’s decision to inflate, trading oﬀ distorting taxes,
useful or politically popular spending, and the distortions caused by inflation, and the ability
to place blame elsewhere in making this decision.


5.4       The dynamic Laﬀer curve and the fiscal limit
The point at which higher taxation simply cannot raise any more revenue — the top of the
“Laﬀer curve” — is one fiscal limit5 . Since present values matter, small eﬀects of tax rates on
growth can put us at the fiscal limit much sooner than static analysis suggests. Thus, a high
marginal tax and interventionist policy which stunts growth can be particularly dangerous
for setting oﬀ a fiscal inflation.
   We are used to thinking of the static Laﬀer curve, in which tax revenue  is generated
by a tax rate   from income  as
                                                 (  ) =    
The marginal revenue generated from an increase in taxes is
                                           log        log 
                                                    =1+
                                           log        log  
The second term is negative — higher taxes lower output (and, more so, reported income),
so the elasticity of tax revenues with respect to tax rates is less than one. The top of the
Laﬀer curve is where the elasticity is equal to zero, so higher tax rates raise no revenue.
    Many economists think the U.S. is comfortably below that point. For example, a rise
in the tax rate from  = 030 to  = 035 is a 15% (log(035030) = 015) increase, so it
would have to result in a 15% decline in taxable output before it generates no additional
revenue. (Yes, this calculation is too simple. The point is to contrast this calculation with
the dynamic calculation below, not to assess realistically the U.S. tax system. Trabandt
and Uhlig (2009) oﬀer a detailed Laﬀer calculation with fixed productivity growth and no
migration, yielding the result that the US is substantially below the Laﬀer limit.) More
people voiced concern that the UK’s recent move to a 50% marginal rate plus VAT put it
above the top, especially since high-wealth people can leave. When tax rates are already
high, the same percentage point tax rate rise is a smaller percentage (log) rise, so smaller
output eﬀects of each percentage point tax rise are necessary to oﬀset the tax rate increase.
   The present value of future tax revenues is what matters for the fiscal valuation equation,
however. For a simple calculation, suppose growth of taxable income is steady at rate  and
the interest rate is a constant . Then, the present value of future tax revenues is
                                      Z ∞
                                            1                
                                 =       
                                                     =
                                       =0                  −
  5
      See Piergallini and Rodano (2009) for a model of the Laﬀer limit in fiscal theory.

                                                        31
Taking the same derivative,
                            log        log      1     
                                     =1+         +
                             log        log     −   log 
We see there is an additional term, which is also negative.
   Since  −  is a small number, small growth eﬀects can have a big impact on the fiscal
limit. For example, if  −  = 002, then  log  = −002 puts us at the fiscal limit
immediately. Thus, if a rise in  from 30% to 35% only implies a 002 × 015 = 03%
reduction in long term growth, then we’re at the fiscal limit already, disregarding the flow
eﬀect  log   log  entirely.
    I do not digress here to the economics by which marginal tax rates lower the level or
growth rate of output. The disincentive eﬀects of working, saving or investing, and the in-
centives for tax evasion, are widely discussed. Migration of high-wealth people and businesses
is perhaps even more important, especially to small countries: Even if growth per capita is
not aﬀected by distorting taxes, fewer capitas mean less tax revenue. Growth theory points
to accumulation of knowledge as the main driver of long run per-capita growth rates, but I
don’t want to stop here to model how distorting taxes interfere with that process, nor tie
the calculation to one particular such model.


6    Phillips curves—Will inflation “stimulate?”
The point of stimulus is not to inflate, of course, but to boost output in the short run. Many
economists argue that a little inflation isn’t such a bad thing in the current circumstance,
as they argued for deliberate inflation in Japan in the 1990s. For example, Greg Mankiw
and Ken Rogoﬀ are quoted in Miller (2009) as being in favor of inflation, on Phillips curve
grounds to raise output as well as to bail out borrowers at the expense of nominal debt
holders.
     I have not described a particular mechanism for output eﬀects, in part because both the
theory and experience of Phillips curves under fiscal inflations is unexplored territory. But
it is worth remembering that not all inflations come with output booms either in theory or in
practical experience. There is no guarantee that inflation will “stimulate” the real economy.
Inflation with real stagnation is a possibility too.

Experience
   We have many precedents against a rigid Phillips curve in traditional monetary analyses
and historical experience. Of course we all understand that currency reforms (exchanging
old currency for new, with fewer zeros, or moving to the Euro) change the price level with
no output eﬀects at all.
   The 1970s had inflation with recession or stagnation. This experience is captured in two
ideas: “aggregate supply” shifted adversely, and inflation expectations rose, or its “anchor-
ing” disappeared, shifting the Phillips curve up and to the right. As a visual reminder of

                                             32
how weak even the Phillips curve correlation is, Figures 8 and 9 present a history of U.S.
inflation and unemployment, broken up into two subperiods for visual clarity.
                                                                                  Inflation and unemployment, 1966−1984
                                     14




                                     12                                                          80
                                                                                                            81        75


                                     10
                                                                                                                                82
                                                                                            79
                                      8
                         Inflation
                                                                                                                 76
                                                                                            71    78
                                      6                 70                                                  77

                                                 69                          74                                   84
                                                                                                                                                  83
                                      4               6867
                                                                                           72

                                                                        73
                                      2
                                                         66


                                      0
                                          3             4               5                   6          7          8                  9       10        11
                                                                                                  Unemployment




                   Figure 8: CPI inflation and unemployment, 1966-1984


                                                                                  Inflation and unemployment, 1984−2009
                                      6

                                                                                                 91
                                     5.5


                                      5                                                                                    84

                                                                        89
                                     4.5                                90                             86   85
                                                                              88

                                      4                                                                     92
                         Inflation




                                                                                                      87
                                     3.5                                                                    93


                                      3                                      96                       94
                                                                             95
                                                       07                     02
                                     2.5        01                  97
                                                              08
                                                 99    98          05
                                           00           06
                                      2                                           03

                                                                                                                 09
                                     1.5

                                                                              04
                                      1
                                           4                  5                        6               7               8                 9             10
                                                                                                  Unemployment




                   Figure 9: CPI inflation and unemployment, 1984-2009

    The larger history of fiscal inflations and currency collapses does not inspire hope that
a fiscal inflation always results in prosperity. The hyperinflations that follow wars (Sargent
1992), Latin American fiscal collapses, currency crashes, or the recent hyperinflation in
Zimbabwe were associated with sharp declines in economic conditions, not the spectacular
booms that a simple Phillips curve might predict.
    This wider experience is worth considering. Most economists view the postwar U. S.
experience as one that comes from a regime in which the fiscal constraint was not important.
If we run in to fiscal constraints, however, our future will not be drawn from this same

                                                                                                      33
experience. If that happens, we may find that a comfortable idea of booms associated with
inflations will vanish once again.

Fiscal anchor. Fiscal stagflation? Explicit models.
    In any monetary-fiscal analysis, the fiscal equation (3) is a central part of the “anchoring”
of inflation expectations necessary for successful monetary policy. Monetary policy needs
fiscal backing. This insight suggests that a fiscal inflation is likely to correspond to a “Phillips
curve shift,” which would lead to stagflation, not inflation with a boom. A fiscal inflation
may also correspond to poor output through an “aggregate supply shift;” Governments resort
to distorting taxes before they “default” through inflation.
  To give one quantitative assessment of a fiscal inflation’s output eﬀects, I use a textbook
New-Keynesian model, for example see Woodford (2003),

                                          =  +1 −                                              (15)
                                           =   +1 +                                           (16)
                                          =  +   +1                                            (17)

where each symbol represents deviations from a steady state. ( is output,  is the real rate,
 is inflation, and  is the nominal rate. The second equation is the New-Keynesian Phillips
curve.) Given the response of inflation to a shock, and in particular a choice of one of the
inflation scenarios in Figure 3, we can simply compute the corresponding paths for output,
and real and nominal interest rate responses to the shock, { }  { } and { }, from (16),
(15) and (17) in turn. We can regard the interest rate path as a calculation of what interest
rate policy was required to lead to the inflation outcome6 .
    Figure 10 gives the results. In response to a time-zero surplus present value shock, I
specify a path for inflation similar to that in the delayed-inflation scenario of Figure 3, but
with rounded corners to avoid otherwise large movements in output and real and nominal
interest rates. (The latter are essentially first and second derivatives of inflation in (15)-(17).)
   The major news of Figure 10 is that output declines through the entire inflation episode.
This is stagflation, not a boom; a march of the Phillips curve up and to the right as in
the 1970s. The reason is transparent: The inflation is all expected; expected inflation rises
before actual inflation. The forward-looking Phillips curve   =   +1 +  implies lower
output;   +1 is a “Phillips curve shift.”
    Real interest rates decline in the stagflation, and rise again when output recovers. The
nominal rate is a simple sum of expected inflation and the real rate. (Again, the solution is
the same if we regard the nominal rate as the policy lever, debt sales as the instrument, and
inflation as the result.) Since the nominal rate falls with output growth and then rises in
the recovery, the overall rise in nominal rate is greater than the rise in inflation. An observer
might well conclude that the Fed is properly following a “Taylor rule” with interest rates
   6
     With “active” fiscal policy of the form (3) we do not have to specify policy as a function of endogenous
variables in the form of a Taylor rule; the equilibrium is the same given the eventual value of the interest
rate whether that interest rate varies with oﬀ-equilibrium values of endogenous variables or not. An “active”
fiscal policy solves the global indeterminacy problems of New Keynesian models, see Cochrane (2007).


                                                     34
                                               Response to delayed inflation
                              14



                              12



                              10



                               8                      i
                                                               π
                    percent



                               6



                               4



                               2                                           r


                               0
                                                                           y
                              −2
                                   0   2   4          6             8          10   12   14
                                                           time




Figure 10: Output and real and nominal rates in a “delayed inflation” scenario. I assume
the path of inflation. Given that path, I calcuate output , the real rate  and the nominal
rate  respectively, using   =  +1 +  ;  =  +1 −  ;  =  +   +1 respectively.
I use  = 098  = 1,  = 1. These expressions represent deviations from a steady state. I
plot   and  around steady-state values 1% 2%, and 3% respectively for clarity.

declining in the recession, rising faster than inflation, and rising with rising output growth.
Yet a mysterious inflation coming from “loss of anchoring” bedeviled its eﬀorts. In a sense,
that is exactly what happened.
   Of course, there are many diﬀerent versions of the Phillips curve, with slightly diﬀerent
timing. But expected inflation is a “shift” in almost all of them, so this scenario, of a widely
anticipated inflation, is unlikely to give much of an output boom in any model.
    In this scenario, the government delayed and smoothed inflation from a surplus shock
at time zero, accepting a larger eventual increase in the price level. This analysis points to
an apparent further cost of delay. A time-zero price level jump is unexpected, and could
be followed by a return to zero inflation; that path would lead to more output. However,
such a policy would also lead to an equal number of negative innovations, and more output
instability in general.
    One may rightly object that this simple marriage of a fiscal equation to a three equation
New-Keynesian model needs a lot more theoretical elaboration and empirical evaluation
before predicting anything. In particular, it’s hard with this simple Phillips curve to account
for the severity of the output drop in the recession. Yes, the recession is unexpected while
this scenario studies an expected inflation, but the 2008 decline in inflation is modest. A
view that people expected a quick return of inflation is unlikely. One needs either a diﬀerent
and more realistic Phillips curve, as is common in the empirical literature, or to add shocks.

                                                          35
More deeply, we need to understand better the operation of this “active fiscal, passive money”
regime (using Leeper’s 1991 terminology) of models with explicit price-stickiness.
    Finally, it is not clear that all fiscal inflations will have the same output eﬀects. In the
fiscal context,                                  Z ∞
                                 +                    1
                                           =                 +  
                                                  =0 +
                                                                                   ()
inflation can follow from issuing more money  or debt  (or long-term debt  ) without
changes in surpluses; from shocks to prospective deficits + , causing a flight from debt, or
from a rise in the risk premium + . It’s not at all obvious that each of these changes
is accompanied by a boom or by the same boom. We have some sense that unexpectedly
printing up a lot of money — a fiscal helicopter drop — might give a short-term output boost,
especially if it were done as a surprise. However, the experience of fiscal inflations caused by
current and prospective deficits — currency collapses — is not comforting.

Standard views
   Here I part company with most of the inflation/deflation commentators and the Federal
Reserve. All of them link inflation tightly to increased “demand” and hence tighter markets.
   In a revealing statement, Chairman Bernanke (2009b) said to Congress,

          Even after a recovery gets under way, the rate of growth of real economic
      activity is likely to remain below its longer-run potential for a while, implying
      that the current slack in resource utilization will increase further. ...In this en-
      vironment, we anticipate that inflation will remain low. The slack in resource
      utilization remains sizable, and, notwithstanding recent increases in the prices
      of oil and other commodities, cost pressures generally remain subdued. As a
      consequence, inflation is likely to move down some over the next year relative to
      its pace in 2008. That said, improving economic conditions and stable inflation
      expectations should limit further declines in inflation.

   Throughout 2009 and 2010 the FOMC has been issuing nearly identical statements. This
one is from March 16 2010:

         “With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and
     longer-term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for
     some time.
         The Committee . . . continues to anticipate that economic conditions, includ-
     ing low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation
     expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds
     rate for an extended period.”

   So, inflation is caused by “tightness” (the opposite of “slack”) in the economy. This is
not just a cause and forecasting variable, it is the cause, because given “slack” we apparently

                                              36
don’t have to worry about inflation from other sources, notwithstanding the weak correlations
of Figures 8 and 9
    These statements do mention “stable inflation expectations.” How does the Fed know
expectations are “stable” and won’t come unglued once people look at deficit numbers? As
I read Fed statements, almost all confidence in “stable” or “anchored” expectations comes
from the fact that we have experienced a long period of low inflation (adaptive expecta-
tions). To a lesser extent, the Fed relies on survey data and interest rate data. For example,
Chairman Bernanke (2010b) asserted again in his February 24 2010 testimony that “accord-
ing to most measures, longer-term inflation expectations have remained relatively stable.”
The accompanying semiannual report on monetary policy (Federal Reserve 2010) mentions
inflation expectations three times. The first asserts that “inflation expectations have been
relatively stable” and points to a graph (figure 2) of actual inflation. The second (under
“prices”) summarizes median survey data, excusing a jump in short-term expectations by
energy prices and pointing to more stable long-term expectations. The third inferred expec-
tations from Treasury vs. TIP yields, again arguing that “short-term” expectations might
have risen but “long-term” expectations had not changed much. These are the only mention
of expectations or documentation of the FOMC and Chairman’s assertions in the document.
Occasionally, sophisticated Fed statements allude to the New-Keynesian idea that expecta-
tions are anchored by a belief that the Fed will respond quickly to inflation, though not
why people should have such a belief. The volume of popular press coverage of deficits and
inflation — clearly about expected future inflation — and even the ads for gold on cable TV
suggest at least a more widespread concern about inflation than has been present for some
time.
   In particular, Fed statements make no mention of fiscal constraints on monetary policy,
the possibility that fiscal inflation can erupt and there is little the Fed can do about it, or
that uncontrolled deficits may quickly induce higher inflation expectations. Two exceptions
suggest the rule: One of the few recent Fed statements on our fiscal position is this, from
Chairman Bernanke’s (2009c) July 21 2009 testimony:

         ..maintaining the confidence of the public and financial markets requires that
     policymakers begin planning now for the restoration of fiscal balance. Prompt
     attention to questions of fiscal sustainability is particularly critical because of
     the coming budgetary and economic challenges associated with the retirement
     of the baby-boom generation and continued increases in the costs of Medicare
     and Medicaid. Addressing the country’s fiscal problems will require diﬃcult
     choices, but postponing those choices will only make them more diﬃcult. More-
     over, agreeing on a sustainable long-run fiscal path now could yield considerable
     near-term economic benefits in the form of lower long-term interest rates and
     increased consumer and business confidence. Unless we demonstrate a strong
     commitment to fiscal sustainability, we risk having neither financial stability nor
     durable economic growth.

   Though warning against deficits, the main danger Chairman Bernanke sees from an
unsustainable debt path is higher long-term interest rates, presumably from a flow crowding

                                              37
out argument, and less “confidence.”
   Addressing the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform on April 27,
2010, (Bernanke 2010c) he went further,

         Increasing levels of government debt relative to the size of the economy can
     lead to higher interest rates, which inhibit capital formation and productivity
     growth—and might even put the current economic recovery at risk. To the extent
     that higher debt increases our reliance on foreign borrowing, an ever-larger share
     of our future income would be devoted to interest payments on federal debt
     held abroad. Moreover, other things being equal, increased federal debt implies
     higher taxes in the future to cover the associated interest costs—higher taxes that
     may create disincentives to work, save, hire, and invest. High levels of debt also
     decrease the ability of policymakers to respond to future economic and financial
     shocks; indeed, a loss of investor confidence in the ability of a government to
     achieve fiscal sustainability can itself be a source of significant economic and
     financial instability, as we have seen in a number of countries in recent decades.

    These are all important points, but only the last sentence begins to give a glimmer of the
fiscal equation’s warning — that when investors question fiscal sustainability, inflation can
break out despite ample “slack” and there is nothing the Fed can do about it.
    Other commentators on both sides evoke similar views. Krugman (2009) writes “[in
ordinary times]...banks, flush with reserves, would increase loans, which would drive up
demand, which would push up prices.” Laﬀer (2009) describes the same mechanism. Feldstein
(2009) describes a more general “demand” based mechanism: “The key fact is that inflation
rises when demand exceeds supply. A fiscal deficit raises demand when the government
increases its purchase of goods and services or, by lowering taxes, induces households to
increase their spending...” Again, he’s worried about crowding out, not a flight from the
debt and stagflation.
   All of these analyses ignore the stagflation experience of the 1970s, in which inflation was
high even with “slack” markets and little “demand,” and “expectations” moved quickly.
They ignore the experience of hyperinflations and currency collapses, which happen in
economies well below “potential.” The Phillips curve does shift, and a fiscal inflation may
well correspond to a shift, not a movement along that curve, and there may be very little
the central bank can do about it.


7    Conclusion
The government debt valuation equation
                                              Z   ∞
                                +                   1
                                       =                     +                      (18)
                                              =0   +
is at the center of macroeconomic events right now, from understanding the recession, to
stimulus, to monetary policy, to the inflation/deflation debate, to the future of the Euro.

                                              38
    Will we get inflation? The scenario leading to inflation starts with poor growth, possi-
bly reinforced by to larger government distortions, higher tax rates, and policy uncertainty.
Lower growth is the single most important negative influence on the Federal budget. Then,
the government may have to make good on its many credit guarantees. A wave of sov-
ereign (Greece), semi-sovreign (California) and private (pension funds, mortgages) bailouts
may pave the way. A failure to resolve entitlement programs that everyone sees lead to
unsustainable deficits will not help.
    When investors see that path coming, they will quite suddenly try to sell government
debt and dollar-denominated debt. We will see a rise in interest rates, reflecting expected
inflation and a higher risk premium for U.S. government debt. The higher risk premium
will exacerbate the inflationary decline in demand for U.S. debt. A substantial inflation
will follow — and likely a “stagflation” not inflation associated with a boom. The interest
rate rise and inflation can come long before the worst of the deficits and any monetization
materialize. As with all forward-looking economics, no obvious piece of news will trigger
these events. Oﬃcials may rail at “markets” and “speculators.” Economists and the Fed
may scratch their heads at the sudden “loss of anchoring” or “Phillips curve shift.”
   This is a scenario, not a forecast. Whether it happens depends on the actions of our
public oﬃcials, which are very hard to forecast.
    In the meantime, as I have outlined, the intellectual landscape for the analysis of monetary
and fiscal policy is changed deeply by a world in which fiscal issues crystallized in (18) exert
stronger influence on the advanced economies than they have for generations.


8    References
 Ashcraft, Adam, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2010, “Two Monetary Tools:
     Interest Rates and Haircuts,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, forthcoming.

 Bernanke, Ben S., 2009a, Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk, March 10 2009,
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20090310a.htm

 Bernanke, Ben S., 2009b, June 3 Testimony,
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20090603a.htm

 Bernanke, Ben S., 2009c, Testimony on the Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the
     Congress, Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives,
     Washington, D.C. July 21, 2009
     http://federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20090721a.htm

 Bernanke, Ben S., 2010a, “Federal Reserve’s Exit Strategy”
     http://federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20100210a.htm,
     http://federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20100325a.htm

 Bernanke, Ben S., 2010b, “Testimony on the Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the
     Congress, Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives,

                                              39
    Washington, D.C.”
    http://federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20100224a.htm
Bernanke, Ben S., 2010c, “Ahieving Fiscal Sustainability,” Remarks to the National Com-
    mission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, Washington, D.C. April 27, 2010,
    http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100427a.htm
Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M. and Rebelo, S., 2001, “Prospective Deficits and the Asian
    Currency Crisis.” Journal of Political Economy 109, 1155—98.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo, 2006, “Government Finance in
    the Wake of Currency Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 401-440.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expec-
   tations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1,
   195—228.
Cha, Ariana Eunjung, 2009, “Geithner Tells China Its Dollar Assets Are Safe” Washington
    Post Foreign Service, June 1, 2009,
    http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/06/01/AR2009060101784.html
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2010, “When is the Govern-
    ment Spending Multiplier Large?” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Cochrane, John H., 1992, “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of
    Financial Studies 5,243—80.
Cochrane, John H., 1988, “A Frictionless model of U.S. Inflation,” in Ben S. Bernanke and
    Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998 Cambridge MA: MIT
    press, p. 323-384.
Cochrane, John H., 2001, “Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of
    the Price Level,” Econometrica 69, 69-116.
Cochrane, John H., 2005, “Money as Stock,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52:3, 501-
    528.
Cochrane, John H., 2007, “Inflation Determination with Taylor Rules: A Critical Review,”
    Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Cochrane, John H., 2008, “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictabil-
    ity,” Review of Financial Studies 21, 1533-1575.
Cochrane, John H., 2010, “The Government Debt Valuation Equation. An Appendix to
    ‘Understanding Policy’”
    http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/Papers/
Congressional Budget Oﬃce, 2009, “A Preliminary Analysis of the President’s Budget and
   an Update of CBO’s Budget and Economic Outlook,”
   http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/doc10014/Summary.4.1.shtml

                                          40
Council of Economic Advisers, 2009, “The Economic Case for Health Care Reform”
   http://www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/CEA_Health_Care_Report.pdf

Duﬃe, Darrell, 2010, “The Failure Mechanics of Dealer Banks,” Journal of Economic Per-
   spectives 24, 51—72.

Elmendorf, Doug, 2009, “The Budget and Economic Outlook,” September 2009 presenta-
   tion to the National Economists Club, http://www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=10624&type=1

Federal Reserve, 2010, “Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,” February
    24, 2010
    http://federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/mpr_20100224_part1.htm. February 24.

Feldstein, Martin, 2009, “Inflation is Looming on America’s Horizon,” Financial Times,
    April 19, http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/publication/18990/
    inflation_is_looming_on_americas_horizon.html

Ferguson, Niall, 2009, “History Lesson for Economists in Thrall to Keynes” Financial
    Times, May 29 2009,
    http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/a635d12c-4c7c-11de-a6c5-00144feabdc0.html

Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick, 2009, “Haircuts” NBER Working Paper 15273.

Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick, 2009b, “Securitized Banking and the Run on
    Repo,” NBER Working Paper No. 15223.

Graham, Jed, 2010, “ Debt Shock May Hit In 2018, Maybe As Soon As 2013,” Investor’s
    Business Daily May 6, 2010, p. A01.

Hilsentrath, Jon, 2010, “Inflation Fears Cut Two Ways at the Fed” Wall Street Journal
     April 5 2010.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgenson, 2008, “The Aggregate Demand for
    Treasury Debt,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.

Krugman, Paul, 2009, “The Big Inflation Scare” New York Times May 28 2009
    http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/29/opinion/29krugman.html

Leeper, Eric, 1991, “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 27, 129-147.

Laﬀer, Arthur, 2009, “Get Ready for Inflation and Higher Interest Rates ” Wall Street
    Journal, June 11, 2009,
    http://online.wsj.com/article/SB124458888993599879.html

Miller, Rich, 2009, “U.S. Needs More Inflation to Speed Recovery, Say Mankiw, Rogoﬀ,”
     Bloomberg.com May 19 2009,
     http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601083&sid=auyuQlA1lRV8



                                           41
Orszag, Peter R., 2008, “Letter to Representative Paul Ryan (R—WI),” May 19, 2008,
    http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/92xx/doc9216/.

Piergallini, Alessandro, and Rodano, Giorgio, 2009, “Public Debt, Distortionary Taxation,
    and Monetary Policy,” Manuscript, University of Rome.

Pittman, Mark, and Bob Ivry, 2009, “Financial Rescue Nears GDP as Pledges Top $12.8
    Trillion (Update1)” Bloomberg.com March 31 2009,
    http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=armOzfkwtCA4

Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua D. Rauh, 2009, “The Liabilities and Risks of State-
   Sponsored Pension Plans,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4): 191—210,
   DOI:10.1257/jep.23.4.191.

Rey, Helene, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2007, “International Financial Adjustment,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 115, 665-703.

Romer, Christina and David Bernstein, 2009, “The Job Impact of the American Recovery
   and Reinvestment Plan,”
   http://otrans.3cdn.net/45593e8ecbd339d074_l3m6bt1te.pdf

Samuelson, Robert J., 2008, The Great Inflation and its Aftermath, New York: Random
   House.

Sargent, Thomas J., 1992, Rational Expectations and Inflation, New York: Harper and
    Row, Second edition.

Sargent, Thomas J., 1999, The Conquest of American Inflation, Princeton: Princeton Uni-
    versity Press

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace, 1981,“Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5:3, Fall 1981, 1—17.

Satow, Julie, 2009,
    http://www.nysun.com/business/anna-schwartz-the-fed-is-inviting-inflation/70958/

Taylor, John, 2009b, “Empirically Evaluating Economic Policy in Real Time,” NBER Re-
    porter 2009 Number 3, www.nber.org/reporter.

Trabandt, Mathias, and Harald Uhlig, 2009, “How Far Are We From the Slippery Slope?
    The Laﬀer Curve Revisited,” NBER Working Paper 15343.

Uhlig, Harald, 2010, “Some Fiscal Calculus,” Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
   Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                          42
