                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRENDS IN WORLD INEQUALITY IN LIFE SPAN SINCE 1970

                                          Ryan D. Edwards

                                        Working Paper 16088
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16088


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2010




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2008 annual meeting of the Population Association
of America in New Orleans, LA. This work was supported by PSC-CUNY grant 60104 37 38. I am
grateful to Henry (Ayodeji) Fola-Owolabi for excellent research assistance, to Michel Guillot for an
electronic dataset of life tables and for helpful advice, and to Shripad Tuljapurkar for many helpful
comments. All errors and opinions are mine alone and do not reflect the views of the City University
of New York, the Professional Staff Congress, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Ryan D. Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Trends in World Inequality in Life Span Since 1970
Ryan D. Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 16088
June 2010
JEL No. J11,O11

                                              ABSTRACT

Previous research has revealed much global convergence over the past several decades in life expectancy
at birth and in infant mortality, which are closely linked. But trends in the variance of length of life,
and in the variance of length of adult life in particular, are less well understood. I examine life-span
inequality in a broad, balanced panel of 180 rich and poor countries observed in 1970 and 2000. Convergence
in infant mortality has unambiguously reduced world inequality in total length of life starting from
birth, but world inequality in length of adult life has remained stagnant. Underlying both of these trends
is a growing share of total inequality that is attributable to between-country variation. Especially among
developed countries, the absolute level of between-country inequality has risen over time. The sources
of widening inequality in length of life between countries remain unclear, but signs point away from
trends in income, leaving patterns of knowledge diffusion as a potential candidate.


Ryan D. Edwards
Department of Economics
Queens College - CUNY
Powdermaker Hall 300-S
Flushing, NY 11367
and NBER
redwards@qc.cuny.edu
   The past 50 years have brought an enormous amount of global convergence across countries in

life expectancy at birth, e0 , the unconditional average length of human life (Wilson, 2001; Goesling

and Firebaugh, 2004). There are exceptions, as remarked by Moser, Shkolnikov and Leon (2005)

and Ram (2006). The impact of HIV/AIDS in Africa and the collapse of the Soviet Union in the

1990s contributed to some divergence in e0 after 1980, even while convergence in infant mortality

continued apace. But viewed over longer periods of time, the picture is one of sustained advances.

During a time when life expectancy has grown very rapidly among rich countries, at a rate of about

0.2 year of life each year since 1955 (White, 2002), life expectancy in developing countries has grown

even faster. The gap in average life span between the richest and poorest nations has declined from

about 35 years in 1950 to 23 years today (Wilson, 2001), accounting for an additional 0.24 year

of life each calendar year, or more than a doubling of the rate among advanced countries. Global

convergence across countries in e0 contrasts with divergence and bimodality in income per capita

(Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992; Pritchett, 1997). In a widely remarked study, Becker, Philipson

and Soares (2005) report that accounting for the economic value of gains in life expectancy produces

more worldwide convergence across countries in “full income,” a measure that comprises both real

income and the value of life expectancy.

   But trends in life expectancy at birth only speak to one component of overall world inequality

in length of life, namely between-country variation in the total length of life starting from birth.

Within-country variation is also important and can be measured using the distribution of life-table

deaths. Wilmoth and Horiuchi (1999) assess within-country variation in length of life among indus-

trialized countries using an array of statistics including their preferred measure, the interquartile

range (IQR). They show that the IQR fell dramatically in the U.S., Sweden, and Japan during the

epidemiological transition that started after 1870, but that it had plateaued by 1950, suggesting

little evidence of rectangularization in survivorship at an upper limit on length of life. Shkolnikov,

Andreev and Begun (2003) perform similar analysis on high-quality data from advanced countries

using the Gini coefficient as their preferred index, and they report similar results.

   There are also important differences between unconditional variation in length of life, i.e. start-

ing from birth, which these earlier studies have examined, and variation conditional on surviving

past infancy, or “adult” variation. Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005) show that among advanced

countries in the Human Mortality Database or HMD (2009), the variance in adult length of life,

                                                  2
which they measure with S10 , the standard deviation in length of life past age 10 based on the

period life table, fell rapidly prior to 1960 during the epidemiological transition but remained stag-

nant afterward, with large differences across countries in the level of S10 . Edwards and Tuljapurkar

also show that S10 is increasingly responsible for lingering divergence in mortality among advanced

countries, and Edwards (2008) argues that higher adult variance represents a real welfare cost.

Smits and Monden (2009) focus on mortality above age 15 in a broad cross section of countries in

2000 using new estimates developed by Lopez et al. (2002), and in a narrow panel of high-income

countries over time using the HMD. They find large differences across countries in the level of

within-country inequality in adult length of life, which they measure using the Gini and Theil

(1967, 1979) indexes, both in the large cross section and in the subset of industrialized countries.

   In this paper I assess and decompose trends in global inequality in length of life by constructing

a new balanced panel dataset that covers 180 countries around 1970 and in 2000. I combine high-

quality data from the HMD and similar datasets with data from model life tables, checking results

for robustness to data quality. Like Wilson (2001) and Sala-i-Martin (2006), I weight statistics

by population, so my focus is on global inequality in human length of life rather than inequality

between countries. But through a decomposition analysis, I find that variation between countries

has played a very important role in global inequality.

   The data reveal that inequality in total length of life starting from birth has unambiguously

decreased since 1970 for the world as a whole and for advanced countries with high-quality data.

But beneath this felicitous result lie two important findings. Inequality in length of adult life has

remained steady or even widened during this period, depending on the type of inequality mea-

sure I use and the subsample. And while the share of inequality attributable to within-country

differences has decreased over time, as is consistent with the demographic and epidemiological tran-

sitions underway in developing countries, the share attributable to between-country inequality has

unambiguously increased. Patterns of widening inequality are especially strong among developed

countries with high-quality data.




                                                  3
Data sources

Data limitations complicate the assessment of trends in global inequality in length of life and its

components. Mortality statistics in developing countries are rare and often of questionable quality

even for contemporary periods, let alone historical ones. But Lopez et al. (2002) have significantly

improved the quality and scope of current estimates of life tables in developing countries, work that

has facilitated efforts by Smits and Monden (2009) and others to examine cross-sectional trends

worldwide. The contributions of Lopez et al. (2002) and Murray et al. (2003) represent further

refinements of a rich tradition of modeling life tables that notably includes the earlier work of the

United Nations Population Division (1982) and Coale and Demeny (1983). Model life tables are

certainly imperfect tools for assessing the shapes of survivorship curves. But they are the best tool

available for many developing countries, they remain widely used, and we know they are useful

for a variety of purposes. Coale (1991) and Coale and Banister (1994) use them to estimate the

number of “missing females” in China and other developing countries, for example. In the absence

of a mortality crisis like HIV/AIDS or that associated with the collapse of the Soviet Union, model

life tables are likely to provide a reasonable indication of underlying conditions.

   Many databases report historical measures of life expectancy at birth, e0 , for developing coun-

tries that are derived from model life tables, but none appear to report the full model life tables

themselves. To reconstruct these estimates, I matched levels of e0 in 1970 as reported by the United

Nations Population Division (2006) to model life tables using their country-specific assumptions

published in the Analytical Report. For 78 out of 180, or 43 percent of countries in the dataset,

I observe a model life table in 1970, with 65 observations based on Coale and Demeny (1983) re-

gional model life tables. Primarily located in sub-Saharan Africa, these 78 countries represented

20 percent of the world’s population in 1970.

   For 21 countries in 1970, I construct life tables based on vital statistics in the World Health

Organization Mortality Database (2009). When appropriate, I rescaled the country’s mortality

schedule with a constant proportion in order to match e0 in 1970 for both sexes combined as

reported by the UN. I performed a similar type of rescaling for 20 historical life tables in order to

translate the age shape of mortality measured in a later period back to where it probably was around




                                                  4
1970.1 For the other 61 countries in 1970, I observe life tables based on high-quality data. Several

papers in historical demography present estimates of historical life tables in developing countries

(Vallin, 1975; Allman and May, 1979; Banister and Hill, 2004; Cheung et al., 2005). Murray et al.

(2003) present a set of life tables compiled from the WHO collection, Preston, Keyfitz and Schoen

(1972), and the United Nations Population Division (1982). High-quality life tables for 33 advanced

countries are available from the Human Mortality Database (2009) over a broad range of years.

       For coverage in the year 2000, I rely heavily on the World Health Organization Life Table

Database (2009), which presents life tables based either on high-quality vital registration data

when available, or on modeling techniques pioneered by Lopez et al. (2002). I use these life tables

for 143 of the 180 countries in 2000. One observation, Puerto Rico, must be drawn from WHO

Mortality data. For China and Taiwan, I use life tables from Banister and Hill (2004) and Cheung

et al. (2005), to improve consistency with 1970 estimates. The remaining 33 countries in 2000 are

included in the Human Mortality Database (2009).

       For both years, population totals are provided by the UN Population Prospects database. When

life tables for both sexes combined are unavailable, I construct them from sex-specific life table

survivorship schedules weighted by sex-specific population. Similarly, life table aggregates for

regions and for the world as a whole are based on population-weighted averages of country-level

survivorship schedules. Appendix Table A-1 lists the 180 countries represented in the dataset, their

World Bank region, the years of coverage, which sometimes differ from 1970 and 2000, and the data

sources. Each country-year observation consists of a period life table for both sexes combined.
   1
     When the underlying data are age-specific mortality rates, I raise or lower all mortality rates by the same
proportion, a process that changes life expectancies but leaves the Gompertz slope and thus the variance in length
of life unchanged (Tuljapurkar and Edwards, 2009). When the data only include survivorship, I reduce all ℓx above
age 0 by the same additive amount, producing an additive vertical, or equivalently an additive horizontal, translation
in survivorship. Both rescaling methods effectively impose additive translation of the length of life distribution,
recentering life expectancies to official estimates while leaving unaffected S10 and other inequality measures that are
invariant to additive change. Of these 41 observations I have translated to 1970, 14 are based on life tables for 1990
from the World Health Organization Life Table Database (2009), 17 are based on life tables in the early 1980s from
Murray et al. (2003) or based on mortality rates from the World Health Organization Mortality Database (2009), and
10 are life tables in the early 1970s constructed using data from the WHO Mortality Database that had indicated a
different e0 than official estimates.




                                                          5
Methods

Inequality measures

A wide array of statistics are available to measure inequality. I focus on five that are frequently used

in the literature: the standard deviation, S; the interquartile range, IQR; the Gini coefficient, G;

the Theil index, T; and the average life years lost to death, e† , a measure introduced by Vaupel and

Canudas-Romo (2003) that is related to life-table entropy as defined by Keyfitz (1985). Both the

Gini and the Theil are widely employed in studies of income inequality, and Shkolnikov, Andreev

and Begun (2003) discuss how to use the Gini to examine inequality in length of life. For present

purposes, the single most important difference between these five measures of inequality is that

several are invariant over proportional translations of the underlying distribution while the others

are invariant over additive translations.

       In a tradition dating back at least to Lorenz (1905), the literature on income inequality re-

gards invariance over proportional change, also called “scale independence,” as a centrally desirable

characteristic (Foster and Sen, 1997). When the underlying good in question is income, which is

typically measured in currency units, invariance over proportional change is desirable both from

a practical perspective, given proportional exchange rates between currencies, and also from a

utility-theoretic perspective (Atkinson, 1970), based on the way in which economists believe the

extra enjoyment of additional money declines. Both the Gini, which is the area under the Lorenz

curve plotting income shares against percentiles, and the Theil exhibit invariance over proportional

change in the underlying distribution.

       When the good in question is length of life, invariance over additive change appears to be the

preferred characteristic among demographers and other social scientists. Level differences in life

expectancy between groups defined by race (Preston and Taubman, 1994), sex (Glei and Horiuchi,

2007), education (Meara, Richards and Cutler, 2008) or some characteristic are the focus, not

proportional differences.2 The standard deviation, the IQR, and the average years lost to death,
   2
     The precise reasons for this preference are unclear. Proportional differences in age-specific mortality rates roughly
translate into additive change in life expectancy (Vaupel and Canudas-Romo, 2003), but the fact this correspondence
is true offers no particular normative justification for why such a measure should be a preferred indicator of inequality.
In advanced countries, temporal trends in mortality rates are roughly proportional (Lee and Carter, 1992), while they
are approximately linear in life expectancy (White, 2002). If our definition of stable inequality meant that all groups
experienced the same trend in their mortality or survivorship, then we should prefer measures of inequality that are
invariant over additive change in the case of life expectancy or over proportional change in the case of mortality rates.



                                                            6
e† , are all invariant over additive change in the distribution of length of life.

    All five measures, whether invariant over proportional or over additive change in the underlying

distribution, may agree on trends in inequality in length of life. But it is equally possible that

the additive and proportional measures might disagree. Suppose for example that the long-lived

and the short-lived within a population were both to gain the same number of average life years

through a reduction in old-age mortality that increased each group’s life expectancy by the same

amount, without any change to the shape of either length of life distribution.3 Additive measures of

inequality like the standard deviation, e† , and the IQR would register no change in inequality; each

group gains the same level amount, so inequality would be unchanged. But proportional measures

like the Gini and Theil would decrease because the short-lived have gained proportionately more life

years than the long-lived, having started with fewer. Demographers are likely to interpret the fixed

gap in life expectancy from this example as indicative of stable rather than narrowing inequality,

but the issue is open to interpretation.


Decomposing inequality across countries

Several of these five measures are decomposable into within and between-group components. I

choose two measures for a decomposition analysis, the standard deviation and the Theil, because

the former is invariant to additive change and the latter to proportional change. Technically

speaking, it is the square of S, or the variance, V, that is additively decomposable into within and

between-country components, but I report the standard deviation because its level is more intuitive.

The global variance of length of life τ over all individuals equals the sum of the expectation over

the j countries of the variance across individuals within country j, plus the variance over countries

of the within-country mean across individuals:


                                      V [τ ] = Ej [Vi (τ |j)] + Vj [Ei (τ |j)] ,                                 (1)
From a utility-theoretic perspective, canonical economic models of intertemporal preferences and behavior suggest
that invariance over additive change would be a preferable characteristic of any measure of inequality over length of
life (Edwards, 2008, 2009).
    3
      This would appear as a rightward (additive) shift in the length of life distribution. Such a dynamic is not
the historical pattern in mortality decline during the demographic transition, when reductions in infant and child
mortality are very important, but it broadly fits patterns in advanced countries since 1960 (Edwards and Tuljapurkar,
2005). Bongaarts (2005) proposes a model of mortality forecasting that embeds such a principle.




                                                          7
where the moments are all weighted by the populations of the i countries. This decomposition is

neatly intuitive: the average variance in the first term is the within-country component, while the

variance in the country means in the second term is the between-country component.

       The Theil (1967, 1979) entropy measure used by Pradhan, Sahn and Younger (2003), Smits and

Monden (2009), and others is defined for country j as the expectation across individuals of the log

of the within-country expectation divided by length of life:

                                                                         
                                                               Ei [τ |j]
                                          T |j = Ei log                         .                                (2)
                                                                  τ

The Theil also additively decomposes into within and between-country inequality:

                                                                   
                                                             E[τ ]
                                      T = Ej [T |j] + Ej log            ,                                        (3)
                                                             Ej [τ ]

where the first term is the population weighted average across countries of the within-country Theil,

and the second is the Theil computed on the variation in average τ between countries relative to

the global average. As before, the first term is the within-country inequality, and the second is the

between-country.

       As discussed by Smits and Monden (2009), within-country inequality in length of human life

tends to be the larger component of the two. In addition to inequality between homogeneous

subgroups within a country, however defined, the measure will also capture all “natural” inequality

one might find within any homogeneous subgroup of humans. The relative universality of the

Gompertz Law within living organisms (Finch, Pike and Witten, 1990), or positive and finite

increases in mortality through age, suggests that such natural inequality could be relatively large.4


Total versus adult mortality

Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005) and Smits and Monden (2009) argue for treating infant and

adult mortality separately. The two are etiologically distinct, and we also know that patterns of

cross-country convergence in infant mortality and e0 have not always agreed during recent decades
   4
     As discussed by Tuljapurkar and Edwards (2009), there is an inverse relationship between the Gompertz slope
of log mortality and the variance in length of life. Thus the fact that the Gompertz slope is always finite in living
organisms suggests that some “natural” inequality in length of life is unavoidable. One could interpret this natural
inequality as inherent uncertainty about health deriving from internal biological processes.



                                                         8
(Moser, Shkolnikov and Leon, 2005). The incidence of HIV/AIDS is a good example of why we

should examine infant and adult mortality separately; while the disease can affect very young

children through prenatal exposure, it is primarily transmitted between adults. Because infant

mortality is always fixed in a particular age range, including it in measures of inequality of length

of life tends to draw attention away from important trends in the distribution of adult life span.

    In order to isolate trends in adult mortality, I calculate inequality statistics on truncated dis-

tributions of length of life above age 10, in addition to measuring inequality using the entire

unconditional distribution. As Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005) discuss, age 10 is an arbitrary but

perfectly reasonable cutoff age; the important issues are that the cutoff age be not so small as to

pick up the influences of infant mortality, and not so large as to impart bias through the rightward

shifting of the old-age mode.



Results

World distributions of length of life

The world distributions of length of life in 1970 and 2000 are depicted graphically in Panel A of

Figure 1. These curves are the probability distributions of world life-table deaths in each year, de-

rived from population-weighted survivorship probabilities by age averaged across the 180 countries

in the dataset. Panel B of Figure 1 shows the probability distributions above age 10, each of which

have been rescaled so that the sum of density above age 10 equals 1.

    Three dynamics are visible in Panel A, but only one is echoed in Panel B, which is restricted

to adult mortality. First, Panel A reveals large reductions in infant and child mortality between

1970 and 2000, as evidenced by the shortening of the left-hand mode at age 0. Second, the old-age

mode centered roughly around age 70 has risen in height over time, reflecting more density heaped

on and around the old-age mode. This could reflect either the reduction in infant mortality,5 or a

reduction in adult variance, or it could reflect both dynamics. Third, the distribution around the

old-age mode appears to have shifted rightward by about 4 or 5 years at most ages, although it is

difficult to be precise because the data are arrayed in 5-year age groups. Technically, the mode in
    5
      I am implicitly assuming that death in infancy is independent from death at older ages, which is likely true only
in the synthetic cohort of a period life table. Finch and Crimmins (2004) and others have demonstrated that old-age
mortality is often related to early-age mortality in a birth cohort.


                                                          9
both years is at ages 75 to 80.

    Of these three dynamics visible in Panel A, only the last appears in Panel B. That is, once I

condition out the large reductions in infant mortality during the period, the dominant pattern is

a rightward, additive translation of densities around the old-age mode that appears not to have

significantly changed the spread. While infant mortality has declined dramatically and no doubt

brought down total world inequality in length of life, variance in the length of adult life seems not

to have declined by much at all.

    The visual story that emerges is confirmed by statistics. The columns of Table 1 report char-

acteristics of the full sample in both periods, of the subsample of 61 countries with actual rather

than model life tables in both periods, and of the subsample of 33 countries represented in the

Human Mortality Database (2009). Each successive sample restriction improves the quality of the

underlying data, and as usual, data quality is positively related to level of development, revealed

by trends in real GDP per capita in the bottom row of the top panel. As shown in the top row of

the middle panel, average life expectancy at birth, e0 , increased across all subsamples, from 58.8

to 66.9 or 8.1 years in the full dataset, from 61.4 to 69.9 or 8.4 years in the sample without model

life tables, and from 70.7 to 75.8 or 5.1 years in the high-quality HMD.6 Average life expectancy

conditional on surviving to age 10 also increased, but the increases were smaller and more stable

across subsamples. This is shown in the top row of the bottom panel, which reports the mean

length of life above age 10, M10 . This measure, which equals remaining life expectancy at age 10

plus 10 years, rose by roughly 4 between 1970 and 2000 in each subsample.

    The middle panel of Table 1 displays the five inequality statistics measured over the entire dis-

tribution of length of life. Nearly all statistics, proportional and additive alike, register reductions

in total inequality in each sample during the period. The exception is the interquartile range mea-

sured over HMD countries. The IQR registers a different trend because of the strong relationship

between unconditional variation in length of life and infant mortality, which was already very low

in the HMD countries; changes in a very small probability of death in infancy change the IQR

very little. In all 180 countries and in the subset of 61 countries with actual life tables, increases
   6
     By comparison, the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database reports world e0 at 59.1 in 1970 and
67.3 in 2000, while the United Nations Population Division (2006) lists statistics for five-year time intervals that
imply world e0 = 57.2 in 1970 and e0 = 65.0 in 2000. The annual rates of increase in e0 implied by these figures are
0.270 for all 180 countries, 0.282 for the 61 with no model life tables, and 0.170 for the HMD countries. White (2002)
reports an average rate of 0.208 per year for 21 OECD countries between 1955 and 1996.


                                                         10
in survivorship at age 10, ℓ10 , were substantial, as shown in the bottom row of the middle panel.

Survivorship at age 10 began the period around 0.87 and rose 7 percentage points in both of these

samples, but for the HMD countries, ℓ10 rose only about 2 percentage points, from 0.972 to 0.990.

   The bottom panel in Table 1 reveals trends in the five inequality statistics measured over the

conditional distribution of length of life above age 10. The three additive measures, the standard

deviation, the IQR, and the average life years lost, e†10 , register either roughly steady or even in-

creasing inequality for all samples, a notable departure from earlier results. The standard deviation

above age 10, S10 , falls by 0.2 year from 17.0 to 16.8 in the full sample, by 0.2 year in the sample

with no model life tables, and actually rises from 15.1 to 15.4 among HMD countries. The IQR

and e†10 behave similarly, falling only slightly in the broader samples and rising among the HMD

countries. The stagnation in inequality implied by these additive measures reflects what we saw in

the Panel B of Figure 1, namely the rightward shift of densities around the old-age mode that left

variance basically unchanged.

   By contrast, the proportional measures of inequality, the Gini and the Theil, decline across all

samples in the bottom panel of Table 1, which conditions out infant and child mortality. This follows

intuitively from the combination of roughly stable additive inequality, S10 , and increases in the

average length of life, M10 . Proportional inequality, which can be conceptualized as approximately

the ratio of the two, must have fallen in this case because the denominator increased even though

the numerator remained basically unchanged. This is a different story than what emerged in the

middle panel of Table 1, where additive and proportional measures of total inequality from birth

were both decreasing in tandem. In that case, proportional inequality fell for two reasons: the

numerator, S0 , was falling while the denominator, e0 , was rising. Because average length of life is

typically rising over time in this manner, proportional indexes are poorly equipped to reveal the

underlying trend of stagnation in S10 and other additive indexes measured over adult ages.

   The stagnation in world S10 that we see in Figure 1 is a novel finding that could reflect a

variety of potentially countervailing influences. One possibility is that all region or country-specific

distributions of length of life above age 10 have shifted rightward by roughly equal amounts, leaving

both the within and between-country components, as well as total inequality, unchanged. Recent

trends in S10 among advanced countries suggest this story might fit at least that subset (Edwards

and Tuljapurkar, 2005), and the evidence in Table 1 is partially supportive. But such a scenario

                                                  11
seems unlikely to fit a broad panel of rich and poor countries. We know that the epidemiological

transition typically brings with it a large amount of mortality compression (Wilmoth and Horiuchi,

1999; Edwards and Tuljapurkar, 2005). Stagnation in world S10 could also result from diverging

but perfectly offsetting trends in the within and between-country components of inequality in adult

length of life. Or the story may vary by level of development. In the next sections, I examine

distributions by world region and decompose total inequality into within and between-country

components to explore these questions.


Distributions by region

The seven panels in Figure 2 plot distributions of length of life from birth in 1970 and 2000 for the

seven regions defined by the World Bank.7 A visual comparison with Panel A in Figure 1 reveals

some similarities between world and regional trends in several cases, and also a number of notable

differences. Trends in East Asia and the Pacific, trends in the high income group, and to some

extent trends in the Middle East and North Africa, shown in Panels A, C, and E, look much like

the world trends visible in Panel A of Figure 1. All these plots show declining infant mortality

combined with a rightward and upward shifting of densities around the old-age mode. A similar

dynamic is present but not as clearly visible for Latin America and the Caribbean, shown in Panel

D, where top-coding of the life tables at ages 85 and over, which produces a heaping of density,

is prevalent in 1970. In South Asia, shown in Panel F, variance around the old-age mode appears

to have remained relatively high, but the mode has still shifted rightward as infant mortality has

fallen.

       The notable differences here are in Europe and Central Asia, shown in Panel B, and in sub-

Saharan Africa, in panel G. In the former, which comprises Russia and the former Soviet republics,

European countries previously behind the Iron Curtain, and Turkey, there is little visual evidence

of any change in the distribution between 1970 and 2000. What little there is suggests a widening.

In sub-Saharan Africa, we see a reduction in infant, child, and adolescent mortality, but a sharp

increase in the probability of death between ages 20 and 60, and a very slight rightward shift of
   7
    The World Bank categorizes countries based on geography and level of development. The “high income” group
shown in Panel C consists of 47 geographically dispersed countries that roughly correspond to the OECD plus several
developed countries in the Middle East and Taiwan. The other six regions comprise developing countries organized
by geographic proximity. See Table A-1 for a listing of countries by region.



                                                        12
the distribution above age 60. In both of these world regions, mortality reductions appear to have

been slight if not nonexistent.

   Table 2 reports life expectancies and measures of variance for these regional distributions of life

span. These statistics largely confirm the visual findings but also reveal several more subtle trends.

As shown in the upper panel, average life expectancy at birth rose across all regions, but much of

the gains were driven by increases in survivorship to age 10, ℓ10 . Adult life expectancy, measured

here by the average length of life conditional on survival to age 10, M10 , actually fell in Europe

and Central Asia and in sub-Saharan Africa. As shown in the bottom panel, gains against infant

mortality produced reductions across the board in the standard deviation measured from birth, S0 ,

and in the Theil index measured from birth. But trends in S10 are more interesting. In two regions,

S10 fell by relatively large amounts: by 1.3 years in East Asia and the Pacific, and by 2.7 years

in the Middle East and North Africa. In four others, it either was largely unchanged or fell more

gradually: by 0.6 in the high income countries, by 0.1 in Latin America and the Caribbean, by 0.6

in South Asia, and 0.4 in sub-Saharan Africa. And in Europe and Central Asia, S10 rose by 0.3

year. The Theil index above age 10 registers similar trends, agreeing on the increase in inequality

in Europe and Central Asia but registering larger declines than in S10 for all other regions. This is

because the mean length of life above age 10, M10 , was increasing for five of the seven regions.

   It is striking that changes in S10 varied so much across regions and generally not in the manner

suggested by historical patterns of development. As discussed by Wilmoth and Horiuchi (1999) and

Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005), the epidemiological transition ushered in monotonic declines in

the IQR and in S10 for industrialized countries that ended around 1960. Based on this, one would

expect countries or regions with high S10 to experience more rapid decline, a pattern that is not

apparent in Table 2. A graphical exposition confirms this departure from historical patterns in the

case of adult mortality. The two panels in Figure 3 depict scatter plots of the evolving relationship

between the mean and standard deviation in length of life for world regions. Panel A graphs the

relationship between S0 and e0 , which is strongly downward sloping in the cross section, and regions

have also moved down and to the right along the locus over time. That is, when measured from

birth, variance has fallen and the average has risen monotonically for all regions over time. But

Panel B reveals that the same is not true for the variance and average above age 10. Although

the regions are still arrayed along a downward sloping line in the cross section, that relationship is

                                                 13
not always reflected in the experiences of individual regions over time. Some regions gained higher

average adult life expectancy and lower adult variance, moving southeast in the plot, while others

gained only higher average and moved due east. Others either remained stationary or even lost

ground on both fronts. While convergence in infant mortality has apparently brought fairly steady

and universal improvements in total inequality and in life expectancy, there is evidence that adult

mortality is diverging across regions.


Distributions by country

Some of the divergence in adult mortality that we see across world regions could reflect regional

covariation among countries; those with high mortality probably occupy the same impoverished

regions, for example. There is little evidence of any convergence in M10 or S10 among the seven

World Bank regions shown in Panel B of Figure 3, but whether this is due to strong regional

covariation or to small sample size is unclear. Across all 180 countries in the dataset, it turns out

that there is evidence of convergence in S10 . This is shown in Panel A of Figure 4, which plots

the change in S10 against its level in 1970 for all countries, with a superimposed trend line that I

estimate with weighted least squares. The R2 is only 0.145, but the bivariate relationship is strong;

the slope coefficient of −0.238 has a t-statistic of −5.5. Because it contrasts with regional patterns,

this evidence of convergence in within-country inequality in length of adult life tentatively suggests

that region-wide sources of geographic variation may be important.8

       Although within-country inequality appears to have fallen, between-country inequality has not.

Considerably less cross-country convergence is apparent in Panel B of Figure 4, which plots the

change in M10 versus its starting level. Here, the R2 is 0.021, the slope is −0.106, and its t-statistic

is −1.97, all reductions from the S10 regression. The variance in country-specific M10 represents

the between-country component of inequality in adult length of life. In sum, Figure 4 reveals

that within-country inequality in adult life span might have fallen due to convergence in S10 , but

between-country inequality has probably risen because there has been much less, if any, convergence

in M10 .

       Especially the latter of these two patterns contrasts markedly with stronger convergence across
   8
     If I include dummy variables for regions in the convergence regressions of changes on levels, the slope and the
t-statistic in the S10 regression roughly double in magnitude. In the M10 regression, they increase by a factor of five.
In both cases, regional dummies are highly statistically significant predictors of the change in M10 or S10 .


                                                          14
countries in life expectancy at birth, e0 , and in infant and child mortality, as shown in Figure 5.

Panel A plots the change in e0 against its initial level, while Panel B shows the same for survivorship

to age 10, ℓ10 . In both cases, the weighted least squares trend lines are steeper, −0.271 and −0.486,

the t-statistics on their slopes are −8.11 and −22.01, and the model R2 ’s are 0.270 and 0.731.

There are outliers in each graph, but the relationships are demonstrably tighter than in Figure 4.

   For a more formal analysis, I can decompose global variation in length of life into within and

between-country elements using equations (1) and (3). I report the results in Table 3, where as

before, I separately examine the full dataset of 180 countries and two higher-quality subsamples.

The top panel shows decompositions of inequality in length of life starting from birth using the

Theil and the standard deviation, and the bottom panel does the same for inequality above age 10.

Because the square of the standard deviation is additively decomposable, the squares of the within

and between-country components sum to the square of the total standard deviation; I report the

proportion of total variance attributable to each piece.

   The between-country share of inequality has grown in nine of the twelve decompositions depicted

in Table 3, and in many cases, its absolute level has also grown. Both the Theil and the standard

deviation register increases in the between-country share in most subsamples; the exception is the

subset of 61 countries without model life tables. When the inequality measure is S10 , the between-

country share still increases even in that subsample. The within-country share always remains

significantly larger at usually more than 90 percent of the total, consistent with the findings of Smits

and Monden (2009), but growth in the between-country share was often considerable. This was

particularly true in the HMD subsample, which consists of relatively rich countries that had already

completed their demographic and epidemiological transitions by 1970. Among those countries, both

the Theil and the standard deviation, regardless of whether they are measured from birth or from

age 10, record increases in the between-country share and in its absolute level.

   The trends in the within and between-country components of world S10 can be viewed graphi-

cally in Figure 6. Panels A and C on the left show histograms of country-specific S10 , the average

of which is the within-country variation. The weighted mean fell from 16.5 to 15.9 apparently due

to faster reductions at the high end of the distribution, which was bimodal in 1970 but by 2000 had

only a fat right tail. While this is not rapid convergence, it is more than we see in the between-

country component, which is shown along the right in Panels B and D. There, the histogram of

                                                  15
country-specific M10 , the variance of which is the between-country component of total S10 , clearly

widened, with a fat left tail emerging by 2000. Visual evidence of convergence is practically nonex-

istent here; rather, it appears that some countries benefited from increases in adult life expectancy

while others did not.

   An open question is whether regional variation may be more important than country-level

variation, in that one categorization may define more more homogeneous subgroups. One way to

assess the importance of regional covariation across countries in explaining global inequality is to

repeat the same decomposition exercise using world regions instead of countries and then compare

results. If regional covariation is more important, in that similar countries are clustered together

geographically, we would expect the between-region component of world S10 to be larger than

the between-country component. In unreported results, I decomposed inequality by region and

found that the between-region components were if anything slightly smaller than between-country

components. It would appear that national boundaries are at least as useful as regional boundaries

in describing the evolution of world inequality in length of life. This result is consistent with

the result shown in Table 3 that between-country inequality is rising even among the uniformly

high-income countries of the HMD, which roughly occupy a single region.



Discussion

This study reveals that convergence in length of life is not as universal a phenomenon as it may at

first appear. To be sure, inequality in infant mortality appears to have fallen unambiguously, and

trends in life expectancy at birth, which depend heavily on trends in infant mortality, generally

imply much convergence over the past several decades (Moser, Shkolnikov and Leon, 2005; Wilson,

2001; White, 2002). But even the degree of global convergence in life expectancy from birth can

depend on the choice of subsample and the inequality measure. Among rich countries with high-

quality demographic data in the Human Mortality Database, for example, one measure of total

inequality in length of life from birth, the inter-quartile range, registered an increase between 1970

and 2000. This is probably because infant mortality was already so low in those countries that the

IQR is effectively measuring the spread in adult length of life.

   When the focus shifts to adult length of life, as it ultimately must over the natural course


                                                 16
of the mortality transition, there is considerably less evidence of convergence overall. The world

distribution of length of life above age 10 shifted outward by an equal amount at all ages, roughly 4

years between 1970 and 2000, maintaining a stable world standard deviation of length of life above

age 10, S10 , of about 16.9 years. The IQR and average life years lost, e†10 , register similar plateaus

in world inequality. Because they are proportional indexes, the Gini and Theil often show declines

in inequality surrounding adult length of life because the mean has increased while the variance has

not. But among high-income countries, even the Gini and Theil show barely any progress against

inequality in adult length of life, while S10 , the IQR, and e†10 all register increases.

   Regardless of the choice of measure, or whether we are considering length of life from birth

or from age 10, it turns out that the between-country share of inequality appears to be rising in

most subsamples over time. In the case of adult mortality, the absolute level of between-country

inequality has risen. While we find that the average variance within countries has actually fallen

over time in almost every instance, increases in the between-country component have been large,

even large enough in some subsamples to raise total inequality in adult length of life. This result

should be particularly troubling because the average variance within countries, which depends on

the shape of the life table, is based on data of lower quality in the broad cross section, which includes

countries with model life tables. And patterns of increasing between-country inequality are stronger

among countries with high-quality data. Aggregating the country-level data into geographic regions

defined by the World Bank region ultimately reveals a similar picture. There appears to be strong

regional covariation among similar countries because they are located near one another, but the

between-region variation in total inequality is no greater than the between-country variation.

   In discussing the implications of these patterns, it is important to assess whether they reflect

developments of which we were already aware. Wilmoth and Horiuchi (1999) and Edwards and

Tuljapurkar (2005) both describe the inequality plateaus reached around 1960 by advanced countries

that had completed their demographic transitions. Results here are unexpectedly reminiscent of

those findings in some ways, but as such they are in fact provocative. There is little reason to

expect developments in high income countries, which have reached more advanced stages of the

demographic transition and represent only 15–20 percent of the world’s population, to be at all

representative of global trends. One would expect developing countries to experience reductions

in S10 or the IQR during their epidemiological transitions. But while countries in some regions

                                                   17
have, many others apparently have not. Aside from continued gains against infant mortality, the

aggregate picture of world inequality in length of adult life since 1970 looks much like that of

advanced countries. This is not a pattern we would normally expect to see unfolding during the

natural course of the demographic and epidemiological transition.

   The decomposition analysis is helpful in understanding this odd result. It turns out that the

within-country component of total adult inequality has indeed been declining, as transition theory

suggests it should. As high levels of variance within developing countries have declined, the average

variance across countries has also fallen. While the decline in within-country inequality has perhaps

not been as rapid as one might expect, the more pressing question seems to be why between-country

inequality in adult length of life has risen across many subsamples.

   In addition to the epidemiological transition underway in developing countries, there have been

two other significant developments in world mortality since 1970 that are more like idiosyncratic

shocks and less like general trends. The rise of HIV/AIDS starting in the 1980s ultimately led to

a massive increase in adult mortality in an array of countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa but

not limited to that region. The collapse of communism in the early 1990s swept away social and

political structures in much of Central and Eastern Europe and Asia and brought with it much

economic and psychological upheaval. Either or both of these shocks, which typically affected

adults more than infants and children and impacted some countries far more greatly than others,

are clear candidates for explaining the rise in between-country inequality in adult length of life.

   In both cases, these shocks can explain some of the patterns we see, but the robustness of results

across subsamples complicates any attempt to decisively attribute between-country divergence to

either explanation. In unreported results, I restricted the HMD subsample to the 22 countries that

were not behind the Iron Curtain. I found that the standard deviation in M10 among this subgroup

rose from 1.5 to 1.8, while the average S10 fell from 14.7 to 14.2. Even among Western nations,

there were increases in between-country inequality.

   In the case of HIV/AIDS, there is somewhat more evidence in favor of a blanket explanation, at

least for developing countries. The United Nations Population Division (2006) identifies 60 countries

as hardest-hit by HIV/AIDS, including much of Sub-Saharan Africa, China, and the U.S. Removing

them from the analysis lowers both the within and between-country inequality components of S10 ,

and both components are falling over time, from 16.1 to 15.3 and from 5.3 to 4.7. But by contrast,

                                                 18
removing countries hardest-hit by HIV/AIDS from the HMD sample, a subgroup that includes the

U.S., Russia, and the Ukraine, does not qualitatively change results at all. In the HMD subsample

without those three countries hardest-hit by HIV/AIDS, between-country inequality still rises from

1.6 to 2.7, while within-country inequality falls, from 14.3 to 13.9. It appears that HIV/AIDS can

help explain between-country divergence in the broad cross section of rich and poor countries, but

not in the subsample of rich countries alone.

       It is tempting to search for a single explanation for these patterns, but the insights provided

here imply that between-country divergence in average length of adult life may be associated with

very different factors across different groups of countries or regions. Part of the phenomenon seems

to be associated with advanced countries, which have reached a low-variance plateau and are now

experiencing some divergence in the average length of adult life. Another part is attributable to

developing countries languishing at high levels of variance and low average life expectancy, probably

because of the ravages of HIV/AIDS. The underlying etiologic causes of between-country divergence

thus seem likely to be distinct at different levels of development.

       Still, extant patterns bear some tentative implications for understanding these trends, at least

by revealing what is not responsible. If socioeconomic determinants of mortality were responsible

for increasing variance between countries, one would expect them also to have raised variance

within countries. Increased alcoholism, crime, or poverty would reduce the mean length of life

within a country but probably should also raise the variance because each contributes to heightened

uncertainty. As revealed by Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005), lower socioeconomic status within

the U.S. is consistently associated with reduced mean and increased variance in length of adult

life, for example. We see some evidence of reduced average life coupled with increased variance in

regional trends in Europe and Central Asia, but that is not the dominant trend. Reductions in

within-country inequality coupled with increases in between-country inequality, such as we see in

the data, are not particularly consistent with a story about socioeconomic determinants.9

       In addition, trends in the world distribution of adult length of life appear to be quite different

from trends in the world distribution of income. Theil (1979) and Sala-i-Martin (2006) report
   9
     By this logic, the spread of HIV/AIDS also seems like less of a coherent explanation because communicable
infectious diseases also simultaneously lower the mean and raise the variance of length of life. We see traces of this
within sub-Saharan Africa, but even there the evidence is not entirely compelling. If HIV/AIDS were singularly
important, we would expect to find increases in both within and between-country components of inequality, and
reality is more complicated.


                                                         19
that the within-country component of world income inequality is smaller than the between-country

piece, which is the reverse of what we see here. More importantly, Sala-i-Martin (2006) reveals that

the within-country component has been increasing over time while the between-country component

has fallen, also the reverse of the pattern in length of adult life. Incongruent time trends suggest

something else must be important for population health.

    Education is another key covariate of health, but it is more difficult to measure than either

income or mortality, and studies of global inequality in education have offered mixed results. Many

have explored only between-country variation in education, possibly because of data quality but

also because there is much interest in explaining convergence in income per capita across countries.

Using the dataset compiled by Barro and Lee (2001) for example, Sab and Smith (2002) study

human capital accumulation and report convergence across 84 countries between 1970 and 1990

in average education, life expectancy, and infant mortality. Also examining the Barro and Lee

(2001) data, de Gregorio and Lee (2002) show that within-country inequality in education, as

measured by the average across countries in the standard deviation of educational attainment,

rose between 1965 and 1990 everywhere except in Latin America. But between-country inequality,

indexed by the standard deviation in average education, also rose except among the OECD. Crespo

Cuaresma (2006) argues there are notable differences across datasets in decadal fluctuations in

average education across OECD countries, but no data that he examines register a net increase in

between-country inequality from 1970 and 2000. Given conflicting results, it is difficult to reject

the hypothesis that trends in education inequality, if measured correctly, might be important for

trends in life-span inequality. But taken as a whole, the evidence suggests that socioeconomic

determinants in general seem unlikely to have driven the trends in the distribution of length of

adult life.

    It would help to characterize the widening gap between countries as one in which either some

countries are increasingly lagging behind the pack or others are increasingly leaving the pack be-

hind. But reality could easily be a mixture of both dynamics, with one or the other prevailing

at a particular level of development and disease environment. If inequality between countries in

length of adult life were due to uneven diffusion of healthy practices and technology across political

boundaries, one could readily imagine a world in which there emerged leaders and followers among

countries, at the same time there is falling inequality within countries. A similar story might also

                                                 20
predict varying levels of exposure across countries to the spread of new infectious diseases like

HIV/AIDS, if the latter tended to affect everyone within a uniformly ill-prepared country.

   An emerging view in health economics is that knowledge and technology are simultaneously

important for gains against mortality and also likely to produce inequality at least in the short run

(Cutler, Deaton and Lleras-Muney, 2006), while income appears to be relatively less important.

But this argument is based on historical patterns within countries of technology adoption, of the

diffusion of knowledge and inequality in education, and of the within-country health gradient.

While the basic outline of that story may loosely fit what I have revealed about trends in between-

country inequality in this paper, it is not immediately clear why technological diffusion should

be faster within countries than between them, as it would have to be in order to fit my results.

Still, this perspective seems like it is worth exploring further, especially if outcomes reflect some

combination of factors including technology and other influences. Global convergence in incomes,

for example, could be driving down within-country inequality in length of life, while divergent

access to life-saving technologies could account for the widening of between-country inequality.

   Although specific policy recommendations would require a much deeper understanding of its

causes, the rising importance of between-country variation in adult length of life over time bears

very different implications than the standard finding in the literature examining cross-sectional

evidence on health inequality. Those papers find that within-country variation in health is the

larger component of global health inequality (Pradhan, Sahn and Younger, 2003; Smits and Monden,

2009). While that is still true, and the variance in length of life faced by an individual is indeed large

and costly, this new finding about the trend toward increasing inequality between countries suggests

a newly emerging priority for health surveillance and policy. Much progress has been made in

reducing infant mortality worldwide, and there are also signs of reductions in adult variance within

countries, as is consistent with the demographic and epidemiological transition. But we appear

now to be facing a new challenge during an era of considerable uncertainty about socioeconomic

well-being and new contagious diseases: rising between-country inequality in adult length of life.

At this early stage of our understanding, these results can only suggest that a newfound importance

surrounds efforts to facilitate the diffusion across countries of healthy practices, knowledge, and

medical technologies that extend average adult life.



                                                   21
References
Allman, James and John May. 1979. “Fertility, Mortality, Migration, and Family Planning in
  Haiti.” Population Studies 33(3):505–521.
Atkinson, Anthony B. 1970. “On the Measurement of Inequality.” Journal of Economic Theory
  2(3):244–263.
Banister, Judith and Kenneth Hill. 2004. “Mortality in China, 1964–2000.” Population Studies
  58(1):55–75.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee. 2001. “International Data on Educational Attainment: Up-
  dates and Implications.” Oxford Economic Papers 53(3):541–563.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1992. “Convergence.” jpe 100(2):223–251.
Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2005. “The Quantity and Quality of
  Life and the Evolution of World Inequality.” American Economic Review 95(1):277–291.
Bongaarts, John. 2005. “Long-Range Trends in Adult Mortality: Models and Projection Methods.”
  Demography 42(1):23–49.
Cheung, Siu Lan Karen, Jean-Marie Robine, Edward Jow-Ching Tu and Graziella Caselli. 2005.
  “Three Dimensions of the Survival Curve: Horizontalization, Verticalization, and Longevity Ex-
  tension.” Demography 42(2):243–258.
Coale, Ansley J. 1991. “Excess Female Mortality and the Balance of the Sexes in the Population: An
  Estimate of the Number of “Missing Females”.” Population and Development Review 17(3):517–
  523.
Coale, Ansley J. and Judith Banister. 1994. “Five Decades of Missing Females in China.” Demog-
  raphy 31(3):459–479.
Coale, Ansley J. and Paul Demeny. 1983. Regional Model Life Tables and Stable Populations. 2 ed.
  New York: Academic Press.
Crespo Cuaresma, Jesús. 2006. “Convergence of Educational Attainment Levels in the OECD:
  More Data, More Problems?” Economics of Education Review 25(2):173–178.
Cutler, David, Angus Deaton and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “The Determinants of Mortality.”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3):97–120.
de Gregorio, José and Jong-Wha Lee. 2002. “Education and Income Inequality: New Evidence
  from Cross-Country Data.” Review of Income and Wealth .
Edwards, Ryan D. 2008. “The Cost of Uncertain Life Span.” NBER Working Paper 14093.
Edwards, Ryan D. 2009. “The Cost of Uncertain Life Span.” Unpublished manuscript, March.
Edwards, Ryan D. and Shripad Tuljapurkar. 2005. “Inequality in Life Spans and a New Perspective
  on Mortality Convergence Across Industrialized Countries.” Population and Development Review
  31(4):645–675.
Finch, Caleb E. and Eileen M. Crimmins. 2004. “Inflammatory Exposure and Historical Changes
  in Human Life-Spans.” Science 305(5691):1736–1739.
Finch, Caleb E., Malcolm C. Pike and Matthew Witten. 1990. “Slow Mortality Rate Accelerations
  During Aging in Some Animals Approximate That of Humans.” Science 249(4971):902–905.

                                               22
Foster, James E. and Amartya Sen. 1997. On Economic Inequality After a Quarter Century. Oxford:
  Clarendon Press.
Glei, Dana A. and Shiro Horiuchi. 2007. “The narrowing sex differential in life expectancy in high-
  income populations: Effects of differences in the age pattern of mortality.” Population Studies
  61(2):141–159.
Goesling, Brian and Glenn Firebaugh. 2004. “The Trend in Between-Nation Health Inequality.”
 Population and Development Review 30(1):131–146.
Human Mortality Database. 2009. University of California, Berkeley (USA) and Max Planck In-
 stitute for Demographic Research (Germany). Available at www.mortality.org.
Keyfitz, Nathan. 1985. Applied Mathematical Demography. 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
Lee, Ronald D. and Lawrence R. Carter. 1992. “Modeling and Forecasting U.S. Mortality.” Journal
  of the American Statistical Association 87(419):659–671.
Lopez, Alan D., O. B. Ahmad, Michel Guillot, M. Inoue, B. D. Ferguson, J. A. Salomon, Christo-
  pher J. L. Murray and Kenneth H. Hill. 2002. World Mortality in 2000: Life Tables for 191
  Countries. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Lorenz, Max O. 1905. “Methods of Measuring the Concentration of Wealth.” Publications of the
  American Statistical Association 9(70):209–219.
Meara, Ellen R., Seth Richards and David M. Cutler. 2008. “The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in
 Mortality and Life Expectancy, By Education, 1981–2000.” Health Affairs 27(2):350–360.
Moser, Kath, Vladimir Shkolnikov and David A. Leon. 2005. “World mortality 1950–2000: di-
 vergence replaces convergence from the late 1980s.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization
 83(3):202–209.
Murray, C. J. L., B. D. Ferguson, A. D. Lopez, M. Guillot, J. A. Salomon and O. Ahmad. 2003.
 “Modified Logit Life Table System: Principles, Empirical Validation, and Application.” Popula-
 tion Studies 57(2):165–182.
Pradhan, Menno, David E. Sahn and Stephen D. Younger. 2003. “Decomposing World Health
  Inequality.” Journal of Health Economics 22:271–293.
Preston, Samuel H., Nathan Keyfitz and Robert Schoen. 1972. Causes of Death: Life Tables for
  National Populations. New York: Academic Press.
Preston, Samuel H. and Paul Taubman. 1994. Socioeconomic Differences in Adult Mortality and
  Health Status. In The Demography of Aging, ed. Linda G. Martin and Samuel H. Preston. Wash-
  ington: National Academy Press pp. 279–318.
Pritchett, Lant. 1997. “Divergence, Big Time.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3):3–17.
Ram, Rati. 2006. “State of the “Life Span Revolution” between 1980 and 2000.” Journal of Devel-
  opment Economics 80(2):518–526.
Sab, Randa and Stephen C. Smith. 2002. “Human Capital Convergence: A Joint Estimation
  Approach.” IMF Staff Papers 49(2):200–211.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 2006. “The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty and ... Conver-
  gence, Period.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2):351–397.



                                                23
Shkolnikov, Vladimir M., Evgueni E. Andreev and Alexander Z. Begun. 2003. “Gini coefficient as
  a life table function: computation from discrete data, decomposition of differences and empirical
  examples.” Demographic Research 8(11).
Smits, Jeroen and Chistiaan Monden. 2009. “Length of life inequality around the globe.” Social
  Science & Medicine 68(6):1114–1123. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.12.034.
Theil, Henri. 1967. Economics and Information Theory. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Theil, Henri. 1979. “World Income Inequality and Its Components.” Economics Letters 2(1):99–102.
Tuljapurkar, Shripad and Ryan D. Edwards. 2009. “Variance in Death and Its Implications for
  Modeling and Forecasting Mortality.” NBER Working Paper 15288.
United Nations Population Division. 1982. Model Life Tables for Developing Countries. Number 77
 in “Population Studies” New York: United Nations.
United Nations Population Division. 2006. World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision. New
 York: United Nations.
Vallin, Jacques. 1975. “La mortalité en Algérie.” Population 33(6):1023–1046.
Vaupel, James W. and Vladimir Canudas-Romo. 2003. “Decomposing Change in Life Expectancy:
  A Bouquet of Formulas in Honor of Nathan Keyfitz’s 90th Birthday.” Demography 40(2):201–216.
White, Kevin M. 2002. “Longevity Advances in High-Income Countries.” Population and Develop-
 ment Review 28(1):59–76.
Wilmoth, John R. and Shiro Horiuchi. 1999. “Rectangularization Revisited: Variability of Age at
 Death within Human Populations.” Demography 36(4):475–495.
Wilson, Chris. 2001. “On the Scale of Global Demographic Convergence 1950–2000.” Population
 and Development Review 27(1):155–171.
World Health Organization Life Table Database. 2009. Available at www.who.int/whosis.
World Health Organization Mortality Database. 2009. Available at www.who.int/whosis/mort.




                                                24
       Table 1: Characteristics of the world distribution of length of life in 1970 and 2000

                                                                 No model
                                              All countries      life tables     HMD     only
    Sample characteristics                    1970 2000         1970 2000       1970     2000
     Number of countries                       180    180         61     61       33       33
     Total population in millions             3,712 6,099       2,688 4,030      964     1,147
     GDP per capita in 2000 US$               4,360 7,505       5,168 9,617     11,821   22,775

    Characteristics of length of life from birth
    Life expectancy at birth, e0           58.8         66.9    61.4    69.9     70.7     75.8
    Standard deviation from age 0, S0      27.4         23.5    26.1    21.5     18.9     17.0
    Interquartile range (IQR)              22.4         20.6    21.0    19.2     18.0     18.5
    Avg. years lost due to death, e†       20.6         17.7    19.4    16.2     14.7     13.8
    Gini coefficient                      0.247        0.180    0.221   0.156    0.135    0.116
    Theil index                           0.442        0.242    0.370   0.182    0.125    0.060

     Survivorship to age 10, ℓ10              0.867    0.937    0.888   0.956    0.972    0.990

    Characteristics of length of life above age 10
    Mean length of life above age 10, M10 67.5   71.3           68.9    73.0     72.7     76.5
    Standard deviation above age 10, S10   17.0  16.8           16.3    16.1     15.1     15.4
    IQR above age 10                       20.6  20.0           19.7    18.9     17.8     18.4
    Avg. years lost above age 10, e†10     14.5  14.3           14.0    13.7     13.1     13.2
    Gini coefficient above age 10         0.137 0.127           0.128   0.118    0.111    0.108
    Theil index above age 10              0.046 0.039           0.040   0.033    0.029    0.027

Notes: Each column presents statistics based on population-weighted averages across countries in
the given subsample. Inequality statistics are based on the aggregate probability distribution of
length of life for the subsample, where densities are the life-table deaths, n dx . HMD stands for
Human Mortality Database (2009), the highest-quality source. Statistics measured above age 10
are calculated conditional on survival to age 10. The mean length of life above age 10, M10 , is
equal to e10 + 10. The Gini coefficient is calculated per Shkolnikov, Andreev and Begun (2003).
The Theil index is constructed per Pradhan, Sahn and Younger (2003). The interquartile range
(IQR) is calculated using cubic splines on the original 5-year life tables taken to tenths of a year.
Average life years lost due to death, e† , is calculated per Vaupel and Canudas-Romo (2003).




                                                 25
         Table 2: Characteristics of regional distributions of length of life in 1970 and 2000

                                   Life expect.        Avg. life above      Survivorship          Population
                                    at birth, e0         age 10, M10        at age 10, ℓ10         (millions)
 World Bank region                1970     2000        1970     2000        1970    2000         1970 2000
 East Asia & Pacific              58.3     69.7        66.6      72.6       0.871   0.959        1,133 1,819
 Europe & Central Asia            67.3     68.2        71.0      70.3       0.947   0.970         359     448
 High income                      70.6     77.7        72.6      78.3       0.971   0.992         801    1,007
 Latin America & Caribbean        60.4     71.5        68.4      74.0       0.881   0.965         275     516
 Middle East & North Africa       53.7     67.7        65.0      71.4       0.822   0.947         127     277
 South Asia                       47.8     60.9        62.5      67.6       0.757   0.898         731    1,363
 Sub-Saharan Africa               45.8     50.7        61.0      60.9       0.741   0.827         286     668

                                  Std. dev. from       Std. dev. above       Theil   index        Theil index
                                     age 0 S0            age 10, S10         from    birth       above age 10
 World Bank region                1970    2000         1970     2000        1970      2000       1970 2000
 East Asia & Pacific              26.5     20.5        16.4     15.1        0.419     0.169      0.044 0.030
 Europe & Central Asia            21.9     19.8        15.9     16.2        0.211     0.139      0.035 0.036
 High income                      19.0     15.9        15.0     14.4        0.130     0.050      0.029 0.022
 Latin America & Caribbean        26.8     21.1        16.8     16.7        0.428     0.157      0.043 0.035
 Middle East & North Africa       29.2     21.5        17.9     15.2        0.605     0.210      0.056 0.031
 South Asia                       30.1     25.7        17.7     17.1        0.720     0.369      0.058 0.045
 Sub-Saharan Africa               30.9     28.4        19.8     19.4        0.776     0.553      0.077 0.066

Notes:




                                                  26
    Table 3: Cross-country decompositions of world variance in length of life, 1970 and 2000

                                                                       No model
                                                   All countries       life tables    HMD     only
 Inequality in length of life from birth           1970 2000          1970 2000       1970    2000
  Theil index                                      0.442 0.242        0.370 0.182     0.125   0.060
  Within-country                                   0.428 0.233        0.359 0.177     0.125   0.059
  Between-country                                  0.014 0.008        0.010 0.005     0.000   0.001
  Share due to between-country                     3.1%    3.5%       2.8% 2.6%       0.1%    1.3%

  Standard deviation from age 0, S0                 27.4       23.5    26.1   21.5    18.9    17.1
   Within-country                                   25.7       21.9    24.6   20.5    18.9    16.4
   Between-country                                  9.4        8.4     8.8     6.4     1.7     4.8
   Share due to between-country                    11.9%      12.8%   11.4%   8.9%    0.8%    7.8%

 Inequality in length of life above age 10
  Theil index above age 10                            0.046   0.039   0.040   0.033   0.029   0.027
  Within-country                                      0.043   0.036   0.038   0.032   0.029   0.026
  Between-country                                     0.002   0.003   0.002   0.002   0.000   0.001
  Share due to between-country                        6.6%    7.2%    4.5%    4.5%    0.7%    6.2%

  Standard deviation above age 10, S10                17.0     16.8   16.3    16.1    15.1    15.4
   Within-country                                     16.4     15.9   15.8    15.4    15.0    14.8
   Between-country                                     4.6     5.3     3.9     4.4     1.5     4.4
   Share due to between-country                       7.2%    10.1%   5.8%    7.6%    0.9%    8.3%

Notes: The source is author’s calculations based on the data described in Appendix Table 1. HMD
stands for Human Mortality Database (2009), the highest-quality source. Probability densities are
the life-table deaths, n dx . Statistics measured above age 10 are calculated conditional on survival
to age 10. The Theil index is constructed per Pradhan, Sahn and Younger (2003). The within and
between-country components of the standard deviation are the square roots of the components of
the variance. The share of the standard deviation attributable to between-country inequality is the
analogous share of the variance.




                                                 27
                            Figure 1: World distributions of length of life in 1970 and 2000

                Density
                          .15
                          .1
                          .05
                          0              A. Unconditional distribution from birth




                                0   10    20   30   40    50         60   70   80    90     100    110
                                                               Age


                                    B. Distribution conditional on survival to age 10
                          .15
                          .1
                Density
                          .05
                          0




                                0   10    20   30   40    50         60   70   80    90     100    110
                                                               Age

                                                         1970              2000


Notes: Data are life-table deaths (n dx ) for the world population around the year 1970 or in 2000 constructed from
the life tables and populations of 180 countries observed in both periods, as described in the text. Panel A plots the
entire distribution across all ages; Panel B rescales death probabilities to sum to unity above age 10.




                                                          28
              Figure 2: Distributions of length of life in 1970 and 2000 by world region


                                              A. East Asia & Pacific                                                 B. Europe & Central Asia




                                                                                                    .15
                          .15




                                                                                                    .1
                       .1
                Density




                                                                                          Density
                                                                                                    .05
                          .05
                          0




                                                                                                    0
                                0   10   20    30    40   50 60   70   80   90 100 110                    0   10   20   30   40   50 60   70   80   90 100 110
                                                            Age                                                                     Age


                                                    C. High income                                                 D. Latin America & Caribbean




                                                                                                    .15
                          .2
                          .15




                                                                                                    .1
                Density




                                                                                          Density
                  .1




                                                                                                    .05
                          .05
                          0




                                                                                                    0




                                0   10   20    30    40   50 60   70   80   90 100 110                    0   10   20   30   40   50 60   70   80   90 100 110
                                                            Age                                                                     Age




                                         E. Middle East & North Africa                                                       F. South Asia
                                                                                                    .15
                          .15




                                                                                                    .1
                          .1
                Density




                                                                                          Density
                                                                                                    .05
                          .05
                          0




                                                                                                    0




                                0   10   20    30    40   50 60   70   80   90 100 110                    0   10   20   30   40   50 60   70   80   90 100 110
                                                            Age                                                                     Age


                                              G. Sub−Saharan Africa
                          .15
                          .1
                Density
                          .05
                          0




                                0   10   20    30    40   50 60   70   80   90 100 110
                                                            Age




Notes: Data are life-table deaths (n dx ) for populations in seven world regions around the year 1970 or in 2000
constructed from the life tables and populations of 180 countries observed in both periods, as described in the text.
Regions are defined on the basis of development and geography by the World Bank.




                                                                                     29
Figure 3: Trends across world regions in the mean and standard deviation in length of life since
1970

                                                                                   A. Unconditional variance vs. mean from birth
                                                                                         Sub−Saharan Africa
                          Standard deviation in age at death at birth, S0
                                                                      30


                                                                                 South Asia
                                                                                                      Middle East & North Africa

                                                                                                     Sub−Saharan Africa

                                                                                               East Asia & Pacific        Latin America & Caribbean
                                                     25




                                                                                                                     South Asia



                                                                                                                                         Europe & Central Asia
                                                                                                            Middle East & North Africa           Latin America & Caribbean
                                                                                                                                              East Asia & Pacific
                                      20




                                                                                                                 Europe & Central Asia
                                                                                                                                               High income




                                                                                                                                                                 High income
                         15




                                                                            40                  50                 60                70                           80
                                                                                                           Life expectancy at birth, e0


                                                                                             B. Variance vs. mean above age 10
                         Standard deviation in age at death above 10, S10
                                                                    20




                                                                                  Sub−Saharan Africa
                                                                                  Sub−Saharan Africa
                                                       18




                                                                                                      Middle East & North Africa
                                                                            South Asia

                                                                                                                  South Asia
                                                                                         Latin America & Caribbean                            Latin America & Caribbean
                                                                                                             East Asia & Pacific
                                                                                                                              Europe & Central Asia
                                         16




                                                                                                                                 Europe & Central Asia

                                                                                                        Middle East & North Africa         East Asia & Pacific
                                                                                                                                           High income

                                                                                                                                                       High income
                            14




                                                                            60                     65                  70                 75                                   80
                                                                                                        Mean length of life above 10, M10

                                                                                                                     1970          2000


Notes: Data are means and standard deviations of length of life in world regions based on distributions of life-table
deaths (n dx ). Regions are defined on the basis of development and geography by the World Bank. The unconditional
standard deviation of length of life at birth is S0 , while the standard deviation above age 10 is S10 . The mean length
of life starting from birth is e0 , life expectancy at birth. The mean length of life above age 10, M10 , is equal to
e10 + 10.




                                                                                                                       30
Figure 4: Convergence across countries in the mean and standard deviation in length of adult life,
1970 to 2000

                                                                                        A. Convergence in the std. dev. of adult life
                    Change in st. dev. in age at death above 10, 1970−2000
                                −4         −2        0       2        4




                                                                                  Slope = −0.238

                                                                                  R−squared = 0.145
                      −6




                                                                             12                14                16              18                20
                                                                                         Standard deviation in age at death above 10, S10, in 1970


                                                                                       B. Convergence in the mean length of adult life
                    Change in mean length of life above 10, 1970−2000
                               −10         0            10        20




                                                                                  Slope = −0.106

                                                                                  R−squared = 0.021
                    −20




                                                                                  55                60              65               70                 75
                                                                                                   Mean length of above 10, M10, in 1970


Notes:




                                                                                                                31
Figure 5: Convergence across countries in life expectancy at birth and survivorship at age 10, 1970
to 2000

                                                                                A. Convergence in life expectancy at birth
                                                                 20
                     Change in life expectancy at birth, 1970−2000
                                    0             10




                                                                                                                              Slope = −0.271

                                                                                                                              R−squared = 0.270
                    −10




                                                                           40                  50              60                70               80
                                                                                           Life expectancy at birth, e0, in 1970


                                                                                B. Convergence in survivorship at age 10
                    Change in survivorship to age 10, 1970−2000
                                                            .2




                                                                                                                          Slope = −0.486

                                                                                                                         R−squared = 0.731
                      0       .05        .1        .15




                                                                      .6              .7                   .8                  .9                 1
                                                                                             Survivorship at age 10 in 1970


Notes:




                                                                                                       32
Figure 6: Histograms of the standard deviation in length of life above age 10, S10 , in 1970 and 2000


                          A. Distribution of S10 in 1970                                             B. Distribution of M10 in 1970
             15




                                  Mean = 16.5, Std. Dev. = 1.8                                  Mean = 67.1, Std. Dev. = 4.6




                                                                                 15
                10
        Frequency




                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                 10
             5




                                                                                 5
             0




                                                                                 0




                     12    14      16         18          20     22                       50         55       60       65      70    75        80
                                    Country S10                                                                    Country M10


                          C. Distribution of S10 in 2000                                             D. Distribution of M10 in 2000
             15




                                                                                 20




                                  Mean = 15.9, Std. Dev. = 1.7                                  Mean = 71.0, Std. Dev. = 5.5
                                                                                     15
                10
        Frequency




                                                                           Frequency
                                                                              10
             5




                                                                                 5
             0




                                                                                 0




                     12    14      16         18          20     22                        50        55       60      65       70   75    80
                                    Country S10                                                                    Country M10



Notes: Graphs are histograms of country-level observations of S10 , the standard deviation in length of life above age
10. Means and standard deviations of S10 are weighted based on population. The lines plot kernel density estimates.




                                                                      33
Appendix: Data sources

                                        Table A-1: Dataset contents


Country                  Code   World Bank Region            Year 1    Source   Year 2   Source   Quality

Cambodia                 KHM    East Asia & Pacific             1970     10       2000     4         C
China                    CHN    East Asia & Pacific          1964-82     7        2000     7         B
Fiji                     FJI    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Indonesia                IDN    East Asia & Pacific             1970     10       2000     4         C
Korea, Dem. Rep.         PRK    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Lao PDR                  LAO    East Asia & Pacific             1970     10       2000     4         C
Malaysia                 MYS    East Asia & Pacific             1990     4*       2000     4         C
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.    FSM    East Asia & Pacific             1970     10       2000     4         C
Mongolia                 MNG    East Asia & Pacific             1990     4*       2000     4         C
Myanmar                  MMR    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Papua New Guinea         PNG    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Philippines              PHL    East Asia & Pacific             1970     2        2000     4         B
Samoa                    WSM    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Solomon Islands          SLB    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Thailand                 THA    East Asia & Pacific             1970     2        2000     4         B
Tonga                    TON    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Vanuatu                  VUT    East Asia & Pacific             1970     11       2000     4         C
Vietnam                  VNM    East Asia & Pacific             1990     4*       2000     4         C
Albania                  ALB    Europe & Central Asia           1990     4*       2000     4         C
Armenia                  ARM    Europe & Central Asia           1981     5*       2000     4         C
Azerbaijan               AZE    Europe & Central Asia           1981     5*       2000     4         C
Belarus                  BLR    Europe & Central Asia           1970     1        2000     1         A
Bosnia and Herzegovina   BIH    Europe & Central Asia           1982     2*       2000     4         C
Bulgaria                 BGR    Europe & Central Asia           1970     1        2000     1         A
Croatia                  HRV    Europe & Central Asia           1982     2*       2000     4         C
Georgia                  GEO    Europe & Central Asia           1981     5*       2000     4         C
Kazakhstan               KAZ    Europe & Central Asia           1981     5*       2000     4         C
Kyrgyz Republic          KGZ    Europe & Central Asia           1981     5*       2000     4         C
Latvia                   LVA    Europe & Central Asia           1970     1        2000     1         A
Lithuania                LTU    Europe & Central Asia           1970     1        2000     1         A
Macedonia, FYR           MKD    Europe & Central Asia           1982     2*       2000     4         C

                                                                                    Continued on next page


                                                 34
                                Table A-1 – continued from previous page

Country                 Code   World Bank Region           Year 1    Source     Year 2   Source   Quality

Moldova                 MDA    Europe & Central Asia          1981         2*     2000     4         C
Poland                  POL    Europe & Central Asia          1970         1      2000     1         A
Romania                 ROM    Europe & Central Asia          1970         2      2000     4         B
Russian Federation      RUS    Europe & Central Asia          1970         1      2000     1         A
Serbia and Montenegro   SCG    Europe & Central Asia          1982         2*     2000     4         C
Tajikistan              TJK    Europe & Central Asia          1981         5*     2000     4         C
Turkey                  TUR    Europe & Central Asia          1970         10     2000     4         C
Turkmenistan            TKM    Europe & Central Asia          1981         5*     2000     4         C
Ukraine                 UKR    Europe & Central Asia          1970         1      2000     1         A
Uzbekistan              UZB    Europe & Central Asia          1981         5*     2000     4         C
Australia               AUS    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Austria                 AUT    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Bahamas, The            BHS    High income                    1980         5*     2000     4         C
Bahrain                 BHR    High income                    1990         4*     2000     4         C
Barbados                BRB    High income                    1970         10     2000     4         C
Belgium                 BEL    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Brunei Darussalam       BRN    High income                    1990         4*     2000     4         C
Canada                  CAN    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Cyprus                  CYP    High income                    1990         4*     2000     4         C
Czech Republic          CZE    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Denmark                 DNK    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Equatorial Guinea       GNQ    High income                    1970         10     2000     4         C
Estonia                 EST    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Finland                 FIN    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
France                  FRA    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Germany                 DEU    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Greece                  GRC    High income                    1970         2      2000     4         B
Hong Kong, China        HKG    High income                    1971         8      2000     8         B
Hungary                 HUN    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Iceland                 ISL    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Ireland                 IRL    High income                    1970         2      2000     4         B
Israel                  ISR    High income                    1975         2      2000     4         B
Italy                   ITA    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A

                                                                                    Continued on next page



                                               35
                               Table A-1 – continued from previous page

Country                Code   World Bank Region           Year 1    Source     Year 2   Source   Quality

Japan                  JPN    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Korea, Rep.            KOR    High income                    1973         2      2000     4         B
Kuwait                 KWT    High income                    1975         3      2000     4         B
Luxembourg             LUX    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Malta                  MLT    High income                    1970         5*     2000     4         C
Netherlands            NLD    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
New Zealand            NZL    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Norway                 NOR    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Oman                   OMN    High income                    1990         4*     2000     4         C
Portugal               PRT    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Puerto Rico            PRI    High income                    1970         5*     2000     5         C
Qatar                  QAT    High income                    1990         4*     2000     4         C
Saudi Arabia           SAU    High income                    1970         10     2000     4         C
Singapore              SGP    High income                    1970         2      2000     4         B
Slovak Republic        SVK    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Slovenia               SVN    High income                    1982         2*     2000     1         C
Spain                  ESP    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Sweden                 SWE    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Switzerland            CHE    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Taiwan                 TWN    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Trinidad and Tobago    TTO    High income                    1960         3      2000     4         B
United Arab Emirates   ARE    High income                    1970         10     2000     4         C
United Kingdom         GBR    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
United States          USA    High income                    1970         1      2000     1         A
Argentina              ARG    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         2      2000     4         B
Belize                 BLZ    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         11     2000     4         C
Bolivia                BOL    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         11     2000     4         C
Brazil                 BRA    Latin America & Caribbean      1980         5*     2000     4         C
Chile                  CHL    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         2      2000     4         B
Colombia               COL    Latin America & Caribbean      1964         2      2000     4         B
Costa Rica             CRI    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         2      2000     4         B
Cuba                   CUB    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         2      2000     4         B
Dominica               DMA    Latin America & Caribbean      1969         5*     2000     4         C

                                                                                   Continued on next page



                                              36
                               Table A-1 – continued from previous page

Country                Code   World Bank Region            Year 1    Source    Year 2   Source   Quality

Dominican Republic     DOM    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         5*     2000     4         C
Ecuador                ECU    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         5*     2000     4         C
El Salvador            SLV    Latin America & Caribbean      1971         2      2000     4         B
Guatemala              GTM    Latin America & Caribbean      1964         2      2000     4         B
Guyana                 GUY    Latin America & Caribbean      1960         3      2000     4         B
Haiti                  HTI    Latin America & Caribbean    1970-71        6      2000     4         B
Honduras               HND    Latin America & Caribbean      1974         2      2000     4         B
Jamaica                JAM    Latin America & Caribbean      1981         5*     2000     4         C
Mexico                 MEX    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         2      2000     4         B
Nicaragua              NIC    Latin America & Caribbean      1990         4*     2000     4         C
Panama                 PAN    Latin America & Caribbean      1960         2      2000     4         B
Paraguay               PRY    Latin America & Caribbean      1990         4*     2000     4         C
Peru                   PER    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         2      2000     4         B
St. Lucia              LCA    Latin America & Caribbean      1972         5*     2000     4         C
St. Vincent and        VCT    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         10     2000     4         C
the Grenadines
Suriname               SUR    Latin America & Caribbean      1971         5*     2000     4         C
Uruguay                URY    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         5*     2000     4         C
Venezuela, RB          VEN    Latin America & Caribbean      1970         5*     2000     4         C
Algeria                DZA    Middle East & North Africa   1969-70        9      2000     4         B
Djibouti               DJI    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Egypt, Arab Rep.       EGY    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Iran, Islamic Rep.     IRN    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Iraq                   IRQ    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Jordan                 JOR    Middle East & North Africa     1990         4*     2000     4         C
Lebanon                LBN    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Libya                  LBY    Middle East & North Africa     1970         11     2000     4         C
Morocco                MAR    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Syrian Arab Republic   SYR    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Tunisia                TUN    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Yemen, Rep.            YEM    Middle East & North Africa     1970         10     2000     4         C
Afghanistan            AFG    South Asia                     1970         10     2000     4         C
Bangladesh             BGD    South Asia                     1970         10     2000     4         C

                                                                                   Continued on next page



                                              37
                                   Table A-1 – continued from previous page

Country                    Code   World Bank Region           Year 1    Source     Year 2   Source   Quality

Bhutan                     BTN    South Asia                     1970         10     2000     4         C
India                      IND    South Asia                     1971         2      2000     4         B
Maldives                   MDV    South Asia                     1990         4*     2000     4         C
Nepal                      NPL    South Asia                     1970         10     2000     4         C
Pakistan                   PAK    South Asia                     1970         11     2000     4         C
Sri Lanka                  LKA    South Asia                     1970         10     2000     4         C
Angola                     AGO    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Benin                      BEN    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Botswana                   BWA    Sub-Saharan Africa             1982         10     2000     4         C
Burkina Faso               BFA    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Burundi                    BDI    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Cameroon                   CMR    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Cape Verde                 CPV    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Central African Republic   CAF    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Chad                       TCD    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Comoros                    COM    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Congo, Dem. Rep.           ZAR    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Congo, Rep.                COG    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Cte d’Ivoire               CIV    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Eritrea                    ERI    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         11     2000     4         C
Ethiopia                   ETH    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Gabon                      GAB    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Gambia, The                GMB    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Ghana                      GHA    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Guinea                     GIN    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Guinea-Bissau              GNB    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Kenya                      KEN    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Lesotho                    LSO    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Liberia                    LBR    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Madagascar                 MDG    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Malawi                     MWI    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Mali                       MLI    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C
Mauritania                 MRT    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4         C

                                                                                       Continued on next page



                                                  38
                              Table A-1 – continued from previous page

Country               Code   World Bank Region           Year 1    Source     Year 2   Source   Quality

Mauritius             MUS    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         5*     2000     4        C
Mozambique            MOZ    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Namibia               NAM    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Niger                 NER    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Nigeria               NGA    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Rwanda                RWA    Sub-Saharan Africa             1990         4*     2000     4        C
So Tom and Principe   STP    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Senegal               SEN    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Sierra Leone          SLE    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Somalia               SOM    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
South Africa          ZAF    Sub-Saharan Africa             1960         2      2000     4        B
Sudan                 SDN    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Swaziland             SWZ    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Tanzania              TZA    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Togo                  TGO    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Uganda                UGA    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Zambia                ZMB    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
Zimbabwe              ZWE    Sub-Saharan Africa             1970         10     2000     4        C
1




                                             39
Notes: An asterisk appears to the right of each life table that is rescaled so that it matches

period life expectancy at birth for both sexes combined in 1970 as reported by the United Nations

Population Division (2006). The variance in adult length of life remains essentially unchanged.

See the text for details.



Sources: 1 Human Mortality Database (2009)

2 Murray et al. (2003)

3 United Nations Population Division (1982) UN Life Table Collection

4 World Health Organization Life Table Database (2009)

5 World Health Organization Mortality Database (2009)

6 Allman and May (1979)

7 Banister and Hill (2004)

8 Cheung et al. (2005)

9 Vallin (1975)

10 Coale and Demeny (1983) Model Life Tables

11 United Nations Population Division (1982) UN Model Life Tables




                                               40
